A LESSON OF SELF-DENIAL: OR, The true way to desirable BEAUTY.

By JOHN COLLINGS, M. A.

Mat. 10. 37. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of
me; and he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. Ver.
38. And he that takes not up his cross, and follows after me, is not worthy
of me. Printed for Rich: Tomlins. 1649.

TO THE Right Honorable, The Lady Frances Cecill, the only Daughter of the
Right Honorable the Lady Elizabeth, Countess Dowager of EXETER.
Increase of true Honor, and Peace, and Happiness.
Madam,
WHen I considered the plenty of Gospell-sheaves, which the Gracious Lord of
the Harvest has in our days caused his reapers to bind up, I could not but
question whemy gleane were worth your Ladyships stooping to take up. God has
seemed to empty his treasuries upon our heads, that there is scarce a
gospell-duty but some or other more eminent laborers in the Lords harvest have
undertaken to discover and urge, which makes me sometimes tremble to think at
what disadvantage they must perish, that are yet dead or unfruitful. But if
there be any lesson that has been lesser urged, or practiced than other, it is
this of self Denial. I rejoice to see the flowings of the spirit of grace in
those eminent Servants of the Lord, that have both hunted for venison, and
caught it, to make savory meat for the Saints, discovering those secrets of the
Lords strength, and unsearchable riches of love, beyond the pens or tongues
of those that have gone before them. But methinkes, I have sometimes feared
lest while those Eminent ones have driven according to the peace of their own
souls, and made it their work almost only to dress out the strong meat, they
should have driven beyond the pace of the Lambs, and only go away with part of
the flock who are able to receive and have ears to hear, such sublime gospel
mysteries. I have sometimes wished a Shepard or Hooker, or two more to stay
behind, and to drive the remnant of the flock, which in heaven will overtake
the other, though there be many things to be spoken which (without over driving
them) they are not yet able to bear. I (being one borne out of due time) am
only fit for such a work, the opening the Rudiments of Christianity, and it
shall be my crown if by teaching the A B C of the ways of grace, I may be
made isntrumental but to fit Saints for their highschooles. I have presumed
here to present your Honor with the first Lesson of Grace. He that will be my
disciple (says Christ) let him deny himself, and take up the cross and
follow me; first deny himself, then follow me. Not but that I hope your
Ladyship can readily endorse this sermon, with that speech of the young man,
All these have I kept from my youth. Though I need not mind your Honor, that
it is a lif's not a days practice. (Madam) there can be no Mistress like
Experience, which easily convinces me, that your Ladyship (who have had a
constant sight of sublunary vanities, an enjoyment of creature-contentments) is
far more able to read him (who now writes) a lecture of the Vanity of every
thing under the Sun, than he is to read it your Ladyship, who has been blessed
in the want of those advantages, and only (from a guess at the body by the
foot) can subscribe Solomon's account of them: surely (Madam) there is nothing
under the Sun, but in cleaving to it, and neglecting Christ, a rational
creature must dishonor himself as well as his Savior, and as well call in
question his own judgment, and outlaw his own reason, as disobey his God.
Christ, (Madam!) Ah! Christ, Christ alone is the excelling one; that is
Altogether desires; It is the Rose of Sharon only that wants prickles. His name
is the only box of Ointment, which one fly or other will not make to stink.
And now I mention his name, I remember what the spouse says, Thy name is an
ointment powerd forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee. Of those Virgins,
I trust your Ladyship is, those that love Christ for the ointment of his name
powered forth; (so I trust has the Ointment of grace powered upon that head from
which you drew your natural breath, ran down to the skirts of all her
Relations.) (Madam) This world is not so well bred, but in Christ's ways if
your Ladyship desire to walk, you must expect to be a sharer in the scoffs of
those that put out the finger at those that run not with them to the same
excess of Riot. I need not mind your Ladyship of the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who patiently endured the cross and despised the shame for your sake.
(Madam) the ways of Christ, the paths of holiness, are only uncomely to
those before whose eyes the Devil has cast a mist, and the God of this world
has blinded their eyes, lest the glorious light of of the gospel should shine
upon them. If the King desires our beauty, no matter, whether our rate be high
or low amongst the children of Vanity, whose God is their Belly, and whose
glory is their shame. May your Ladyship strive after perfection, and yet dance
before the Ark, though Michal mocks out at the window* The Moon keeps its
course though the dogs bark. This Sermon (Madam) was formerly dedicated to your
Ladyships ears, I never thought then, that the noise of it should have gone
beyond the chapel it was preached in, nor indeed had it, had not your
Ladyships noble Mother commanded the transcription of a copy, which desire was
also seconded by other Noble friends, whose commands I was as unwilling to
disobey, as unable to perform, through my multitude of other occasions, which
is the only reason of my publication of it, that I might be thrifty of my time
for my other studies, and by troubling the world work my own ease. Having
resolved upon this course, I was desirous it should appear as covertly as
might be, and have therefore added it to some other Sermons, preached long
before then, sent to the press to gratify the desire of the Printer. (Madam)
your Ladyship I trust will easily excuse me for the want of pains in it; If I
should spend time to tickle some few ears, it would be unthriftily done, and
possibly I might by it lose the advantage of speaking to many another heart; I
had rather so preach and write that those that hear or read my sermons, should
read and hear with a trembling heart, than with a tickled fancy. (Madam) Such
as it is) I crave leave to present it to your Ladyship, Beseeching the God of
grace so to empower every line, that it may be a drop of mercy to your Honors,
and every Readers soul, That your Ladyship may grow up like the tree planted
by the rivers of water, and bring forth fruit in your season, That in the
renewing of every week, there may appear in your Ladyships heart and
conversation, an answer of those old prayers newly returned to your Ladyships
Noble Parent. That the Lord may have glory, your soul peace, and he the daily
answer of his prayers, who truly is Madam,

Your Honors most humbly obliged servant in the Lord Jesus, John Collings.
Chaplyfield house, Aug: 21. 1649.
A LESSON OF Self-denial.
Psalm. 45. 10, 11. Hearken O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear:
Forget also thy own people, and thy Fathers house, so shall the King desire thy
beauty, --
IT is agreed (almost amongst all Expositors) that this Psalm is a
Marriage-Song, and principally relating to the spiritual marriage between
Jesus Christ, and the believing soul, or between Christ and his Church: But
there is a little question amongst them, whether the spiritual sense of it be
couched under a type, or an Allegory; Some think that the Holy Ghost here
treates of that spiritual marriage, under the type of Solomon's marriage to
Pharaohs daughter, of which we read, 1 King. 3. 11. Of this opinion (says D.
Rivet) are D. Rivet Pref. in hunc Psalmum.
the Hebrew Interpreters, and most others, as Calvin, Bucer, Junius, Jansenius.
etc. yet these grant that there are some things in the Psalm not capable of
that literal sense. Others are against this, partly because (as they say) that
marriage of Solomon's was wicked, and against Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 7. and partly
because it is probable that Solomon having before that time (as 1 King. 3. 3.)
the fear of the Lord in his heart, it is not probable he would have contracted
that marriage, had not she first contracted to have forsaken her fathers house
(which the Hebrews also say was one of the marriage-Articles.) But it is
probable that that marriage gave occasion to the writing of this Psalm; and
for the reason against it, Rivet answers by a Rule of S. Hieroms, Homines mali
in re non bona, sanctissimarum rerum imo ipsius Dei ^ypi esse possunt.
That In Scripture, evil men, and that in wicked actions, are oft-times types
of holy actions, and that of Gods own too often times; Ishmael was a type of the
old Testament (according to the Apostle) an many other instances might be
given. Whether it be a Type or an Allegory is not much material, nor worth the
disputing: Rivet thinks neither sense improbable, but conceives it might be
both; nor do I see any thing of value against it. In the Psalm observe:

1. The Preface, verse 1. Wherein he Psalmist declares the readiness of his
heart, and instinct of the spirit, putting him upon the Composure of it.

2. The narrative part of the Psalm, from the 2 verse to the last.

3. The Conclusion of it, verse ult.

In the narrative part is something, 1. Relating to the Bridegroom. 2. Relating
to the Bride.

The Bridegroom is commended from his Beauty, v. 2. Thou art fairer than the
children of men. 2. From his Eloquence, v. 2. Grace is powered into thy lips. 3.
From the blessing of God upon him; God has blessed thee for ever. 4. From his
Glory and Majesty, v. 3. 5. From his success, v. 4. 6. From his Temper and
Disposition, verse 4. 7. From his Valor, verse 4, 5, 6. 8. From the nature of
his Kingdom, v. 6. 9. From his love to Justice, v. 7. 10. From the perfume of
his Garments, v. 8. 11. From his choice in his Queen and his Attendants, v. 9.
So far it relates to the Bridegroom.

The other part relates to the Bride; and in it is a Lesson of Instruction and
Exhortation read to her, pressed from several Motives.

The Exhortation is in the two verses in which my Text lies; And it is
fourfold, pressed from several Arguments. In the Text then you may consider,
1. An Exhortation, enforced upon the former Description. 2. Several Motives to
press this Exhortation.

1. In the first consider,
1. The person exhorted; set out by the name of Daughter, (O Daughter.) 2. The
Exhortation; which is five-fold: 1. Hearken. 2. Consider. 3. Incline thin ear.
4. Forget thy people and thy fa, there is house.
5. Worship him.
3. The Motives enforcing it, which are, 1. The former description of him; now
thou art married to such an husband, hearken, etc. 2. The Relation of Daughter;
Children should harken to their Parents. 3. She should be beautiful. 4. Her
beauty should be desirable. 5. The King should desire it; yea, greatly desire
her beauty.

Let me a little open the words, and then proceed.

[O Daughter,] Quae consentit viro in matrimonium est viro in loco filiae,
says Rivet: The woman that consents to her Husband in marriage, is to him in
stead of a Daughter: So says the Parable, 2 Samuel, 12. 3. The Ewelambe, which
signified the wife, laid in the poor man's bosom, and was unto him as a
daughter, Jer. 3. 4. Will thou not from hence forth cry unto me, Thou art my
Father, the guide of my youth, the guide of her youth, that is, an Husband, and
yet her Father. God can marry his Daughter, and yet the marriage not be
incestuous; Yea, he first marryes the soul, and then makes it his Daughter,
according to that 2 Cor. 6. 18. Wherefore come out from amongst them, and be
ye separate, says the Lord, and I will be a Father unto ^ou, and you shall be
to me Sons and Daughters, says the Lord; Daughters by Adoption, Gal. 4. 6.
Nor in vain called a Daughter: It is a courteous compellation, as both Rivet
and Mollerus note, by which the Lord will let his Saints know, that he will
extend toward them the care of a father, as well as the love of an Husband, he
will love them like an husband, and protect them like a father. Hark
Christians! Saints are Sons and Daughters, as well as Spouses to Christ. If he
be a father where is his honor? If an husband where his love? But to proceed.

Hearken O Daughter] Audi filia,] What should she hear? She should hear her
husband. There was a voice from heaven, Matthew. 17. 5. This is my well-beloved
Son hear him. Christ's Sheep are eare-marked, John 10. 11. The good sheep are
thus marked, They hear his voice. Faith comes by hearing, yea and it grows up
by hearing too; they are over-growne Saints that are grown past Ordinances, I
am afraid they are grown out of Christ's knowledge; it is the deaf adder stops
her ear. David's ear was opened, Psalm. 40. They that are too proud to hear
Christ's Voice on Earth, I am afraid will be thought too vile ever to see his
face in heaven. Hearken therefore (O Daughter) Gods way to the Heart lies
through the Ear, that is his ordinary way; if he at any time comes another way,
I am afraid it is not when we have wilfully blockt that up, but when himself
has stopped it.

Hearken O Daughter, and Consider, or see] and vide: First hear, then see.
There is a seeing of Faith. Faith is the daughter of hearing; the Ear must
open before the soul. Do not only hear but also see. Hearing is not enough.
He that believes not, is damned already. Seeing may be of experience. As we
have heard, so have we seen in the City of our God. The soul that hears well
shall see. John 1. 50. Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the Fig Tree,
beleevest thou? thou shall see greater things than these. Faith must go before
Sight, but Sight shall succeed faith: yet Faith is a Sight, though not of
experience.

And incline thine ear.] Expositors make this Phrase to contain three things.
1. A Repetition of the first Branch, Hearken. It is a difficult duty, the word
is doubled, that it may be enforced; the Psalmist speaks twice, considering
our deafness, yet he speaks louder in this than in the other phrase. Secondly,
therefore To incline the ear, is more than to hear, it does argue a notable
stirring of Attention. He that inclines his ear, affert al^quem animi motum
and propensionem, quickens up his mind, and brings with him to the duty a
readiness of Spirit, and an intentnesse of mind. 3. Inclining the Ear say
some is Nota demissionis, a Note of that subjection and obedience which should
be found in the Spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ toward him. It follows in
the Text,

And forget thine own people, and thy Fathers house.] Here are two things to
be enquired into. 1. What is meant by her own People, and her Fathers House.
2. What is meant by forgetting of them. For the first, we must be guided by the
Knowledge of the Spouse, to whom these words are spoken; if you look upon, 1.
The Church of the Jews as the Spouse meant here to be married to Christ,
without question it is meant of the Jewish Worship. the Ceremonial Law and
Worship, and their Traditions, they were to be forgotten, and the
Gospell-worship to be embraced; the worship of Christ's Institution, consonant
to that of Christ to the Woman of Samarta, John 4. 21, 22, 23. 2. If you
understond by the Spouse, the Church of the Gentiles, then the Fathers house is
all the Gentile worship and Paganish Idolatry, which must all be left upon
their turning to Christ. 3. If you understand by the Spouse the particular
believing soul, the Fathers house, is old Adams house, all sinnne and
wickedness, all traditionall worshipping. Renounce the Per patris domum
intelligo, quicquid corruptionis ex utero afferimus, aut quaecunque ex prava
institutione nobis adhaerent quasi ad nos haereditario jure aut educatione
transfusa. Rivet ad loc.
World (says Deodate) and cleave to Christ: It is a Lesson of Selfe-Denyall,
consonant to that of Christ, Matthew. 10. 37. By Fathers house, says Doctor
Rivet, we may understand whatever corruption we either brought out of the
womb with us, or have contracted by ill education or custom, so that they
cleave to us as our inheritance. And by People, says he, I understand [ea quae
ex mala consuetudine, and conversatione cum impiis acquisita, nos a Deo
abducunt, quae omnia nobis sunt deponenda] all those Corruptions, and whatever
they be, which we have contracted by ill acquaintance, and conversing amongst
the wicked, which estrange us from God, these must all be laid down, Luke 9.
23. Luke 14. 26. I shall anon in the opening of the Doctrine, open this term
more fully. I now proceed.

So shall the King desire thy Beauty.] Some read it, Quia concupivit, because
the King has desired thy beauty, making it a motive to induce her to forget
her fathers house. So August. Cyprian, etc. Others read it, according to our
Translation, [The King] The King of Glory, the King of Peace, Christ that King.
I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion: He is the King, [Greatly desire]
Out of his love to thee, his great love to thee, he shall desire it; not only
love thee, but desire thee; yea not only desire thee, but greatly desire thee.
He speaks after the manner of men, whose desire is to the women they love, Genesis
4. 7. Unto thee shall be his desire. And so, Deuteronomy. 21. 11. If thou see
amongst the Captives a beautiful woman, and thou have a desire to her to make
her thy wife. Christ's Love is such to the soul, that he has a desire to her,
yea not a desire barely, but a passionate desire, he shall greatly desire, he
shall be in love with the soul. [He shall greatly desire thy Beauty.] What
Beauty? Pulchritudo est in mente credentium, (says Musculus) it is meant not
of a face Beauty, but an heart Beauty. Decor Ecclesiae (says Mollerus) est in
fide, obedientia, and dilectione. In the graces of the soul, it is a Beauty
that the Lord Christ puts upon the soul, it is not a Beauty of nature, but of
grace that is the Saints Beauty: Sanctitas Ecclesiae est pulchritudo Ecclesia
(says Piscator) the holiness of the Church is the Churches beauty, and so the
holiness of the soul is the souls beauty. This is the fairenes, this the Beauty
that is meant in those places of Solomon's Song, Cant. 1. 10, 11. Cant. 4. 1.
Cant. 6. 1. Cant. 7. 1. This is the Beauty that the Lord Jesus Christ, the
great King shall so desire in the soul, this is the comeliness that shall
make any poor soul desirable in the eyes of the Lord Jesus Christ; This is
the Beauty which will make the King of Glory rest and content himself in his
Love to the soul that has it, and make him be delighted with the
acquaintance of the soul, and in conversing, and having Communion with the
soul. This is it that which (where it is found) will so ravish Christ's heart,
that he will never part from the soul (as Mollerus expounds that phrase
[greatly desire.] Thus (as shortly as I could dispatch it) you have the sense
of the Text. Now in it there lies these truths.

1. That the gracious soul, by marriage to Jesus Christ, becomes his Daughter
as well as his Spouse. He will not only love her as a Wife, but care for her
as a Daughter, 2 Cor. 6. 16.

2, That it is a great piece of the Daughters work to hearken to Christ in his
Word. It is no height of Saintship, to be beyond Ordinances, if we be out of
Heaven: It is a note of a Reprobate, being once enlightened, to fall back; but
it is a new degree of Saintship; they are deaf Adders, that have lived thus
long no Saints; Children of the Devil, not of God; his Daughters must hearken.
[Hearken O Daughter.]

3. Christ's Daughter must and shall see as well as hear. Hearing is not
enough; the soul must be open to receive Christ as well as the ear to hear
his voice, and if they will hear, they shall see. [Hearken O Daughter, and
see.]

4. Christ's Daughters must incline their ear as well as hear and see.
Obedience must be joined to Faith and Worship. Inward affection and intention
of mind must be joined with outward hearing.

5. Which is the Doctrine I will Insist upon.

Doct. That soul that would have the Lord Jesus Christ desire its beauty, must
forget its own people, and its Fathers House. And whosoever does that shall
be beautiful.

And the Lord Jesus shall desire its Beauty. In the handling of this Doctrine I
shall do these 5 things.

1. I shall show you what it is for a soul to forget its own people, and its
Fathers house.

2. I shall show you how, and in what sense the soul that does it shall be
beautiful.

3. I shall show what is meant by the Lord Christ's desiring such a souls
beauty.

4. I shall give you some reasons, why it is requisite that the soul that
would endeare it self to Christ, and make it self desirable, should forget
its Fathers house.

5. Lastly, I shall apply the whole Doctrine suitably.

First, what is meant by the souls own people, and Fathers house; and
secondly, by forgetting of them. What was meant in general I showed before.
Our Fathers house is old Adams house, the world and all therein. I shall now
show you in some particulars, First, What of our Eathers must be forgot.
Secondly, how and in what sense we must forget it. The first I shall dispatch
in these few following particulars, as briefly as I can.

The soul must forget the manners of its Fathers house. Our Fathers house
(ever since God and he parted houses in Paradise) is an house of ill manners,
an house of sin and wickedness. Now every soul that would make it self
beautions or desirable in the sight of Christ's eyes, must shake hands with
sin. Is. 55. 7. Let the wicked man forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and
unto our God, and he will abundantly pardon him; ay then the King shall desire
his beauty, but first let him forget the manners of his Fathers house. All
sin must be forgotten: But I take it especially four sorts of sins are
hinted to us in this Phrase, and may more properly be called the sins of our
Fathers house.

1. Original sin. If we have any thing of Grace or Goodness, we never
learned that at home. It is the gift of God through the tutoring of the Spirit.
But for Sin, we need not go abroad to learn that, it was bred in the bone,
that is one reason why it will never out of the flesh, Ez. 16. Tby Father was an
Amorite, and thy Mother an Hittite. We are chilnren of wrath by nature, Ephesians.
2. 3. Psalm. 51. 4. In sin did my mother conceive me; Now this must be
forgotten; this is a piece of our Fathers house. Men and Women you know are
usually borne in their Fathers House; We are all borne in the house of bondage,
which must be forgotten, if ever the soul be desirable to Jesus Christ. It is
a usual saying of Divines, that he that was never truly humbled for Original
sin, was never truly humbled for any sin.

2. The sins of our Education. The Fathers house is the house where the
Child is brought up: All sin is not bred in us; that which is bred in us may
be improved. Original sin is sin in the seed; Actual sin is sin in
the Blade and Fruit. The World is a dusty house, you can set a Creature in
never a corner of it, but it will contract some dust. Joseph by being in the
King of Egypts house, learned to swear by his Masters life. According to
different breedings, are men addicted to different Vanities, whether pleasure,
or honor, etc. Now when the soul comes unto Christ he must come off these, he
must forget his Fathers house, all his vain sinful breeding, and all the
filth his soul has contracted by reason of it.

3. Sins of Conversation and company. The Fathers house, and the company of
it, is the child's company, those of his Fathers house, are his own people. It
is true, as well for Religion as any thing else, Magni refert quibuscum
convixeris. It is a great matter with whom we converse; from accompanying with
vain persons, thou shall learn to be vain: Cum lupis ululare. When the
soul comes to Christ, it must leave all; sins thus contracted, they are part
of the manders of the Fathers House. Paul left his Pharisaisme that he had
learnt at Gamaliels feet.

4. Customary sins must be left. The Child learnes customs in his Fathers
House. Customary sinning must be left of that soul that would render it self
for beauty desirable to Jesus Christ; Those sins which are to the soul as
the Leopards spot, and the blacknes of the blackamores skin. Inded this is
hard; Custom hatcheth a second nature, Jer. 13. 23. How can you that are
accustomed to do evil, do well? Yet it must be done, the Fathers house must
be forgotten: ill customs must be laid aside, or good ones will not be taken up.

5. Beloved sins must be left. Every thing of the Fathers House almost is
dear to the child. But the dearest sin must be shaken hands with, Matthew.
18. 9. If it be a right hand it must be cut off: if a right eye, it must be
plucked out. Our Members must be Mortified, Col. 3. 5. Thus the manners of our
Fathers house must be forgotten. All sins, but especially these sins. I
proceed now.

Secondly, The soul must forget the Company of its Fathers house. What is that
you will say? I will answer you in two particulars. 1. Our most near and
dearest Relations. See Luke 14. 16. If a man comes to me (says Christ) and
hates not Father, and Mother, and Children, and Brethren, and Wife, and
Sisters, yea and his own life also, he is not worthy of me. He shall not be
so beautiful; not so beautiful, as that the King shall desire his beauty. As
it was said Levi did in another sense, so must the Saint do in some sense: He
must say unto his Father, and to his Mother, I have not seen him, neither must
he acknowledge his Brethren, nor know his own children. Otherwise he will
never have Levie's Character, to be one that observes the Lords Word and
keeps his Covenant. Not that Religion teaches, or commands, or indureth a
Saint to break the ties of all Religion; No, besides that it does not discharge
a Saint of his Duty of Nature; it puts in a Plea also against such
unnaturalness; Honor thy Father and Mother, etc. is the fifth Commandment,
the first with promise (says the Apostle) neither does it allow a Saint to rob
his parents of their due, with saying, Corban, it is a gift: The Ravens of the
valleys shall pick out the eyes of such persons, as well as the Devil has
done of their Religion. Neither does it discharge a Saint of his providentiall
duty, and respect to his relation. He that provides not for his Family is
worse than an Infidel. 1. In point of due honor. 2. In point of natural
affection. 3. In point of Providentiall care. We must not forget the Company
of our Fathers House. Gods Commands do not enterfiere, nor will the Gospel in
that case give a supersedeas to the Law. But 1. if God and they draw several
ways, if the Parents commands cross Gods, then (...), It is better to obey
God than men: The Parent is to command for God, not against him, subordinately,
not supremely; he must be obeyed for Gods sake, and God too for his sake, as by
his command he seconds God; but Parents can as little, yea less discharge the
child of its duty to God, than the Pope can discharge the Subject of his
Allegiance to his Prince. 2. If their love becken us out of the way when God
calls us, or would entice us to make halts in our running through fire and
water to him, then we must forget them. I have somewhere met with a Speech of
St. Hierome to that purpose: Says he, If the Lord Christ should call me to
him, though my Father should lie in my way, and my Mother should hang about my
neck, I would go over my Father, and shake off my Mother, and run to my
Christ. Shetterden a Martyr (as it is storied of him) writ to his Mother thus;
Dear Mother, embrace the Counsel of Gods Word with Heart and Affection, read
it with obedienee, so shall we meet in joy at the last day, Or else I bid you
farewell for ever. In these now and such like cases, that soul that would make
its beauty desirable in the eyes of Jesus Christ, must like Levi say to his
Father and his Mother, I have not seen you; in these cases he must not
acknowledge his Brethren, nor know his own Children: They stand in Christ's
way, and Christ calls hastily. The Saint must spare no time to parley. Natural
affection with them he must forget his Fathers house, the dear company of it,
his Relations.

Secondly, all sinful Company is the Company of our Fathers house, The Company
of fools, as Solomon calls it. Now all this must be forgotten, or else in
stead of being saved, thy soul will be destroyed. Prove. 13. 20. A Companion
of fools shall be destroyed. Psalm 119. 63. I am a companion (says David)
of those that fear thee. You must leave your swearing Company, and your
drinking Company, and your vain Company, or the King will never desire your
beauty. The soul that would render it self desirable in the eyes of the Lord
Jesus Christ, must make all its delight, (with David) in those that excel in
virtue, the Saints upon the earth. Saul before his Conversion was a companion
of those that stoned Stephen, and persecuted the Saints. Like to like, for
himself consented to his death, and was a Persecutor; but no sooner had the
Lord made his Motion to him, but he forgot this company, and assayed to join
himself to the Church.

Thirdly, the soul that would render its beauty desirable in Jesus Christ's
eyes, must forget the Honor and Pomp, and Riches and Greatness of his
Fathers house, all the high-Towers and Treasures of it, etc. They that will be
Christ's Disciples must not take up Crowns, and advance themselves, and follow
him: No, they must deny themselves, and take up the cross and follow him;
their Crowns must be of Thorns, made after their Masters Copy: They must not
be such as love the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and the chief seats of the
Synagogues, and Greetings in the Market, and to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi.
Be not ye called Rabbi (says Christ) for one is your Master, even Christ,
and all ye are brethren. He that is greatest amongst them that are Saints,
must be as a Servant, Matthew. 23. 7, 8, 9, 10. They must forget that natural it
ching which is in the children of Adam usually, and must be scratched with
Madam, or Rabbi, or some high-swelling words of vanity: they must not be such,
as will swell (like that Toad Haman) if Mordecay give him not the knee, or if
their Brother give them not the wall or the way; Saints are no such creatures;
they are such as are not at all taken with any such high titles* but Romans 12.
10. In honor they prefer one before another. And they must look upon it as the
greatest honor in the world, not that they are masters, and descended -- atavis
Regibus, of great Parentage. etc. but that they are servants of Jesus Christ;
the name of Christian (the badge of honor first created at Antioch) must
appear to them, better than the names of Lord or Lady. Theodosius was wont
(they say) more to glory that he was a servant of Christ, than that he was
Emperor of the East. Now I say, That soul that would make its beauty
desirable to Christ, must forget all these, not affect any of them, not value
them; for he that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted. Behold a miracle (says Mat. 23. 12.
(says Augustine) God is an high God (yea, the most high) yet the higher thou
liftest up thy self, the further thou art off him; the lower thou humblest thy
self, the nearer he draws to thee; he looks near to the humble, that he may
raise them up, but sees the proud afar off, that he may depresse them. The
proud Pharisee pressed as near God as he could, the poor Publican durst not,
but stood afar off; God was far from the one and near to the other. The
high towers of the fathers house must be forgotten, yea, and so must all the
rich coffins and chests of it: these are part of the furniture of our fathers
house. You know what Christ said to the young man, when he seemed to be in
love with Christ, Matthew. 19. 21. If thou will be perfect, if thou will make thy
beauty a desirable beauty, Go, and sell all that thou have, and give to the
poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me, and
again v. 24. It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle,
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. You know what Christ
says, Mat. 11. (...), the poor are those that are gospellized. But to proceed
yet.

The soul that would render its beauty desirable in Christ's eyes, must forget
the pleasures and vanities of its fathers house, all that is in the world, 1 John 2. 16. whether it be the lust of the eyes, or the lust of the flesh, or
the pride of life. When the Apostle speaks of lovers of pleasures, he puts in
more than lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. Jude tells us, such as are sensual have
not the spirit, Jude 18. 19. Job in the description of the wicked, Job. 21. 12,
13. tells us, that they are such as take up the tymbrell and harp, and rejoice
at the sound of the Organ, their children dance, they spend their days in
wealth, etc. These are they that say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire
not the knowledge of his ways. What is the Almighty that we should serve him?
and what profit is there, that we should pray unto him, v. 15. Their fiddles
must be laid in the water of true repentance and contrition. The daughters of
pleasure must undresse, if they will be beautiful in Christ's eyes; they must
lay aside their paintings and dressings, their curlings and perfumings of the
hair, where (as he wittily says) the powder does forget the dust; their
ornament must not be the outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing
gold, and putting on of apparel; but the hidden man of the heart in that which
is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in
the sight of God of great price, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4. The daughters of pleasure must
undresse (I say) for the Lord, as he threatened he would do in the day of
judgment, Is. 3. 18, 19, 20. so in the day of mercy, to the soul of the vain
creature, he will also take away the bravery of t^eir tinckling ornaments
about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tyres like the moon, the
chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers, the bonnets, and the ornaments of
the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the earerings, and the rings,
and the nose jewels, the changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the
wimples, and the crisping pinnes, and the glasses, and the fine linen, and the
hoods, and the vailes, and instead of these send in mercy, a girding with
sackcloth, a rent heart, and a weeping eye, and a serious soul. It was a sure
rule that a Divine once gave to another, enquiring of him why he did not
persuade a Gentlewoman (with whom he was acquainted) to leave off some vain
dresses she wore; (Says he) I will first persuade her to get Christ into her
heart, and then she will leave these of her self. The soul that has Christ
in his heart, need not to be persuaded to leave its fidling and dancing, and
love songs, and vain dresses, and paintings, and revellings, and naked
breasts; it knows these will not make its beauty desirable in Christ's eyes;
and it is lost labor to persuade others to it. When Solomon forsook God, then
he ran to pleasures and vanities, and sought every thing that should please his
carnal eye, and tickle his vain fancy; but he no sooner returns to Christ,
but he says of mirth it is madness, and of laughter what does it? Christians
you must forget these, or Christ will overlook you. Tertullian called the
unvailed virgins of Tetull. in lib. de velandis virginibus.
his time Capita Nundinalitia, and Pudor ostentatitiae Virginitatis, Phrases I
will not English. You must forget the pleasures and vanities of your fathers
house: that is the fourth. I will instance but in one thing more.

Fifthly and lastly, You must forget the Religion and Righteousness of your
fathers house. Indeed, there is not much there, it may quickly be all
forgotten; but what there is must all be forgotten. There is a conceited
Religion, at least, a selfe-righteousnesse, which is natural to all the sons
of Adam. Master Hooker gives this reason for it, because our first father Adam
was worth so much he could have gone to Heaven upon his own legs. Now as it is
with a young spenthrift, though he has spent all his fathers estate, and be
not worth a groat, yet he cannot abide to think he should be a worse man
than his father; so it is with the sons of Adam, because he could once have
done enough for heaven, we that are his children, though he lost all his power
before he died, yet we cannot endure to think our selves worse than our
father, and are ready to think heaven may be erned still, and we may do
something for our selves. The young man, Mat. 19. was at it, Master, what good
thing should I do to inherit everlasting life? and so the converts at Peter's
Sermon, Acts 2. and the Jaylour, Acts 16. What shall we do to be saved? hence
is Morality and Civility taken up by some, and formality in duties taken up by
others, and man pitcheth his staff in himself, and resolves there to rest;
but this must be forgotten if ever we would be desirably beautiful in Jesus
Christ's eyes; for all our Righteousnesses are as menstruous clothes, and as a
filthy ragge in the sight of God, Is. 64. 6. and again, Matthew. 5. 20. Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees you
shall never enter into the Kingdom of God. Civility rested in (says a Divine
of our own) is but a beautiful abomination, it is but a smooth way to hell.
It is true, in the world a civil man is valued at an high rate, because the
world is full of gross profaneness, and outrageous wickedness; but Civility
is like the Cab of 2 Kin. 6. 25
Doves dung, or the asses head: the latter was worth fourscore pieces of
silver, and the fourth part of the first valued at five pieces of silver; but
it was because there was a famine in Samaria. This is that makes Civility rated
so high in the world, but in it self it is worth nothing, and Formality in
duties as little, though it amounts to as much as the Pharisees fasting twice a
week, and praying thrice a day, and paying tithe of all that he has.
Notwithstanding all this, all God, I thank thee, I am not, etc. yet the poor
wretch is poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked. All this must be left,
and another righteousness sought and found, before the soul comes up to a
desirable beauty. And thus I have showed what of our fathers house, and our own
people must be forgot.

Let me come in the next place, to show you how, and how far these things
must be left and forgot; To that I answer.

1. Some of these must be absolutely forgot. The manners of our fathers house,
all sin and wickedness must be so forgot, Is. 55. 7. Let the wicked man
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, Hos. 14. 8. Ephraim
shall say, what have I to do with Idols. There must be no willing purposed
practice of any sin how dear soever, how accustomed soever, however acquired,
how long soever lived in; the wicked man must forsake his way, the evil of our
doings must be put away; evil must be eschewed, so must sinful company too.

2. The rest of them must be secundum quid forgotten, in a great measure. Our
relations must not be doted upon, our honors and worldly glory not hunted
after, nor must our hearts be taken with them; we must not be lovers of
pleasure, we must not rest in our righteousness, not dote upon it; our heat
of affection to these things, the running out of our hearts to them, the fixing
of our hearts upon them, this must be forgotten, etc.

3. Conditionally they must be forgotten. If they clash with Christ's commands,
if our Relations would draw us from Christ, or retard our way to Christ; if in
our acts of love to them we must forget the commands of Christ, that either we
must not obey God in our places, or we must break with them, and not be
thought to love them, in this sense they ought to be forgotten, yea, to be
hated. Christ in this case called Peter Satan; this is Christ's command, Luke
14. 26. If our honors and glory in the world would lie in the way, to keep us
from stooping to Christ's command; and from thence our flesh it would fetch such
conclusions as these, It is not fit for so great a person as you to have such
strictness in duties, to be acquainted with such mean creatures (as many
Saints are) to go to Church so often, to be at private meetingt so much, etc.
In this case we must forget them. If our riches begin to stick to our heart,
and to tempt our heart from God, that we cannot enjoy them, but our hearts
will cleave to them, In such a case a Christian shall be a saver, if (as
Crates threw his gold into sea, that he may study Philosophy) he also throw
away his estate to study Jesus Christ. If our pleasures be such, as in the
substance (if such shadows have any) are sinful, or draw away the heart too
much from God, take up our Church-time, or family duty-time, or secret
duty-time, etc. in such case they must be forgot too.

4. Comparatively they must be forgot. God must be greater than they in the
throne of our heart, we must not love father, nor mother, nor daughter, nor
wife, nor child, more than Christ. So Matthew expounds that place, Luke 14. 26.
in Matthew. 10. 37. we must not be lovers of any pleasures more than of Christ,
nor of house, or lands, or honor, or any piece of vanity under the Sun. This
is plain, for we must love Christ with all our heart and soul; and though the
second commandment be, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, yet it does
not say, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy Christ.

5. Lastly, In effect they must be forgot. Christians must do as if they had
no relations; they may rejoice, and buy, and sell, and purchase, and use the
world, but mark how, it is in a forgetting manner, 1 Cor. 7. 30. they that
rejoice must be as if they rejoiced not, and they that buy as if they possessed
not, and they that use the world as if they used it not. Christians may be
called by their titles of Rabbi, and my Lord, and Madam; but while they are so,
they must have a scornful, low, slight, esteem of these swelling words of
vanity, not despising the meanest of Gods Saints, but ready in honor to
prefer them above themselves, and accounting the title of Christian, of a
servant of God, to be a greater title of honor than worldly dignities can
invest them with. And now I have finished my first task in the explication of
the doctrine, in which I have showed you, what of our fathers house must be
forgotten. 2. How far we must forget it.

The second thing I propounded, was to show you how that soul is beautiful,
with what beauty the soul is beautiful that thus forgets its own people, and
its fathers house. This I shall show you, 1. Negatively. 2. Positively.

1. Not with a corporal beauty, this makes not the flesh beautiful. It ads no
luster to flesh and blood, possibly it may discolor that.

2. Not by a native beauty, no natural beauty. The beauty that will appear in
the soul, upon this self denial, is not like the beauty of the face which
appears after washing off dirt, which clouded natures colors.

3. Not in the eye of the vain creature, nor in its own eyes. Ask a vain
creature, he will tell you, that the leaving of vain dresses, and patches, and
plaitinge of the hair, is the way to make the creature look like no body, to
make it despised in the world, etc. and such a one perhaps lothes and abhors it
self as a vile creature, Jo. 42. 6. Thus it shall not be beautiful, and it is
no matter whether it be or no. But secondly such a soul shall be beautiful
these three ways.

1. Imputatione, By the beauty of Christ put upon it; see for this that notable
place, Ezech. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Then wast thou decked with silver
and gold, and thy raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work.
-- and thou were exceeding beautiful. -- And thy renown went forth amongst
the heathen for thy beauty, for it was perfect through the comeliness which I
had put upon thee (says the Lord God.) Christ makes the reflection of his
beauty to be cast upon such a soul, and it becomes beautiful through his
comeliness; the souls doing these things, does not make it spiritually any
more than corporally beautiful, but (they being done) it becomes comely
through Christ's comeliness, comely through a comeliness that is put upon it,
that is the first way. Secondly, It is beautiful,

2. Through Christ's Aceeptation, Of free grace; Christ said to the young man in
the 19 of Matthew. Sell all thou have, etc. and thou shall have treasure in
heaven, not thou shall earne it, but thou shall have it. Christ accepts the
soul as beautiful, and accounts the soul as beautiful, that for his sake
will forget its own people, and its fathers house, Cant. 4. 1. Behold, thou
art fair (my love) behold, thou art fair, thou have doves eyes, etc.

3. Such a soul is beautiful, though not in the worlds eyes, yet in the
Saints eyes; The world will hate and despise them, but the Saints will love and
value them, Cant. 6. 1. the Daughters of Jerusalem say unto the spouse,
whither is thy beloved gone, O thou Fairest amongst women, the daughters of
Jerusalem, the Saints, account such a soul beautiful. It may be that she
may call her self black, the greatest of sinners, and the least of Saints,
yea, and the world may so call her; but those that are godly shall esteem her
comely, and the King shall desire her beauty. And that leads me to the last
particular in the explication of the Doctrine.

3. What is the meaning of that phrase, The King shall desire thy beauty.

1. Generally. It is a speech according to the manner of men, Genesis 4. 7. it is
said of the husband toward the wise, Unto thee shall be his desire. And we
meet with that phrase, Deuteronomy. 21. 11. when thou see amongst the Captives a
beautiful woman, and thy desire shall be toward her, to make her thy wife.

2. But more particularly, I think the true meaning of the phrase may be
understood in these particulars.

First of all it implies, That the Lord Jesus Christ shall discover and see an
excellency in such a soul; we can desire nothing, but we shall first discover
some excellency in it. Now the Lord discovers an excellency in such a soul;
he shall eye such a soul as an excelling soul, as a lovely soul, worthy of
him (though not through its own worthiness) and suitable for him.

2. It implies, That the Lord Jesus Christ shall love such a soul, discovering
in it a suitable excellency; he shall love it, his heart will be ravished with
it, Cant. 4. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thou have
ravished my heart. Christ's affections will be drawn out to a soul that so
forgets it self, his heart will be melting toward it, and on fire for it;
there must first be a love in the soul to the object, before the heart be
drawn forth to covet an union with it.

3. It implies, That the Lord Christ will in his heart prefer such a soul;
when a man's desire is toward a particular woman, to make her his wife, he
preferres her above other women; his desire is not to her sex, but to her, to
her rather than ten thousand others. The Lords desire shall be toward such a
soul, As you have heard described to you, that he will prefer her above ten
thousand of his creatures, though the Lord sees thousands of his creatures,
hundreds in a congregation, that the world dotes upon, some for their fair
faces, and on others for their brave parts, this Eliab and the other Shammah;
yet the Lord that sees all, and can judge best, lets Eliab and Shammah pass,
and fixes his eye upon this self denying (in the world) despised creature,
and upon it he fixes his heart, and prizeth such a soul above all the other
trumperies and kickshawes of beauty. The Lord culs out such a soul, his desire
is toward her, she is the Esther he picks out, and such a soul is more
preferred in Christ's eye, than this witty man or woman, or that gallant, this
Lord or that Lady, Christ has no desire to them, but to this soul his desire
is.

4. It implies, That Jesus Christ will endeavor and effect an union, and enjoy
such a soul; what is the meaning of that phrase, the man's desire shall be to
his wife, but he shall desire to be joined in marriage to her, that they may
be no longer twain, but one flesh? and if his desire be toward her, and it
be a feasible thing he will effect it, if she consent and friends consent,
etc. The Lords desire shall be to the soul, that is, the Lord Jesus Christ
shall endeavor, yea, and unite himself to effect an union with such a soul,
he shall woo it, yea, and she shall yield, for when he works who can let
him? Christ will marry himself to such a soul, make a marriage covenant, and
tie himself in a marriage bond to it; for though in man desire may be
frustrated, so that desire and enjoyment are two things, yet it is necessarily
to be understood in Christ's desiring, whose power is such, that he shall not
need starve his desire longer than he pleases.

5. It implies, That the Lord Jesus Christ will court near communion with such
a soul; mark how he speaks to the Spouse, Cant, 2. 14. O my Dove, that art in
the clefts of the rocks, in the secret places of the stairs, let me hear thy
voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance comely; he will not only
have communion, but he will covet communion with such a soul; he will desire
to have it draw nigh, and dwell in his presence, to have it come near him in a
duty, in an ordinance, etc.

6. Lastly, He will love such a soul with a constant and inseparable love, it
is said, The King shall desire thy beauty, he shall desire it, and never cease
desiring of it, he shall for ever desire thy beauty. And thus I have opened to
you all the three terms, now I come to the second task. As I have gone along
in opening the generals in several particulars, I have proved the Doctrine
that it is so. But may some say, what ground is there that the Lord Jesus
Christ should desire this of every soul that he will love and marry and have
communion with, that it should thus forsake its own people, and its fathers
house? why should Christ hold the soul to this hard meat? I shall therefore in
the next place show you the reasons of it: And there is a very great deal of
Reason for it.

1. Because it is the very law of marriage, Genesis 2. 24. Therefore shall a man
forsake father and mother, and cleave to his wife. The Lord Christ marries
himself to the soul. It is written, I will betroth thee unto me; yea, I will
betroth thee unto me: for this cause the soul shall forsake its own people,
and its fathers house, and shall cleave to its Christ; for this cause because
the soul is married, or about to marry to the Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore
must look to do as married persons use to do, leave all for their husband.

2. A second reason is, because while the soul lives at home with its own
people, and at its fathers house, it cannot be beautiful nor desirable. Our
own people are a filthy people, our fathers house a nastie house; the soul
while it has left that cannot be beautiful nor desirable. The most beautiful
creature you know, if she be brought up by sluttish people (as we say) and
goes in a filthy habit, there is a cloud cast over her beauty. So it is with a
soul, while it has left its sins and vain company, and pride, and ambition,
and pleasures, and riches, and selfe-righteousnesse, it cannot be beautiful in
Christ's eyes. Now beauty is the attractive of the soul, the soul must see a
beauty, in that, which it lets out it self to in desiring: let that be a
second reason.

3. Because there cannot be a cleaving to Christ, unless there be a parting
with these. Christ requires the highest love of our souls, it is the first
commandment you know (with our Saviors gloss upon it) Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and all thy soul. Hence Christ tells us, no
man can serve two masters, you cannot serve God and Mammon; that soul that
will hug sin must hate God; that soul that will be a companion of Jesus
Christ, and a companion of Saints, must not be a companion of sinners, for what
fellowship has Christ with Belial, righteousness with unrighteousness, light
with darkness, the temple of God with Idols, and so the rest? Your soul
cannot love two thengs with an highest love. 2. You cannot in heart truly
cleave to two contraries. There is a third reason, especially if you consider,

4. That God is a jealous God: you meet with the phrase often, and given as a
reason, why they should do this or that, For the Lord thy God is a jealous
God. Jealousy is a passion in the soul, non patiens consortium in re amata
(says Aquinas) that will not endure, or that makes the soul that it will not
endure any sharing in the object beloved. The woman that has a jealous husband
must leave all her old companions. Christian, thy God is a jealous God, if
therefore thou would have him desire thy beauty, if thou would have him
care for thee, thou must forget thine own people, and thy fathers house. I
will add but one reason more. Lastly,

5. Because It is the will of Christ. It was the Apostles precept, that wives
should obey their husbands. Now self denial is a great piece of Christ's
command. It is his first request, He that will be my Disciple let him deny
himself; self denial is the first of Christianity. He that has not learned
this, has not learned the A, B, C, of Christianity, not so much as the
Christ-crosse row, as you call it. Here should be reason enough if (...), [hee
has said so] was enough in Pithagoras his school, to put the business past
disputing amongst his scholars, I am sure it should be much more in Christ's
school, we will therefore enquire no further reason for it. Let me now come
to application.

I shall apply it, by way 1. Of Instruction. 2. Of Examination. 3. Of
Consolation. 4. Of Exhortation.

Instr. It may serve to instruct us in the truth of several Positions, I will
only pick out some few.

1. It may instruct us, That the most part of the world, yea, of those that the
world most esteems of, and sets the highest rate and value upon, are poor,
indesirable, uncomely wretches, in the eyes of Jesus Christ. Christ's eye sees
not as man's eye sees, man sees beauty, where Christ sees none; man sees a
desirablenesse, where Christ's eye sees none; man dotes upon what Christ cares
not for; man calls the proud blessed, but the Lord's soul abhors them;
they have not yet left their own people, and their fathers house. You see many
a gallant strut it in the world, and who but they are the people of fashion (as
you call them) the glory, the beauty of the world, every one admires them, etc.
many that in respect of their wisdom, or parts, or behavior, and civility,
are the desire of those amongst whom they live, and there is not one in ten of
all these that the Lord Jesus Christ has any desire too; they are poor,
uncomely, indesirable creatures in Christ's eyes, notwithstanding all their
honor, and greatness, and nobility, notwithstanding all their beauty, whether
natural or artificial, borrowed from the Painter or Tailor, notwithstanding
all these Christ sees no excellency in them at all. The vain creature dotes,
Christ scorns; the vain creature loves, Christ sees no loveliness in them,
but looks upon them black with the soot of hell, eyes their countenance, all
blots, and their souls too, the vain creature preferres them: there is many a
poor creature that lives in a cottage, that is at an higher rate in Christ's
thoughts; the poor worms soul is carried out to desire matches, an union and
a communion. with them. Jesus Christ scorns them, and has no desire either to
any union, or to enjoy any communion with them: Christ says of such vain
creatures, There go poor wretches that my soul loathes, I am sick of them,
ashamed of them as my creatures; And is this nothing to you? O you sons and
daughters, is this nothing to you? it vexes you to think that you live in a
place where none desires you, and if you were gone none would lament you: It
was an untoward character of an unworthy Emperor; and is it no trouble to you
to think I live not desired, not cared for of Jesus Christ? Zeph. 2. 1. The
Lord calls his people to repentance under this notion; Gather together, O nation
not desired. O that it might call you to some serious thoughts, vain
creatures! you are people not desired of the Lord Jesus Christ, as uncomely,
and despised in his eyes, as you are beautiful, and admired in the eyes of
men; nay, and more, and let me tell you in your ears, and (oh that it may make
your hearts rend, and your ears tingle) if you be not desired of him here, you
shall never enjoy him, nor be enjoyed of him bereafter. Haman was such a poor
wretch, the King had ennobled him, every hat and knee did him homage, and took
notice of the Kings respects to him, at last he came to the gibbet; have a
care poor creatures else, though you compass your selves about with sparks,
poor sparks of friends, honors, riches, pleasures; sparks that will
extinguish as quickly as rise, yet this, and only this, you shall have at the
Lords hand, you shall lie down in sorrow, everlasting sorrow; you shall lie
down in hell. It is an ill place to leave you in, but the Lord pluck you as
firebrands out of the burning. I pass on.

2. From what you have heard you may be instructed, which way the way to heaven
lies; and 2. That it is no easy way, we are all pilgrims and strangers here,
we were bred so, our fathers were so. Now the journies end which all pretend to
(though the most ride backward) the coast which all say they are bound for
(which way soever their compass guides them) is Heaven, this is omnibus in
Voto, though few so run that they may obtain. But has any blind or misled
traveller a mind to know the way? Is any poor soul startled this day? does
hellfire flash in any of your faces, and are you crying out, Sir, What shall
we do to be saved? which way lies our way to heaven? Learn hence, that the
next way to heaven is not the beaten road, but quite cross Natures-fields, and
so through the long street of self-denial, and up the mountain of holiness,
at the top of which you shall see God; it lies over hedge and ditch, over
rocks and mountains: you must leave your youth sins as you go on your
right hand, your education and custom sins on your left hand, your beloved
sins behind you; if your father, or mother, or husband, or wife, or brother,
or sister, or child lie in your way, you must make no halts, but over their
necks; if all your vain acquaintance, your drunken, swearing, wanton
companions, stand of each side and becken you another way, you must decline
their invitation and go quite cross; you must tread upon all your glory and
pomp, and greatness; you must avoid the mountain of Gold, and the rocks of
Pearl; you must take heed of the pleasant brook of carnal and vain pleasures;
avoid your dancing, and painting, and patching, and decking your selves: In
short, you must put your self in an habit fit to carry a cross, This is the
next way to heaven. And now I need not tell you in the second place, That
strait is the way, and narrow is the gate that leads to everlasting life, and
few there be that find it. By this time you will know, that if you will go to
heaven you must go like, and with, very few in this age of wantonness and
dotage. By this time you will easily guess sinners are out of the way, and
proud men are out of the way; those that glory in riches, and worldly
greatness, are out of the way; the careless daughters of Sion, that stretch
out their necks, and mince it as they go, are out of the way; the
selfe-righteous men are out of the way. Ah Lord! who are in it? Heaven is a
difficult journey, it is an hard way to find, it is hard to flesh and blood to
do these things. It was the Martyrs speech, that the cross way was the way to
heaven. The way to heaven is astrait way, no dancing way, dancers must have the
elbowroome of hell-road; they that will walk in this strait way must crowd,
they must not think to walk thither in state; no, they must crowd, and never
be afraid of wrimpling a neat handkerchiefe or cuffe, it is not opus
pulvinaris (said one) but pulveris, you shall be sure to meet with all the
opposition that nature can make, all the forces of flesh and blood, and all the
forces the devil can add; who then shall be saved? even those that God has
appointed to life, those to whom the Lord shall give such an heart as I have
told you, strait is the way, and few there be that find: If you will have a
broader way you may, Mat. 7. 13, 14. but then you must not look for the same
journies end. The Lord give you hearts to consider it, and fear to tremble at
it.

3. And from hence thirdly, you may be instructed, that it must be something
more than nature that must make a poor soul beautiful, and desirably
beautiful in Jesus Christ's eyes. It must neither be natural beauty will do
it, nor yet natural parts; no, nor natures glory, nor the best of nature,
natural righteousness, Matthew. 5. 20. It must be something more than flesh and
blood, yea, something more than flesh and blood can help us with. But I pass
over this.

4. From hence fourthly, you may be instructed, What an infinite love the Lord
Jesus Christ has loved his Saints with, 1 John 3. 1. Behold (says the
Apostle) with what manner of love the father has loved you with, that you
should be called the sons of God. Here he says, hearken O Daughter; the
Daughter of a King is honorable, but the daughter of the King of Kings is much
more honorable. But (if I may say it) here seems to be a degree of love
beyond it, the Kings wife is more honorable than the Kings daughter. Behold
therefore (O ye upright in heart) with what manner of love the Lord Jesus
Christ has loved you, that he should desire your beauty; not only love you,
but if uncomely, poor wretches, make you beautiful, according to that, Ezech.
16. 13, 14. nay, not only so, but desire your beauty; not only like it, but
desire it; O love! infinite love! when David sent his servants to let Abigail
know that he desired her beauty, mark how she admires at it, 1 Samuel 25. 41.
she arose and bowed her self on the earth, and said, Behold, let thine
handmaid be a servant, to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord, Do you
hear this news, O ye daughters of men? do you hear this news? that the
King of glory, the Lord Jesus Christ, that has no need of you, that is
infinitely above you, has sent me this day to tell you, that he desires your
beauty. Rise up, O ye Saints, bow your selves, and say, Let us be servants to
wash his feet, etc. Let us be the doore-keepers of his house, his meanest
servants. No Christians, you shall be his sons and daughters: Nay, hearken O
daughters, here is more for you, The King desires your beauty; Spell this love
at leisure, and now w^sh your souls, follow after Jesus Christ, study it with
your most serious thoughts, live to it with strictest lives. What conversation
becomes the gospel? what manner of persons should you be? Follow on, make
haste and rise, and follow him, singing, crying, as you go, O the height, and
depth, the incomprehensible height! the unfadomable depth of love wherewith
the Lord Jesus Christ has loved sinners, before the beginning of the world,
etc. And lastly.

5. Can you learn a less result from hence than this, that Saints
selfe-denying, despised Saints, are happy creatures; Terque quaterque beati,
blessed again, and again. Surely you have not heard me all this while, but
you are preventing me in the words of the Psalmist. Happy are the people that
are in such a case; yea, blessed are the people that have the Lord for their
God; we may say of them, O nimium dilectis Deo, creatures strangely beloved of
their God, strangely happy in this, that the King should desire their beauty.
Let the world scorn one, let them put out the finger and bark at the moon,
let them mock puritanisme, let the way of holiness be every where spoken
against, pro hominum arbitrio, let them talk, so long as you gain; you dance
before the ark though Michal mock out at the window: You shall be more
beautiful, the more vile they think you; it is for the Kings sake, that has
desired your beauty and scornd theirs; for the Kings sake, that has chosen you
to obtain everlasting life through Jesus Christ, but has ordained them to
wrath, and neglected their beauty. One would not think now, that these
creatures that ravish Christ's heart, should offend worldlings eyes so much:
surely Christ should have no judgment, if these were the contemptible ones of
the earth, the unlovely creatures. Well well, Christians, let them mock on,
after the way which they call simplicity and foolery, moping; etc. worship thou
the God of thy fathers; thou shall have thy pleasures, when they shall have
torments; thou shall have thy crown and honor, when the pride of their glory
shall be stained, and that shall lie in the dust. These children of vanity
forget what Abraham (though something too late to do him good) advised their
brother to remember, Luke 16. 25. That in their life time they received good
things, and those precious Lazarus'es, evil things, but yet a little while and
you shall be comforted, and they tormented; yet a little while and you shall be
honored, and they shall be cursing the womb that bare them, and the paps that
gave them suck, cursing the honor that ruined them, the pleasures that damned
them, the worldly glory which has made them inglorious for ever; yet a little
while and instead of their sweet smells they shall have the stinkes of fire and
brimstone, and instead of their girdles rentings of heart for ever, instead of
their well-set hair they shall have baldness; they shall spend more time in
rending and tearing their hair, than ever they did in curling or powdring it.
Yet a little while, and instead of their stomachers, they shall have girdings
with sackcloth, and everlasting burnings instead of their present beauty. But
blessed shall you be, for you shall shine like the Sun in the firmament of the
father, for the King has desired your beauty. I have at last done with my
first use of Instruction: I proceed now to a second, and that shall be of
examination.

Try whether you have forgotten your own people, and your fathers house.

The most men and women are afraid of the touchstone, and are willing rather to
take heaven for granted, though they find hell for certain; but this is not
safe with you. Try your selves then (Christians) I will help you a little in
so good a work.

1. If you have forgotten your fathers house, you have (first) seen a great
deal of folly and vanity in it: Man is a reasonable creature, and will never
leave any thing, but he will see some cause to leave it. Did the Lord ever yet
convince you thoroughly, not with a Notionall, but an heart conviction of the
folly of your fathers house? Did the Lord ever thoroughly convince you of your
evil ways, the sins of your natures, the customary sins of your lives, of
your education sins, and your beloved sins? Had you ever a through
conviction of the vanity of your evil company, the vanity of your pleasures
and carnal delights? Did your souls ever taste a real bitterness in them? if
not, I fear me you have not left them.

2. Have you had another excellency discovered to your souls? Had your souls
ever yet a real discovery made to you of the excellency of the ways of
holiness, these ways that you once hated? Do you now see a beauty, a glory in
them, so much that you can even stand, and hold up your hands and admire, that
you should be blind so long? A present pleasant thing will scarce be left, but
upon a discovery of, and an obtaining of something more excellent. Christians,
under what notion do you look upon Christ, and his ways? Do you look upon them
as excellent, the ways of strictness, as excellent, sanctifying a Sabbath,
praying, the frequenting of the communion of Saints? Do you look upon them as
excellent? If you do not, I fear me, you but cheat your selves with a
conceit, that you have forgot your fathers house.

3. If you have parted with them I am afraid it cost you some tears, you did
not part with so many friends with dry eyes; friends cannot ordinarily pats
without tears, but your weeping has not been such a weeping if it has been
true; it has not been, because you have parted with them, but because you
abode with them so long; it has for measure been like the mourning of him that
has lost his only begotten son, Zach. 12. 10. but not upon the same
account, not because you must now part with them, but because you embraced them
so long. See the effects of godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 11. it works carfulness
and indignation, etc. Were your souls ever in such a true bitterness for
sin, that it wrought in thee an indignation against your selves; that you
could even eat your own flesh, to think you should ever have been such a
vain, wanton wretch, such a proud sinner as you have been? This is a good
sign you and your fathers house are parted, and that at the parting you
sorrowed after a godly sort.

4. If ever you truly parted with it, both at the parting, and since too, you
have found something to do with your own spirit, some struglings and
combatings with your self. Before you parted you were at a dispute with your
souls; shall I leave this or that corruption, or shall I not? and since you
have been at some debates with your spirit, shall I go home again? shall I
return to such a vomit? to such a wallowing in the mire? even Paul himself
found the law in his members warring against the law of his mind, and bringing
him into captivity to the law of sin, Romans 7. 23. the flesh lusting against
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these contrary one to
another, Gal. 5. 17. I dare almost say, that that soul never conquered sin,
that is not yet in combat with it; never truly overcame it, that is not still
in combat; never yet forgot its fathers house, that has not some strong
inclinations, sometimes to be going to its old home again, and sometimes finds
not that it has something to do to keep his heart from (a second time)
embracing what it has been once ashamed of.

5. Do you make Christ all your delight, and your sole delight? is he to you
solus desideria, and totus desideria? Are your hearts taken more with Christ
than with all the world besides, and so taken with your husband, that nothing
of him, nor from him, displeases you? can you be content with Christ alone,
and say with David to the Lord, Thou art my portion? could you quest all things
else for him? and is there nothing of him but seems lovely to you? do his
strictest laws seem excellent to you? Is he excellent to you in the intent of
his Kingly office, as well as in the comfort of his Priestly office? does his
very yoke seem easy, and his burden seem light to you?

6. Do you abide with Christ, as the wife abides with the husband, and the
branch abides in the vine? every true branch abides in him, Joh. 15. 4. is your
dwelling with him? or are you only religious by fits? the hypocrite may be so
religions, but the Saint makes the Lord his dwelling place. Which is that which
you count your home? the best of Gods Saints may have some inclinations to
vanity, and be sometimes trading with the world; Ah! but Christ is his home,
Christ is his dwelling place; he thinks himself in a strange place, when he
is not with Christ in duties of holy communion. Christian, which is thy
element? Is your soul in its element, when it is conversing with things below
Christ? that is an ill sign, by these things you may take a scantling of your
own haarts. The Lord help you in applying these things to your souls. I
proceed to a 3d use.

Here Is comfort to the Saints, joy to the upright in heart, especially

1. Against all the uncomelinesse and indesireablenesse the Saint apprehends in
himself. There Is none so comely as the Saint in Christ's eyes, nor any so
uncomely and ugly in their own eyes; Paul cries out, O wretched man that I am,
Romans 7. 24. and again, I am as one borne out of due time, the least of the
Apostles, not worthy to be called an Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 8, 9. It is an usual
account the Saints give of themselves, ah wretched creatures, poor
indesireable wretches, hard-hearted sinners, vile persons, etc. Be of good
cheer Christian, The King has desired thy beauty; thou art black in thine
own eyes, but comely in Christ's eyes: Black in respect of thy merit, but
comely in respect of imputation; comely through the comeliness that he has
put upon you. Secondly,

2. Here Is comfort against all the dirt the world casts upon you, all the
uncomelinesse they conceit in you; who so despicable creatures in the eyes of
the world, as those men and women whom the Lord delights to honor? these are
the despised ones; upon the backs of these it is that the Plowers plow, and
make long furrows; they are the upright in heart, that they privily bend their
bow to shoot at, against these are the puttings out of the fingers, and the
liftings up of the hands; upon these are laid all the scoffs of the ungodly,
and through their weakness the barkings of these dogs sometimes trouble
them. But Christians, has not the King desired your beauty? the beauty that
these wretches are so blind they cannot see. Has not the King desired it? Is
it desirable in Christ's eyes, and despised in their eyes? which is the best
judge, think you? is it not enough for you, that you please your husband?

3. Here Is comfort for you, not only against all their scoffs, but against all
their low esteem of you. David says, I am small, and of no reputation. Christ
was accounted the least in the kingdom of Heaven; he was the stone which the
builders refused. A man of no fashion in the world, who cared for him? did any
of the Pharisees believe on him? The wife, you know, takes her honor from her
husband, and usually, if he be accounted one of no fashion, she is not valued
at a very high rate; Saints, though they be indeed the worlds pillars, yet in
the vulgar estimate they are the worlds burdens; and where ever they live,
they usually live at a low rate in worldlings desires, if any (of note before)
turn puritan, he loses his rate in the worlds thoughts presently, the
Gentleman loses his honor, the Lady her repute; but it is because their
prizers have lost their wit, and their eyes, and it need not much trouble a
Saint, for Christ desires their beauty still: They have put themselves out of
the worlds reckoning, and heightend themselves in Christ's esteem. Despise on
(fools) the King has desired these souls beauty,

Ah! but will a poor misdoubting Christian say, I am afraid they have a true
object of laughter in me. I am afraid I have not that desirable beauty, but am
a painted sepulcher; were I but convinced, that I had indeed truly forgot my
fathers house, and that the Lord Christ had indeed desired my beauty, I could
nail their scoffs to my heels, and mourn over their gallant follies: But I
fear.

1 Obj. Alas! I am going home to my fathers house ever and anon, I am ready to
yield to temptations, ready to fall into sin; yea, and the Lord pardon me, I
fall seven times a day. If I had forgot my fathers house, should I have such
inclinations to go home? would my heart draw so hard for vanity, as it does
sometimes? should I sin so often, etc.

I answ. 1. Which way stands your affection? your heart you say bends that way,
but which way stands your affection? do you take pleasure in such
inclinations? have you a good mind to sin, if you durst? to return to your
old vanities, if you durst? only you durst not, that is an ill sign. But upon
such inclinations, does there presently arise a loathing in your souls? do
you say, Get thee behind me Satan, that is a good sign, that though you be
invited by a temptation of vain company, or the Devil, etc. yet you have
truly forgotten your fathers house.

2. You go home sometimes you say, it may be you fall into some of your former
vain courses, and are with some of your vain companions. But I pray, What do
you when you are in your fathers house? are you pleased with your vanities, or
with the vanities of your friends? or do you spend your time in chiding? It
may be your heart sometimes declines to some vanity, or you are sometimes in
converse with vain persons. Are you one with vanity, one with sinners? or do
your spirits rise against your selves, and against the vanities of those with
whom you are? What indignation is wrought? if any, you may have forgot your
fathers house, for all this going home.

3. You go home sometimes you say. But I pray, How long do you stay there? Is
sin your trade? Do you live in known sins? this indeed will argue your
profession but hypocrisy. But (on the contrary) though you fall through
weakness, yet do you rise through grace; though you sin sometimes, yet is
sin as David's concupiscence, called a stranger in the Parable. Thus the best
Saints have sinned, yea, and may sin; not of wilfulness, but of weakness;
not trading in sin, nor lying in it, but falling into it, and rising by
repentance.

2. Obj. Ah! but will another Christian say, I cannot deny my self in the
company of my fathers house, wretch that I am. I got acquaintance when I was
young with vain persons, or I am related to such, and I dare not say, but I
love their company, and often times leave better for them; neither can I deny my
self in my relations. My heart is excessively let out after them.

1. Thou say thou art often times yet a companion of vain persons, but
consider (Christian) are they thy invited ghests, or accidental merely? are
they intruders, or are they the welcome crmpanions of thy life? are they thy
picked company or no, thy intimates, or merely companions in respect of thy
trade, and converse with the world? If thou delightest not in them, they indeed
are sometimes thy companions, but thou art not theirs.

2. Art thou a companion with them in sin, or only in civil actions, or for
discourse, etc. sometimes? if the first indeed it is a sign thou have not left
thy fathers house; but if the latter only, it is no such sign, thou keep
thy course, they come to thee, and it may be disturb thee, but thou do not
go to them.

3. Thou say thou love them. But it would be considered, Whether thy love
be merely natural or more? It may be thou love them because they are witty
people, or of ingenuous dispositions. Thus Christ loved the young man, Matthew.
19. and thus thou may love them. It is an ill sign, if thou love them,
because they will drink, or swear, or be vain and wanton in their discourse
or carriages.

4. Thou say thou love thy relations, and thou can not deny thy self in
them, thy heart is so glued to them, etc. and God forbid but thou should love
them, 1. with a natural affection, its a sign of a wretch, Romans 1. 31. to be
without natural affection, and 2. with a providentiall love and care; he that
provides not for his family (says the Apostle) is worse than an infidel. But
1. Suppose Christ should call thee to suffer for him, and thou had a good
mind to it, and they should plead hard for thee to spare thy self; would
thou with Hierom shake off thy father, and mother, and children, and run to
Christ? this would be a sign thou had for-got them, Though thou love
them. 2. Notwithstanding that thou love them, would thou favor them in any
sin against God, and only lukewarmely reprove them, like old Elie? It is not
well done of you, O my sons, because thou love them: will thou rather let
them dishonor God, damn their own souls, do any thing, rather than reprove,
or smite them? this love indeed is a real hatred, and will argue little love
to God in thy soul. But on the contrary, though thou love them with the
tenderest love, and wilt provide for them with the most providential care; yet
is thy love so truly tempered, that it shall not in the least hinder thee from
doing thy duty to Christ; no, nor yet from doing thy duty to them; from
reproving sharply, admonishing severely? is thy love such, that it shall not
blind thy eyes, so as thou will wink at the least neglect of duty in them, not
at the least sin-in them? Love them then as well as thou can, it shall be no
sad evidence against thy soul, otherwise (Parents look to it) your children
will curse you another day for your love to them: you have heard of killing
with kindness; let the kind of death be never so sweet, yet the death will be
bitter. Take heed not of killing the bodies (alas, that were nothing) but of
damning your childrens souls, and your own too, with miscalled kindness.

3 Obj. But will another Christian say, I have not forgot my honor and glory, I
am not low enough, I fear, to get in at heavens gate. I answer first.

1. This is like the melancholy conceit of her, that a Divine of our own
speaks of; of a woman that conceited, she was so fat, she could not get to
heaven; it is the lowness of mind that God looks at, Lords and Ladies, if
their hearts be not as high as their titles, may sit in heaven as well as
meaner persons. I do not say, they shall have chaires of state set for them,
but they may have a room there; it may be one or two may sit above them (if
there be degrees in glory) that gave them place here: but as Master Rutherford
says, the least place in Heaven is Heaven, though it be behind the door. But
secondly,

2. Is not thy outward Pomp and glory that which thou affectest, and
delightest in it, and huntest after? Does not thy title tickle thy ear, nor
swell thy heart, if not, it can do thee no hurt? all the fear of those
swelling things is, lest they should breed tympanies in the soul.

3. Do you look upon the title of the servant of Jesus Christ, the title of
Christian, as the far more honorable title? Are you of Theodosius his
temper, which would you rather choose, to be called my Lord, or Madam, or to be
called the servant of Christ; which do you prefer? if the latter, it is a
sign you have forgot the former, though you retain it.

4. Is your outward greatness and pomp no snare to your soul in the ways of
God? Great persons are too ready to think they are above prayers, above
hearing, above mean Saints; should such ones as they pray in their families;
no, let their boy do it? should they pray in secret, and run up and down to
lectures? O no (forsooth) it is a dishononour to them (Heaven was made, I
confess, for the most part, for people of lesser quality, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27.
James 2. 5.) should such as they go to private meetings? no, better go to a
tavern, there they shall only foul their souls, but keep their clothes
clean. But now, has the Lord given thee another spirit? it is true, thou art
great, but thy greatness is no such snare to thy soul; thou can pray for
all thy greatness, and hear sermons, and kneel in a duty for all thy silk
stockings, and entertain communion with the meanest Saint; yea, and for a need
prefer a lether dublet in honor before thy self. Though thou be great it
seems thou have forgot it.

4 Obj. Ah, but will a Christian say, I am so addicted to mirth, and pleasure;
I must have my vagary, and tickle my sense sometimes, etc.

1 Answ. Christian, do thou love thy pleasures more than thy God, that indeed
were something? art thou more pleased with hearing a song, than hearing a
sermon? this sounds high. But love God best, and for ought I know, thy eye (for
thy recreation) may be delighted in seeing, and thy ear with hearing too.

2 Answ. Will thou baulk an opportunity of communion with Christ, or with his
Saints, for a vain pleasure? Will thou be a loser in thy heart, to gain a
little pleasure for thine eye, or ear, or any sense? will thou miss a family
duty, an opportunity of hearing Gods word privately or publicly, thy time of
secret duty, a time of communion with the Saints to wait upon thy pleasure? In
such a case I would have thee suspect thy heart, otherwise thou may recreate
thy self with them, and yet have forgotten them.

3 Answ. Suppose thy pleasures have been such, and are such, as are in
themselves sinful, as wantonness, drunkenness, etc. Do thou love them so,
that thou will have them whether God will or no? thou will break with God to
enjoy thy lust; this is an ill, and a very ill sign. But possibly thy
pleasures are such as God allows thee (temperately used) if such, thou may
so use them, and yet the King desire thy beauty. I have finished this branch of
application, I have but one word more to add: It shall be of

Exhortation. Let me now persuade with you Christians; And (oh that the Lord
would help me to persuade) 1. with you, who have not at all yet forgate your
fathers house, and so consequently, your beauty is not at all desirable to
Christ. 2. With you that have begun to do well; I have a word to both sorts,

1 Br. Is there, alas, is there any poor soul before me this day, whose heart
smites him, and tells him, that his soul is not at all yet desirable in the
eyes of Jesus Christ? is there any poor creature so sadly miserable? possibly
the world dotes on you for beauty, wit, parts, behavior, etc. but in the mean
time, do your souls, tell you in plain English, that you are despised in
Christ's eyes. As though God did beseech you by me, I pray you in Christ's stead
be reconciled to God. Ah poor soul, would thou be desired of Jesus Christ?
Hearken then O daughter and consider, and incline your care, forget thy own
people, and thy fathers house. I know I am pleading with you for an hard thing,
especially for you that have all the world at will: But I beseech you by the
love you bear to your precious souls, which shall last for ever; do it, ah
do it. I had need now have the Rhethorick of an Angel, yea, if I had; yet God
must persuade Japhet to come and dwell in the tents of Shem. Let me offer but
a few considerations, and venture at a persuading of you, and leave the issue
with God.

1. Consider, How will you live when your fathers house fails you? for the
present it is a full house, and you live, as we say, as well as a carnal
heart would wish; you have pleasures, and honors, and riches, even what you
would ask: the color is in your cheeks, and the marow in your bones. But will
this last always? does not the fashion of this world pass away? and will not
the fashion of your bodies pass away? what will you do in that day of your
visitation? These things may last a while, till God comes to keep a Court in
your Conscience, or he summons you to a particular judgment, or lays you
upon your back in a bed of affliction, or comes to his last judgment: But in
any of these days (poor creature) what will thou do? when thy perfumed body
shall come to stink in the nostrils of men, thy soul shall be more loathed of
God; a future livelihood would be thought of, This will persuade a virgin to
marry sometimes. But besides.

2. Christian, Do thou know the joys of a married life to Christ? do thou
put no difference betwixt being a bondslave to hell, and one free in Jesus
Christ; betwixt the enjoying the communion of the children of the Devil, and
enjoying the communion of Saints? no difference betwixt enjoying the commun on
of devils, in everlasting torments, and the communion of God, Angels, and
Saints, in the highest Heavens, where eye has not seen, nor has ear heard,
nor can it enter into the heart of man, to conceive what things God has
prepared for them that love him? now (if thy conscience be not seared) thou
have ever and anon some flashes of hell in thy face. The merriest sinner of you
all, I believe is not always free. Is there no difference betwixt that
condition, think you, and a peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost?
Now, you never lie down in your beds, but (if you dare look back, and consider
how you have spent the day) your soul is stricken with terror, and there is a
dart almost struck through your liver, and you dare not let your souls feed
upon the thoughts, but are glad to shuffle it over, for fear you run mad;
but if your souls would but forget these vanities, ah, how sweetly would you
sleep; and when you had spent a day in duties of hearing or praying, how
sweetly would your souls look back upon it. Now if you were not rock't into a
sleep of damnation, you would scarce lie down to sleep, but you would fear
lest you should wake in the morning with hell flames about your ears; nor
walk in the day, but (like the selfe-accused murderer) your eye would be over
your shoulder, for fear the devil should be laying hold of you: then you
would lie down in peace, and rise up in peace, and nothing would make you
afraid. Is this world nothing Christian? ah, that the Lord would persuade you
of this. Besides,

3. Consider (Christian) there is nothing in your fathers house but you shall
find in Christ, by a way of eminency. Must you forsake your sins, you shall
be filled with the graces of the spirit of God? Must you forsake a little idle
vain company, you shall have the communion of Saints, yea, a fellowship with
the father, and the son the Lord Jesus Christ? 1 John 1. 3. Must you forget
your pomp and glory, etc. you shall be called the sons and daughters of
God, heirs, coheires with Christ? Romans 8. Must you forget worldly riches, you
shall have the riches of grace? Must you forget a few vain pleasures, you
shall have a fullness of pleasures, at Christ's right hand, and that for
evermore? Psalm. 16. 11. Must you forget your own righteousness, you shall be
clothed with the righteousness of Jesus Christ? what is lost by the exchange
Christian?

4. Consider again, Christ forgot his fathers house for you, and yet it was
worth many of yours; he forgot the glory, the company, the pleasures of his
fathers house for you; he was content, for you, to be a companion of fishermen,
yea, of sinners, yea, of thieves, when he died upon the cross for you: this he
did freely, he made himself of no reputation, he nothinged himself for you:
Hark what the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 8. 9. you know the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who though he was rich, yet for your sake he became poor; that you
through his poverty might be made rich. Let that melting love win you.
Besides,

5. It is the way to be beautiful: what abundance of pains poor vain
wretches take to be beautiful? surely this must move. Beauty is a desirable
thing, the vain creatures of the earth would never else set nature with the
heels upward, do any thing to obtain it; we should never else have so much
precious time lost, and so many precious souls undone with paintings, and
trimmings, patchings, and perfumings, and a thousand such apish tricks: but
beauty is the idol of the world, to which the very soul shall be offered up
in sacrifice, and when all this is done the soul is amiss, and the way to
adorn that, is to undresse all again. Hark, you that desire beauty, here is
the way of beauty which you have not known; it is to deny your selves in all
these things, and whatsoever else is contrary to the law of Christ, or short of
him; yea, and this,

6. Shall make you desirably beauteous, that Christ shall desire you, and the
Saints shall desire you; this is the way to ravish his heart. But no more by
way of motive, God must do all I know when I have spoke my utmost.

I might tell you who it is will desire your beauty; It is the King of heaven,
of glory, and peace; the King shall desire your beauty. If this, all this will
not do, the Lord open your eyes, and then I am sure it will.

But this is an hard work, and young ones especially had need of a great deal
of help to it, and truly nature affords none, all is laid up in Christ only;
In order to the getting of it from Christ, let me advise you;

With a serious eye to look upon your fathers house, and see what there is in
it desirable, that should so bewitch one that has not outlawed his or her
reason to it. Look seriously upon your sins, will you not see a filthiness
in them? Look upon your vain company, be they what they will, will you not
discern some sordidnesse or baseness in their actions? upon your honors and
greatness, will they not appear bubbles? upon your pleasures, will they not
appear shadows? You look upon these things as pictures, side-wayes, or at a
distance; that makes you admire them, and run after them: come nearer to
them, will they not look dawbed with some uncomelinesse or other? Will not the
colors that looked so sweetly afar off, stink if you bring them near your
nose? Let that be the first piece of advice.

While you enjoy these things, take heed of letting out your heart to them;
rejoice as if you rejoiced not, and use the world as if you used it not; be not
too much intent upon your fathers house, converse not too much with any thing
there; things of the world have a glutinous quality, the heart will cleave to
them, if you let it lie very long amongst them; and if it once cleaves, there
will be no ways, but either your heart must be soundly rent upon the
severing, or hellfire must part them.

Learn to live from your fathers house betimes, take the wise man's counsel,
it was after a large survey and discourse of every room, and the vanity of
every room in our fathers house, Eccl. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth; if rottenness enter into the bones, it will hardly ever
out. You that are young, for the Lords sake think of this: Ah, come off your
youthful vanities before they can plead custom with your souls, live from
home betimes, believe it, there will be more weeping else when you come to
part.

Cry, cry mightily unto God, that he would take off your heart: Believe it,
it must be his work, you will be wearied else in the multitude of your own
endeavors; if the Lord draw off the heart, it will be drawn indeed. Be much
in public prayer, but especially be much in secret prayer. I must conclude.

2. Br. Lastly, you that have been taught of the Lord to forget your fathers
house, that so the King might desire your beauty, Let me plead with you still
to forget it more. Selfedeniall is a long and hard lesson, a Christian must be
learning it from his cradle to his grave, and every time he studies it he
shall find something to be done that is yet behind, and all that he has done
to be done better: you have learned in part how to do it, I need not direct
you, you need no other directions then

1. To study every day more and more the vanity of the creature. Read over the
book of Ecclesiastes well, it is enough to teach you that lesson.

2. Converse little with your fathers house, have as little to do with the
world, the pleasures, or profits, or riches, or company, or manners of it as
you can, the lesser the better.

3. Be more acquainted with Jesus Christ, get nearer to him, be more in
communion with him, get more tastes of Heaven, Earth will relish the worse for
it. I might press upon you the same motives I urged before, and I should do
it with advantages; you know what this King is, how much to be desired, how
much to be odored; you know what a difference there is betwixt the worlds
comeliness, and the comeliness which he puts upon his Saints. Let me
only urge one word, or rather name it:

Some read the words, quia concupivit, Because the King has desired thy
beauty, here is an argument, an engaging argument to a Saint. The Lord has
effectually made it known in your souls, that he desires your beauty more
than ten thousands of others. He has whispered, not only in your ears,
but in your heart, his desire to you. Ah, now Christians be you humble,
self-denying ones, because the King has desired your beauty. Let the love of
Christ constrain you, to order your hearts and conversations as becomes the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ: According to the laws of this King that has
so passionately desired, and so effecaciously declared his desire to your
beauty. I must have done: The Lord add his blessing.

FINIS.

