THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM The Lord General His quarters.

CERTIFYING, How the Lord GENERALS Horse brake through the Kings Army; and how
Major General Skippon fought like a Lion, and gained better conditions from
the Enemy then was expected; the Kings F^s having before intended to put all
our Foot to the Sword.

ALSO, A Letter from the North, of other proceedings in those parts.

Published according to Order.

Sept: 9th LONDON, Printed by JANE COE. 1644.

THE COPPIE OF A LETTR From my Lord General his QUARTERS.
SIR,
ON Wednesday the 21. of August 1644. the Kings whole Army: both his own
brigade, Maurices and Greenvils were all drawn into the field in a battalia,
supposed to be about 30000. And the Lord Generals Army being only about,
10000. horse and foot, we likewise drew out into the field. The Kings Army
appeared in a whole body in the form of a half Moon, within a mile of
Listlehall, the Kings forces with this great body marched up within Musket shot
of the Lord Generals Army, about 4. of the Clock in the morning, my Lord
Generals Army began to play their Ordnance against them, and it is cononceived
did good execution: The fight held all that day between the Ordnance and the
Muskettires, and is conceived our men did good execution: upon the Enemy, and
at night some shor on both sides were made by the Musketeers. On Thur^day
night the Enemy cast up an Half Moon upon the Beak hill, on which they
planted two or three piece of or^nance and played all the next day being Friday
upon our body.

On S^tt^rday August the 24. Sergeant Major General Whithcot with the (...)
Regiment, and Colonel Wares of the White Regiment, and the blew ^^giment of
the Lord Generals, taking into consideration that the gaining of ^^^^itheel
River would be very advantageous to our Army, by stopping up of the water, to
make a Dam to hinder provision from passing that way to the ^ing^ Army, drew
out their men to ambuscado the hedges, and the soldiers themselves wrought the
mean while to raise the Banks, and made a complete D^m; which was finish^d by
Tuesday following.

O^ ^unday the 25. of August, the Kings forces made some shot with small
P^^c^s, and were answered again from ours; and that with great courage from
Colonel Gower of the red Regiment, and diverse others.

Major General Skippon was shot in the right hand, but only a brush, and tore
his Buffe coat on that on that side, but no great hurt God be praised, On the
Kings party Colonel Chapernoone was shet in the head, and taken prisoner,
supposed to be mortally wounded.

On Monday the 26. of August, both partees still played each upon other, but
still we found that although my Lord General was fewer in number, yet my Lords
forces made many more shot then the Kings, and especially my Lord Generals
warning Piece, which played continually.

On Tuesday the 27. of August, the Enemy having drawn themselves off the day
before about 3000. horse and foot, that partee marched toward a ^lace called
Bl^z^y Bridge, about three miles from Lestitheel, which they did, to stop the
passage of Provision from Milly-Billy Bay if they could, from coming, to my
Lord General; for by taking it, my Lord could not have provisions, but by
breaking through them. We had at that time not above ^0 or thereabouts to guard
the Bridge, which they made good till relief came, against all the strength of
the Enemy. There has been great bic^ering about this Bridge, and indeed a good
partee came up to assist our forces there, who then played upon the Enemy with
great courage, and it is believed slew many.

My Lord General sent 1000. horse and 1000. foot of commanded men, to maintain
Blazey bridge, the Enemy lying of one side the water, and ours of the other; on
out part Sergeant Major Skippon commanded in chief, there was also Captain
Cromwell of foot, and of horse Major General Berry, and others:

After our horse and soot had made good Blazey bridge many days, and the rest
Defended themselves against so, numerous a company of the Kings forc^s for
almost 20 days, in continual skirmishing, and no forces were come to relieve
my Lord General, a great number of the kings forses fell upon four Regiments
of ours, which caused three of them to retreat, and the fourth, which were
Colonel Wares, new leavied forces ran away, but the London foot stood
gallantly to it, Major General Skippon fought like a Lion: My Lord General
engaged himself so much all this while, of so many days skirmishing, that now
his EXCELLENCI^ was constrained to remove his quarters, whereby he gained an
opportunity to go to Plymouth himself, where his Excellency is safe with the
Lord Roberts and others, from whence his Excellency intends to come to
Portchmouth. They then called a Counsel of War, and as it was by the said
Counsel concluded, the horse brake through the Kings forces, and the Enemy
having incompasses 30. and odd of our foot, who cried for quarter, the Enemy
cried out as with one voice, Put all to the sword, all to the sword, and
accordingly did they massacre all of them but two, who got away and come to the
rest of our foot, and told them how the Kings forces were resolved to put all
to the sword, our foot still standing out, and fighting with great courage: So
that Major general Skippon gained better Conditions from the Enemy, then was
expected: And had succor, all this time been sent to my Lord General, he had
not been with his Army in this condition, who was himself so careful in the
Defending of his Army: and stood out against the Enemy so long expecting
relief: that had he not that night Changed his quarters he had been taken
prisoner. But seeing that it has pleased God that we have sustained this
loss, (which I hope through Gods providence will turn to his honor, and our
good) I hope those forces that are to march up to the West, will hasten the
more, to prevent further mischief, by the Enemy.

We have had many experiences of Gods love, in all places of the Kingdom, and
how the Lord has done great things for us, when we have been very low, and
although we have had these losses as we may apprehend it may be much to our
hurt, but Gods ways are not our ways, the Lord can turn it to good: when
Gods time of Deliverance is come I am confiden^ that all the Cavaliers in
England, all the Rebels of Ireland, and all the Popish priests, Friars,
Jesuits, and Papists in all their Armies, cannot be able to stand before him.
God is all sufficien if we have but hearts to trust him, he will save us: Thus
in have I rest.

Your humble (...) Servant.
Plymouth the 3. of September. 16^4.
A Letter From a Commander of Note in the Leagure before Pomfret.
SIR,
Colonel Sands Commander in chief, of the forces before Pomphret Castle,
Marched with his own Regiment, consisting of seven Troops of horse to Kippax,
within six miles of Pomsret castle, where we had notice that the Enemy had
drawn out four hundred horse and foot, intending to have fallen upon our
quarters, but we drew that night into the field, and planted our selves in so
convenient a place, that had they fallen upon our quarters, where our Colonel
only left enough to draw them on with the geater eagerness; We had fallen
into the flank and rear of them, But I fear the Malignants and ill affected of
the Country gave them notice in what a posture we were. Not hearing of them we
marched. and took up our quarters that night at Brotherton, within two miles of
the castle, and drew about two of the clock into the field, and marched toward
the castle, and planted our selves within Halfe-cannon shot of them, under a
hill. We marched about the town, and faced them the greatest part of that day,
but not being able to draw them forth; we withdrew and quartered that night at
Medley where we joined Eight troops of horse more, and marched next day to the
castle. The Enemy then drew forth both Horse and foot, and with their Horse
skirmished the greatest part of that day with us, we forced them several times
that day to retreat, but the hedges being lined with Musqueteeres, we were
enforc^d to forbear the pursuit: But toward the Evening, having pulled down
some hedges our Colonel sent a party of horse (being under their cannon) to
fall in the rear of their Ambascade, both of horse and foot, which they
perceiving stayed not to make a retreat, but shamefully ran; We pursued them to
the castle gates, and killed there a Lieuetenant and four Volunteers of
quality: Sir John Redmayns son narrowly escaped, and was forced to leave his
Horse and Arms behind him and escaped on foot, we wounded many, and took
twelve prisoners, two of them being chief Gunners of the castle, which came out
with the Musqueteeres, all the loss on our side, was one Captain slightly cut
in the head, one wounded and one taken prisoner. We had daily strong parties
about them, and are still facing of the Castle, that we may straighten them,
and hinder them from plundering, pillaging and molesting the traffick^ of the
County, which they did in a great measure, until it pleased my Lord Fairfax
to send us hither: That day that we scirmished with them, we took (after we had
beat them into the Castle) of their provisions, 100. Sheep, and 40. Oxen, which
our Colonel has sent to the Committee of York to be dispesed of for the
public use, and although our noble Colonel has disbursed a great deal of
money in this service, yet he quits all private respects, and implies himself
wholly, to serve the Public: We are now drawn with all our horse before the
Castle, and have fetched in the drafts of the Country, and are carrying into
our own quarters all the the carne about the town, which shall be disposed of
as the Committee at York shall appoint. My Lord has promised to send us both
foot and cannon; we doubt not then but to render the Honourble Houses of
Parliament a good account of this castle.

Our Canon are planted before Hemsley Castle and we hope speedily to take it, I
shall as often as I can give you notice of our proceedings in these parts, Sir
Thomas Fairfax is most unfortunately shot in the shoulder, by a bullet from the
Enemy in Hemsley Castle.

Your affection Friend:
From before Pomfret, 29 of August. 1644. at 4. of the clock in the
afternoon. FOr other particulars, they are referred to a Commander of note who
is coming from my Lord General with them. In the mean time, how^ver we have
had so great a loss, yet have we cause to give God tha^^es that our loss is
in our Artillery, and not in men: The Kings forces be^^g resolved before, to
put every man of them to the sword; such is their cruelty against honest true
hearted Protestants. N^^ let us be discouraged for all this, for our extremity
has hitherto been Gods opportunity; and there^o^e let all honest Protestants
join hand, and heart, and purse, and all we have, according to our Covenant;
(and that without any more such delays) for the helping forward of the work of
the Lord, against his and our cruel and bloodthirsty Enemies.

And thus far the Lord has blessed the Parliaments endeavors toward the
relief of the Lord General already, with a supply now going to him with Sir
William Wallers own Forces, and 800. out of Kent well mounted and armed, which
came to him on Thursday last; 3800. of General Middletons horse and dragoons,
besides foot, and those which Sir William Waller expects from Chichester,
Arundell, and the Isle of Wight: Colonel M^sseyes also, and the Forces of the
Noble Earl of Manchester. God bless them, and go along with them, to his
glory; and the Peace, truth settlement, and comfort, of this poor distressed
Kingdom.



FJNJS.

