A LETTER TO His Worthy Friend, D.B.M. FROM Dr. CONNOR, Member of the College
of Physicians and Royal-Society, CONCERNING HIS Medicina Arcana de Mystico
Corporis Humani Statu: OR, A Latin TREATISE, in which he designs to Explain the
MIRACLES relating to HUMAN BODIES, by the Principles of PHYSIC.
SIR,
I Presume you have not forgot a late Discourse, wherein you and I were engaged
in the Defense of Miracles, against the Objections of some Persons then
present, who pretended they could not conceive either the Possibility, or the
Manner of them.

These Objections, we looked upon as weak in themselves, and seeming to imply,
That either the Divine Omnipotence could do nothing, but what their Faculties
were capable to comprehend; or, that there was a necessity, that, to convince
Unbelievers, to confirm some Important Truth, or to bring about some other
great or weighty End, it were requisite that God should not only do a Miracle,
but also show them the Way and Manner how it was performed. We freely owned,
That such Operations as are looked upon as Miracles, those especially recorded
in Scripture, cannot be performed by the Stated Laws of Nature, but immediately
by a Supreme Being, for some great Design.

This Answer, as being undeniably true, they could not but admit; and though
where the Relaters were of an Undoubted Credit and Veracity, they could not but
believe those Performances were Miraculous and Supernatural; yet, for their
clearer satisfaction, they desired our further Thoughts concerning the Manner
of such Supernatural Effects.

This being above my Sphere, which reaches no further then Physic, or Nature
in its ordinary Operations; wherein, however, I find matter more than
sufficient to employ all my Time and Thoughts, and wherein I plainly see the
Existence, and can never sufficiently admire the constant Providence of a
Deity; yet being willing to comply with their Desires, I promised I would give
them what satisfaction I could therein.

This, indeed, was not the first time the very same Difficulties had been
proposed in my hearing; for I had formerly discoursed with others, both in this
and other Countries, upon the same Subject; and had some Years ago drawn up a
rude Scheme of an Essay toward the clearing of this Point. But if this, or the
like occasion, had not put me upon reviewing this Paper, I might have never
given my self, or any Body else, the Trouble of Reading it. But having thus,
unwarily, engaged my self, I resolved to revise this Design, and to give those
Persons a sight of it. This I did accordingly, and afterward showed it to your
self, and to some other Friends.

They owned the Notions I advanced, and the Ways of Explication I proposed,
were new to them, and might be so to others; and though they were not, nor could
be convinced, that these were the very Ways of the Divine Proceedings, in the
effecting of such Operations, yet they seemed inclinable to imagine, that upon
these Principles, Miracles, and the Operations of them, were conceivable by
such as know any thing of the Nature and Laws of Motion.

This Communication of my Thoughts, gave occasion to others to discourse with
me about them, and to desire that if I did intend to publish them, I would in
the mean time, give them, at least, the general Heads of my Design.

This I was willing to have been excused in, as having not digested them into
that order I might at last publish them in; and was willing to reserve to my
self a Power of making what Additions or Retrenchments I should afterward
think fit to make; but the Plan of the Essay happening not to be fully
represented, and afterward being worse understood and commented upon; I at
last resolved to draw up the following Account of the Particulars I therein
consider.

I endeavor, Sir, to make it no longer a Difficulty, to conceive, and make
evident by Reason, and the Principles of Physic, I mean the Principles of
Nature, all the Miracles related in Scripture, concerning Bodies, particularly
the Human: I mean, supposing those Miracles, to be true Matters of Fact, and
all Matters of Fact, as well Natural, as Supernatural, to be immediate Effects
of a Supreme Being, which must be granted; it is as easy to conceive the
Manner how this Infinite Power may be applied to Bodies, to work Miracles, as
to produce the common Phoenomena of Nature. By this I hope to convince our
Scepticks in Religion, the Deists, who must give their Assent, when they have
the same evident Reason to conceive the Possibility, and consequently to
believe the Truth of such Miracles, that are anthentically delivered to us, as
they have to conceive that Straw can burn in a flaming Fire.

The Foundation I go upon, is the Structure of the Human Body, which I have
often taken to pieces, by Anatomy, and resolved into its Essential Elements, or
Minute Particles by Chemistry; for I find it as necessary to be acquainted with
its Fabric, to give an Account of the Miraculous States it is supposed to have
been in Supernaturally, as it is to explain the Natural Effects commonly
produced in it: For want of a sufficient Insight in this Matter, several
Divines of the latter Ages, have given very gross Ideas of the Miracles they
have pretended to explain; and in several Places where I have been, I saw them,
either through Ignorance, or for Interest, give out for Miracles, Phoenomen^,
that were only surprising Effects of Natural Causes; which has given so great
an Occasion to Skepticism, and increate of De^s^^.

Having laid down for my Basis, the Structure of the Human body, as far as I
could discover from my Senses, Anatomy, ^i^e, Microscopes, and Experiments; I
proceed to examine, and endeavor to explain the different ways its Natural
State is supposed to have been Supernaturally altered by an infinite Power:
For, ^^^ing, that the Human Body is all Matter, and that all this Matter is
nothing (...) an Union of Particles, with Bulk, Figure, and respective
^^^ation, I thought that all the alteration that could Sup^^naturally happen to
this Bulk, Figure, or Situation, would be conceived. But before I enter upon
those ^^ce Subjects, I find it first necessary to enquire into the Cause,
Nature, and Laws of Motion; because Motion is the only true Cause of all
Natural E^^^^^s; and the Suspensions of the Laws of this Motion, are the only
Causes of all Supernatural Effects, or Miracles. I conceive the Laws of Motion
can be suspended three different ways, and by one or more of those Laws of
Suspension, it is as easy to solve clearly all Miracles, as it is to explain
the most evident Effects of Natural Causes, by the common Laws of Motion.

Though I mention, That all Miracles whatsoever can be easily reduced to some
of the three Laws of Suspension of Motion, notwithstanding I do not design to
speak of all sorts of Miracles, but of such only as are most in dispute among
the I earned: Yet any understanding Man may easily make his Application, and
resolve all other Supernatural Effects into one or other of 'em. The Heads of
my Discourse, I think fit to lay down here in the same Order I design to treat
of 'em. (viz.)

I. Of the Nature of a Body, particularly an Organical one, where the Structure
and Natural State of the Human Body is explained.

II. How many ways the Natural State of the Human Body, is said to have been
Supernaturally altered.

III. Of the Laws of Motion, and of the three different Suspensions of the
same, in order to explain all Miracles.

IV. How it can be conceived, that Water can be changed into Wine.

V. How it can be conceived, that a Human Body can (...) Invulnerable,
Immortal, and can live for ever without (...), as after the Resurrection.

VI. How a Human ^ody can be conceived to be in a Fire without (...).

VII. How we can conceive that an Army can p^ss through the Sea without
Drowning, or walk upon the Water without Sinking.

VIII. How it can be conceived, that a Man can have a Bloody S^eat.

IX. Of the Different Ways a Human Body can come into the Word; where is given
an Account of its Generation by Concourse of Man and Woman.

X. How are can conceive a Human Body can be formed o^ Woman without a Man, as
Christ 's.

XI. How to conceive a Human Body to be made without Man or Woman, as Adam 's.

XII. How to conceive a Human Body Dead, some Ages since, to be brought to Life
again, as in the Resurrection.

XIII. How many ways it cannot be conceived that a Human Body can be Entire and
Alive in two Places at the same time.

Because my design here is to explain all the Supernatural States that our Body
is supposed to have been put into, and since its being in two Places at once,
is the State the most disputed and doubted of; I thought it convenient to
examine the Reasons of those that assert it capable of being in several Places
at once, to see whether they are reconcilable with our Senses, and with the
Nature and Structure of a Human Body, which is the chief Thing to be
considered. I find it impossible to c^n ^ive, that a Human Body can be in two
Places at the same time, after the manner they have hitherto descri^'d; since
the same Human Body can never be in two Places at o^^^ with the same Bulk, and
with the same Quantity of Matter: Though it may be plainly conceived, that by a
Supreme Power, and in a particular manner, my Body, without, the Spirit, can be
in^ire, and Alive, with the same Structure, and with the same number of
Organical Parts, though not with their usual Dimensions, in several Places at the
same time. Yet since we have no evident Proof, or Experience, that any Human
Body has ever been thus multiplied; and because from conceiving the Possibility
of it, it is thought, People may perhaps hereafter take occasion to draw
several Consequences, that may be liable to dangerous Constructions, and lead
into Erroneous Speculations, I am advised, and am willing to decline treating
of this Subject; having no mind to meddle with Scripture, or Religion, being
not my Province. Wherefore I will endeavor only to explain those Miracles that
most People agree upon, submitting my Judgment to greater Capacities. For I
have no other desing in this Book, but to enquire how far we may look into, and
confirm Supernatural Effects, relating to Bodies, by the Principles of Physic.
Yet I do not think my other Occupations will permit me to get this small
Treatise ready for the Press, so soon as common Discourse, and this notice of
it, might otherwise seem to intimate.

I could not, Sir, resolve you the last time we were together, what you asked
me about the Anatomy: but having thought of it since, I design not to make any
more Demonstrations and ^iscourses of Anatomy, but I intend, this Winter, to
try a great many Chemical, and Anatomical Experiments, to co firm the Natural
Account I have had the Oceasion to give of the Structure, Functions, and
Operations of the Human Body, in this City, and in both the Universities:
Because I have a mind to lay a Foundation of Experiments (since Experiments are
the only Foundation we can surely build upon in Physic) for my Occonomia
Animalis, which I hope to be able to publish in few Years.

As for what we were talking about the Account of Poland, I have put into some
order, the Memoirs I have brought with me out of that Kingdom, and I design to
publish soon an Historical Account of the Ancient and Present State of Poland;
with an Abridgment of the Lives, and of the most remarkable Actions of the
Kings of that Country, from the Beginning of the Monarchy, to this present
Election. I will insert in it something relating to the Duchy of Curland; for
I do not find that there is any tolerable Account of them hitherto published in
our Tongue. But before I expose any thing to the Public Censure of the World,
I shall first desire your Opinion; knowing that your good Judgment can easily
correct the Oversights of

London, Bow-street, October. 22. 1696. Your Faithful Friend, and Servant, B. C.

London: Printed for Sam. Briscoe, at the Corner of Russel Street,
Covent Garden, 1696.


