THE Cause why this is first Printed, before it come to your hands, is, because
I would not give cause of Suspicion, that I seek any thing in secret or
underhand of you. But would have all things come to Light and public view,
for I love the Light, and the Truth; to be justified thereby, or to suffer for
the Testimony thereof.

A second Account in short, of the substance of the proceeding in the Court of
Kingstone upon Thames, upon the matter between R. Mayo the Priest, Plantiffe,
and E. Borough Defendent, the 25. of the seventh Month 1658.
first. THe Judgment of the Court was earnestly craved and desired by R. Mayo
and his Counselors, against E B. upon a verdict on record in the Court
formerly given by an injust jury (as my former account of the former proceeding
declares.) And E. B. was called ^ answer for himself, and show what reason he
could that Judgment ^ould not be given against him, who did appear, and answer
in the ^ar of the Lord, saying, that he was come before their judgment seat,
^ith great boldness, because he had the Lord on his side, and Truth ^n his
side, and the witness of God in all Consciencies on his side, to ^^stifie him
that he had done R. Mayo no wrong, but had spoken the truth of him; And for
this cause judgment ought to be arrested, and ^ot given against him, because
(said he) the Law condemns no man ^or speaking the Truth, and he had spoken
nothing but the Truth, con^erning R. Mayo, as he was always ready to prove
that R, Mayo had ^eld forth damnable Doctrine and Error; and this was
sufficient reason, that judgment ought to be arrested and not given, nor he
condemned ^or speaking the Truth, And he referred himself to the Court, and ^o
the witness of God in them all, whether they would condemn ^im or justify him;
but and if they did pass judgment upon him, it ^as only for speaking the
Truth, and not for any wrong done by him and it should lie upon themselves and
be their burden, though he ^ight unjustly suffer in this life by unjust
judgment, yet theirs would ^e the judgment and the suffering in the life to
come, when God did ^^^eward every man according to his work, and he would leave
it upon them, and to this purpose he spoke unto them. Then R. Mayos Coun^ellors
and the Court pleaded, that there was a verdict by jury against ^im, and that
the Court was to go upon the verdict, which appeared upon record against the
defendant, to which E. B. replied it was true, ^n unjust verdict they had
against him; but what then? he would ^pply himself, and his cause to the Judge
in the sight of the Lord, if ^ossibly he might be convinced of the
unrighteousness of the verdict, and might not he then justly mitigate in the
judgment, and defer it, and deny the verdict? and he did appeal to their
Consciencies, that it was an unjust verdict, for the jury had brought the
matter to a wrong ^ssue, and had not determined and judged according to the
Truth and ^nnocency of the matter, nor brougth it to a Lawful issue, but had
damnified him falsely, before they found any matter of fact against him, or the
Truth of the matter was not searched into, nor the Doctrine ^as not tried nor
determined of by the jury which he had charged and ^roved in Court against R.
Mayo, which Doctrine was damnable and error; but of the Doctrine the Jury had
not judged whether it was sound and true, or damnable and error, which the true
issue of the matter stood upon; but the Jury had unjustly damnified him (for
speaking maliciously as they said) before any matter of fact truly found, and
made appear according to equity, and that was injust, and therefore again,
judgment ought to be arrested upon that reason, because they had not truly
tried the matter, whether R. Mayos sayings, charged and proved against him,
were damnable Doctrine and Error, or whether they were not so, which was the
true cause to be tried, but they had condemned him for speaking such words, not
trying and determining whether the words were true or false words, and till
that was tried, and his words proved false words; he could be no Transgressor,
this was the substance and intent of his words, then R. Mayos Council again
replied, that he might then blame the Jury, but according to the verdict upon
record against the defendent the Court was to proceed; then the Recorder of the
Court said reasonably to this purpose, that the Jury was Judges of matter of
fact, and he was judge in matter of Law; and if any thing could be objected, or
error discovered in the business as in matter of Law, by what appeared upon
record, to that he would harken, for R. Mayo had in his Replication, laid in
that E B. spoke the words charged against him without any such cause by him in
his plea alleged, etc. Whereupon T. Moor gave diverse Arguments as in matter of
Law; and also produced the judgment of one Judge and three Lawers in writing
under their hands, showing diverse sound reasons, wherefore judgment ought to
be arrested in this cause, showing clearly according to Law, that the words
charged against E. B. (to wit,) saying R. Mayo held forth damnable Doctrine and
Error, (which is reckoned his offense, and wherefore the Jury gave verdict
against him, and the Priest, and his Counselors begged judgment,) are not
actionable in Law; instancing out of Cooks Institutes, particular causes of
the like nature, which could not bear an action, and much as to that purpose
was spoken, and showed under the four men's hands as before said, which were just
exceptions in point of Law, against the verdict upon record, wherefore
judgment ought to be arrested, and not passed in this cause against the
defendant, but to all what was showed and spoken to that purpose R. Mayos
Councels replied, the time was now past, to aledge these things, for the Jury
had given their verdict upon oath against the defendant, which was upon record,
and thereupon waved all the reasons that could be given, though never so sound,
and begged the judgment of the Court as before said against him, but then E. B.
returned to the naked Truth, and came again to the simplicity and innocence of
the matter, and waved all the multitude of Arguments, that could be spoken
about points and formalities. of the Law, pleading that whereas the Court had
given him liberty according to his right and birth right privilege, that he
might plead his own cause, and he instanced the time of his alledgement wherein
he did say peradventure he might not plead his cause in the formalities and
punctilios in the course of Law, yet he could plead the justness and simplicity
of the Truth in the matter, and the Court then had said, that would serve, and
be sufficient; and said E. B. the Court having thus spoken formerly; must I now
be condemned for the want of a form and punctilio in Law, wanting no part of
Truth on my side, nor manifestation of it, if they did, might not he say they
had as it were betrayed him? though yet he could not say so, and at this
Argument some of the Court seemed to be highly offended, as if he reflected
upon them, wronging and retorting upon their former kindness to him, which he
did not, but spoke simply and innocently in the matter, only to manifest
Truth, and to persuade them to do Truth and Justice, always keeping close to
the Truth of the cause, and still affirmed (as lawfully he may) that the
particulars (which is declared in my first account) charged and proved against
R. Mayo the Plantiffe in open Court, are damnable Doctrine and Error, and that
he would justify, if there he were pleading for his life, as it was but for
his liberty at most, he would, nor could in Conscience say no less; and if
they would condemn him, and judge him in an hundred pounds for speaking the
truth, he would bear it in patience and suffer, as for righteousness sake, and
he doubted not in the Lord, but to have the peace and presence of the
everlasting Father, with him, if he suffered all his days, to this purpose he
spoke, and thus showed great courage in the Lord against all unrighteous
judgment, looking only to the Lord, and above all the World and suffering in
it, as if he mattered nothing of all what they could do against him, saying
when they had done all that could be against him; the Law whereby he might
proceed against them was the Law of Christ, and he might pray for his Enemies,
and bless them that persecute, and say the Lord forgive them, when they had
done the evil they could, still affirming that he had spoken the Truth
concerning his adversary; Then R. Mayo being sitting upon the bench, he made
some answer, seeming to justify his Doctrine formerly delivered by him, and
charged against him to be damnable, which he repeated, and would have vindicated,
and said; that the light which Christ lights every man withal, John 1.9. is
carnal and darkness. 2. And that he did exhort the people in his Sermon, to
follow and obey a light which is not Christ, nor the light of the Gospel. 3.
The Apostle Paul did exhort the Saints to follow and obey a light, which was
not the Light of the Gospel. 4. Christ was not that word that David walked by,
when he said thy word is a light, etc. 5. A man may be a righteous man, and not
a godly man; He seemed a little to vindicate these things, but to no purpose,
as to men of understanding in the things of God; for he brought not one
scripture to prove his Doctrine at that time, though some of the Court his
friends bid him: so its manifest he continues in ignorance and blindness still,
and his own folly cannot reprove him, nor make him ashamed: Then T. Moor said,
he would take in hand to prove to all people, in the steeple house, or any
other public place, where R. Mayo would meet him, if he would give him a
meeting, that he was guilty of holding forth damnable Doctrine and error: and
he should maintain it in Argument against him, at any time and place where he
would meet him, that the particulars held forth by him, and proved in Court
against him, are damnable doctrine and error, then John Feilder spoke to the
Judges, that R. May^ should come off the bench, for it was against Act of
Parliament, that any Priest sold sit upon the bench in any Judicatory: and I
say it was also unseemly, that the plantiffe and Accuser should sit upon the
bench as if he was Judge in his own cause, and the Defendant, and accused stand
as at the Bar: but the Court caused R. Mayo to come down off the bench, who
did with shame, and his practice showed, he is truly such a one as Christ cried
woe against who loved the Chief-seats, and uppermost rooms in the Assemblies,
Mat. 23. But R. Mayo the Priest seemed to speak something as if he would give
T. Moor a meeting with 20. people as such a number, but before he had ended his
words as to that, the Court stopped him, and his own friends would not suffer
him to speak further to it: then he sell upon the matter in hand, much desiring
he was and craved to have judgment by the Court against E. B. and produced the
opinion in writing of Sergeant Maynard to this purpose, that if the word, were
true, he deserved deprivation of his place, etc. and therefore the words spoken
against him were actionable, etc. some controversy arose about the meaning of
the words: (if the words be true) and by (if the words be true) we understood
and said he meant, if that it was true, that he was guilty of preaching
damnable doctrine and error: then he disserved deprivation, etc. but R. Mayo
and his Council, would have given some other meaning upon the words, for their
own advantage, and what the true meaning of Sergeant Maynard is, remains in his
own breast, the words seemed doubtful.

And now I come to some more particulars of R. Mayos damnable Doctrines,
charged against him, and perferred to be proved in open Court, whereby his
wickedness, and E. Bs. guiltlesseness may more appear: first it was charged,
that R. Mayo had affirmed, that the Devil is the power of God. 2ly. That the
Gospel was not the power of God, a rosecake is as much the power of God. 3ly.
R. Mayo affirmed, if one man killed and murdered another, he did it by the
power of God: These things were charged upon R. Mayo, and not denied by him,
but he went to justify them in open Court, and affirmed that the Devil is the
power of God, and said he would prove it by Scripture, and brought that
Scripture Acts 8, 9, 10. where the unclean Spirits and poor bewiched, people of
Samaria, whom Simon Magus the Scorcerer had bewiched, said of him this man is
the great power of God, as you may read: and this was his proof, that the
Devil is the power of God: and here all may see R. Mayos error and damnable
doctrine, and wickedness, and ignorance, and blasphemy, who has brought the
Testimony of poor bewitched people, and unclean Spirits, that know not God, but
were wholly without him in the World, to prove what he affirmed, (to wit) that
the Devil is the power of God, and its the same Spirit in him that affirms it,
as it was in the bewitched people, that said the Sorcerer was the great power
of God, who are his Witnesses and Testimony of what he affirms, and he may as
well say, Christ has a Devil, and bring the Pharisees words, who said thou
have a Devil: and this is the same in nature with his words: but the whole
Court savv his folly and ignorance, and he was sensible of his own
blindness, and might be of the deceit of his own heart. And is not this
damnable Doctrine and Error, and of the Devil to affirm, and endeavor to
vindicate that the Devil is the power of God? was ever the like heard, or held
forth by sober men? may not he and all his people be ashamed of his doctrines:
Christ said the Devil was out of the Truth, and there was no Truth in him, and
was a murderer, and a Liar from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth,
and all the holy Prophets and Apostles gave their Testimony against the Devil
and his Works, and did distinguish betvveen Christ, who is the power of God,
and the Devil who is against him, for the Apostle was sent to turn from
Satan's power, from the Devil, to the power of God, Acts 18. Here the Apostle
makes them two, and shows they were not one, but contrary one to the other:
and he called the Devil the adversary of their souls, the roaring Lion that
went about seeking whom he might devour, and the Devil made war against
Christ, and tempted him to evil, and persecuted the Woman, and the remnant of
her seed: and Hell was prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41.
search through the Scripture, and see what is spoken of the Devil, and see if
the Devil and the power of God be one, and the same as R. Mayo holds forth, or
whether they are not distinguished to be contrary one to the other, through
the Scripture, and Christ is called the power of God, and the power of God
made the world, and upholds all things: and if the Devil be the power of God
as is affirmed by this wicked man, then the power of God is out of the Truth,
and abode not in it, but is a murderer and a liar, and there is no Truth in
it, and is the adversary of souls, and the roaring Lion that seeks to devour
souls, and the power of God made war against Christ, and tempted him to evil,
and persecuted the Saints, and the seed of God, and made war against them, and
Hell is prepared for the power of God, and must go into the lake, according to
this doctrine; and if his doctrine be true, then the power of God is the Devil,
and made the world, and upholds it, and Christ is the Devil, or else R. Mayos
doctrine is damnable and error; but this doctrine is damnable and error, and of
the Devil as all men may behold and see, for the Devil and the power of God is
contrary one to the other, and are not one but two distinct; Blasphemy and
error in the highest nature is this his doctrine; and the Scripture says
Christ was made manifest, to destroy the Devil, and the works of the Devil: now
if the Devil be the power of God, as R. Mayo says, then Christ was manifest to
destroy the power of God and his works, which he also affirmed as may be proved
against him, Oh! error and damnable doctrine in the highest nature, which is
held forth publicly in the open Court! may not the Court be ashamed of this
their Minister, and the Jury also, who has given verdict against E. B. for
speaking Truth? for is not R. Mayo guilty of holding forth damnable doctrine
and error? let the light in all men's Consciences judge, and let them tremble to
give judgments in this cause, against a man for speaking the Truth, least the
Lord God bring judgment, and wrath upon them, and all men behold their shame,
if they condemn the innocent, and justify the ungodly 2. R. Mayo affirmed that
the Gospel was not the power of God, but a rose cake was as much the power of
God.

Answ And this is damnable Doctrine, for if the Gospel be not the power of God
as R. Mayo says, then the Gospel is not to be believed for salvation, nor
cannot convert Sinners to God, nor is to be preached to save souls, for nothing
can save, nor convert sinners but the power of God. And the Apostle said the
Gospel is the power of God, Romans 1.16. but R. Mayo has said quit the contrary,
that the Gospel is not the power of God, and the Gospel is everlasting, and
converted and saved Sinners, and the Gospel the power of God was preached to
Abraham, before the Scriptures were written, and was preached to all the Saints
by the Apostles, and if any preached another Gospel, then the power of God,
that Paul preached, let him be accursed, says the Apostle: but a rose cake is
a dead thing and without life, and cannot convert Sinners, nor save souls, nor
is everlasting, nor the power of God: is any upon earth so blind, to believe
that a dead rose cake is as much the power of God as the Gospel, and to be
equal with the Gospel, as R. Mayo says? is not this the greatest blindness
that ever was uttered by a man, professing the Ministry of Christ his
blindness may be felt, and it is damnable Doctrine and error, to hold forth
that the glorious Gospel of Christ is no more the power of God, then a dead
rose cake, which cannot p^^ce people to the heart, as the Gospel did the Jews,
and Gentiles, its error, and contempt against the Gospel, and scornful
blasphemous words against God, and Christ, and the Gospel, to make it of no
more esteem then a rose cake, as this man has done: and is it not time for
people, to turn from such a man, whose error and damnable doctrine is thus
fully manifest, and his wickedness in persecuting a man, and begging judgment
of a hundred pound against him, for saying his doctrine is damnable and error,
which is nothing but the Truth against him? but all just men will see his
shame, and the unjustnesse of that Jury that passed on the matter, who gave
such unreasonable damage, for truth speaking, having no respect to the just
cause, nor to the danger they run their own souls into and some knows it
before this, who God suddenly after cut off by judgment, and took his life
from the earth, which may be a warning to the rest of them all to repent.

R. Mayo affirmed that if one man killed and murdered another, he did it by the
power of God. Ans. And this is damnable doctrine and error, for all murder is
of the Devil, and he is a murderer from the beginning. John 8.44 and murder is
of him and from him, and not by the power of God; for the power of God in
Christ, and Moses for bad all murder and the Apostles said murder was a work of
the flesh, and murderers should not enter the Kingdom of God. but were without
the gate, to be nodden in the wine press of the wrath of God: search the
scriptures and see what Testimony all the servants of God gave of murder, and
showed that it is (...) the Devil, and not by the power of God, as R: Mayo
says: and if it be (...) says, that it is by the power of God, then murder is
no sin; for what the power of God leads to do, and does, is no sin, and
then people may be justified in murdering and killing: for what the creature
does by the moving of the power of God, God condemns him not in it, but
justifies him, and is not ^^is ^^^nable doctrine and error? Can any man be so
blind as not to see it? the Lord will judge these wicked doctrines, and
confound them: but one named that scripture to prove his doctrine, and would
have vindicated that if one man murder another, he did it by the power of God,
mentioning where Christ said to Pilate, Thou could have no power against me
except it were given thee from above, not minding the last words, He that
delivered me unto thee has the greater sin; and by this he would have
proved, That murder is by the power of God: And it was asked further, if the
power of God murdered Christ? Or did the Jews murder him by the power of God?
but to this no answer w^^ given: so this is written as a further account of
Richard Mayo his false d^s, that are damnable, and errors in the highest
degree, as all spiritual (...) may judge, and how can the Court justly comdemn
Ed. Borough, except t^^^ will proceed wholly against reason and equity, and
against God, and the (...) in their own consciences, for to all men's sight and
knowledge that fears God Richard Mayo is guilty of holding forth damnable
doctrine and error, and if they condemn Ed. Borough in an hundred pounds for
so affirming (and nothing (...) they have against him) then the Lord shall
condemn them, and their false judgment everlastingly, and all sober men shall
see their folly and wickedness, and that they become also guilty of Richard
Mayo's sin: but concerning of them I hope better, whom I verily believe, may
show moderation in the ^^d, and clear the innocent, that God may bless them,
and not act against (...) and their own consciences, which if they do so, the
Lord shall lay it to their charge, and it shall be their burden when God
arises to judgment. One thing more at the last the Judge spoke, thus, If
Edward Borough the Defendant would in the least confess he was sorry, and had
wronged Rich. Mayo, he would persuade R. Mayo, and he thought he could prevail
with him to acquit and discharge the suit, and clear Ed. Borough, and end the
matter, to which E. B. replied, if his life were to be taken away for it, he
could not do it: for to keep his conscience clear and free from offenses to
God, is of more price with him then all outward liberty or things, and asked R.
Mayo if he would confess. That the light which he exhorted people to follow,
were the light of the Gospel, it so, then some mistake would be found between
them; and more might be said, but R. Mayo would not acknowledge that. So then
Ed. Borough always affirmed himself clear, and that R. Mayo was guilty of
preaching damnable doctrine and error.

And whereas it was alleged in Court against Ed. Borough That Rich. Mayo
Plantiffe says in his Replication, That Ed. Borough the Defendant spoke the
Words (thou holdect forth damnable doctrine and error) of his own wrong and
malice, etc. without any such cause by him alleged in his plea, and as if Ed.
Borough had showed no just cause yet, wherefore he spoke the words against R.
Mayo Defendant.

To which I answer, It is strange that the Court would show such mistake, or
ignorance; for has nor Ed. Borough proved lawfully and justly; first that he
was invited by R. Mayo three times to make what objections he could against his
doctrine. Secondly, he heard him preach such things, and affirm them under his
hand (which are proved against him) which to all spiritual men are seen to
be false and erroneous doctrine, which if people obey and believe they cannot
be saved, And these are sufficient reasons and causes wherefore Ed. Borough
might justly charge upon him damnable doctrine and error. So he has lied to
the Court in his Replication, And hereby the Court and Judge may fully know
that Ed. Borough had sufficient reason to affirm against Rich. Mayo. What he
did, and he did it not without lawful reason, which reason is pure and may
justify him in what he has done; and the Court need not allege that against
Ed. Borough if they will but come to the truth and innocence of this cause.

Then in the Adjourning of the Court, the Recorder of himself justly and
soberly propounded the differing of judgment in the Cause, and judgment is
deferred for a season, till after the Term.

Much more might be written, but this in short is true for substance, and I
leave it to others to give an account at large; if any unjust proceedings in
the Court require it; but enough is done and said about this matter, if it be
now ended, and the more that is meddled in it, the greater will be the shame of
him that does the wrong, and Truth will bring all things to light, and confound
all damnable doctrine and error, and unrighteous Judgment.

A friend to all that fear God EDWARD COOK,

THE END.

