Truths Testimony; AND A Testimony of Truths Appearing, IN Power, Life, Light
and Glory; Creating, Manifesting, Increasing and Vindicating it self in the
midst of persecution.

Wherein is discovered what Truth is, and also a Lie, who knows it, and lives
in it.

WITH The Authors Call and Conversion to the truth, his practice in it, his
publishing of it, and his several Trials for the same: Viz. 1. Before Baron
Wild at Worcester. 2. Before Judge Nicholas at Worcester. 3. Before Sergeant
Green at Oxford. 4. Before Sergeant Hutton at Oxford. 5. Before Sergeant Glyn
at Gloucester.


Together with The part^cular Accusations brought against him in each Trial,
and his answers to the same. As also the Courts proceedings both by JUDGES and
JURIES.

With an humble Appeal to his Highness, Oliver Lord Protector, as a general
redress for all people.

By Richard Coppin.

John 16.2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues; yea, the time comes,
that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service.

Gal. 4.29. But as then, he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that
was born after the Spirit, even so it is now.

London, printed, and are to be sold at the black Spread Eagle at the West End
of Paul's, the Blackmoores-head at Fleet bridge, and at the Seven-stars in Paul's
Churchyard, 1655.

Friends and Enemies.
THat the truth of those transactions that have past between me and my
adversaries may appear, it is through the desire of many people here published,
as a Narrative of what the Lord in these dividing times has done, and will do,
for the increase of the manifestation of truth amongst men, that through much
opposition by men living in a lie, against those who live in the truth, is the
truth made manifest; concerning which I have not thought my life too dear to
have parted with, but with much zeal and love both to God and all people have I
been carried on, to vindicate the truth of what was manifested to me, and
declared by me, who with much joy went through it: I still knowing my self
clear and justified in and by the Lord and my own conscience, in all things
that I have seen, known, and been made a partaker of, in truth and
righteousness.

And if any shall question the truth of what is here written in any part of it,
it is and will be ready to be proved, not only by my self, but by several
other persons that have been hearers of, and eyewitnesses to the same, and
that had taken several Copies of what was done in the Courts at my trials; all
which was still recorded and kept to this day, and now published for the view
of all that desire to look into it, as an outward testimony bearing witness of
the truth against all that is a lie in the world.

And I do further declare that in all my trials and proceedings to this day, I
never feed or bribed any man whatsover, to show me any favor; neither did any
ever require it of me, more then what was due by course of Law to the Clerks of
Assizes: for I was not to seek to men for any favor, but to leave all to the
Lord, whose own the cause was; and who is and will be made manifest in due time
to all men, as he is and has been to him who is ready to serve all men in
love, while he is

Richard Coppin.

SEveral books of the same Author now extant; viz. one entitled, Divine
Teachings, in which are three together; a second, Man's Righteousness examined;
a third, Saul smitten; a fourth, A Man-child born, and to be sold with this.

The Contents.
Chap. 1. WHat truth is, and what it is not; who knows it and lives in it, etc.
page 1 Chap. 2. The Authors life and conversation, before and after the day of
his conversion, etc. page 9 Chap. 3. The Authors Call and Commission to preach;
what, and from whence it was. The Priests Call and Commission to preach, page
15 Chap. 4. The Authors first prosecution of his Commission, and his being
opposed for the same, etc. page 17 Chap. 5. The Authors farther proceedings
with men in all conditions under their several Forms and Administrations, etc.
page 23 Chap. 6. The Ministers malicious proceeding against the Author in
Worcestershire, etc. page 27 Chap. 7. Of his trial at Worcester Assizes before
Baron Wild: the particular accusations against him, and his answers to them,
etc. page 31 Chap. 8. The Authors speech made to the Judge, after his trial,
page 44 Chap. 9. The Authors second appearing at Worcester Assizes before Judge
Nicholas, page 48 Chap. 10. The Authors Trial at Oxford Assizes before Sergeant
Green: The particular accusations against him, and his answers to them, etc.
page 50 Chap. 11. The Authors second appearing at Oxford before Judge Hutton,
etc. page 70 Chap. 12. The Authors humble appeal to his Highness Oliver Lord
Protector, as a general redress for all people. page 71 Chap. 13. The
Sufferings of Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, with the Authors, presented to
his Highness, etc. page 75 Chap. 14. A further discovery to his Highness, of
the malicious practices, ignorant censures, and illegal proceedings of two
Justices and certain Ministers at Stow, etc. page 79 Chap. 15. The Authors
Trial at Gloucester Assizes before Sergeant Glyn. page 85
Truhts Testimony; AND A Testimony of Truths appearing, In Power, Life, Light
and Glory, creating, manifesting, increasing and vindicating of it self, in the
midst of Persecution.
CHAP. I.
What Truth is, and what it is not; who knows it and lives in it; that it is
always persecuted, and by whom; that it most appears, when it is most opposed;
and how.

GOd that made the world, and all things therein, whose goodness fills heaven
and earth, is holy, Acts 17.24, 25, 26, 27, 28
just and good, the pure, perfect, true God, not confined to time, place,
person, nor thing; but comprehends in himself all things that are, and all
things in him that is pure, perfect, true, just and good, so is to him, Titus
1.15.
and he cannot behold any thing any otherwise then as it is in himself; who
sees, knows, possesses and enjoys all things not as man (who is a liar) but as
God (who is true) and who is all, 1 Cor. 15.28.
and all in all, in truth and righteousness; and whatsoever (besides a lie) is
or may be said by men not to be in God, and God not to be in that, is a lie;
and he that says it, is a liar; and no liar can stand in the presence of God,
to know Gods presence with him, till he be brought from the knowledge of a lie,
to the knowledge of the truth, as it is in Jesus, by the appearing of God in
Jesus Christ to him: 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.
Therefore that which all men are to be, to know, to live in, and to practice
in truth and righteousness (that they may no longer be shut out from the
presence of God as liars) is the truth as it is in Jesus, or God as he is in
Christ, reconciling the whole world to himself, not imputing to any man sin and
transgression; and so the Lord Jesus, who is God with us, is to us the way to
the truth, the life living in the truth, Matthew. 1 23. John 14.6.
and the truth lived in, that in due time will make manifest the freedom of all
men in the knowledge of the truth from that which is a lie, 1 Timothy 2, 3, 4, 5,
6.
and bring all men to that which is the truth in himself; though in the time of
men's falling away from the first Image, to have an outward show or form of
godliness, without the power, they are not brought from the knowledge of a lie,
as it is in man, to the knowledge of the truth, as it is in Jesus. There is
nothing more opposed, less known and practiced by men living in the knowledge
of a lie, yet professing truth and godliness, Tit. 1.16.
then the truth is; For they profess that they know God, but in works they deny
him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work a reprobate (as
the Scripture says) for all men knowing, owning and living in any thing below
God, do so long know, own and live in a lie, and so are themselves a lie to
themselves, hating, abominating and opposing the truth which they know not; and
no lie can know the truth, but the truth knows a lie; Mat. 11.27.
not as a lie, but as the truth: So no man knows God, but God knows man, yet
not as man, but as himself, who knows all things in truth and righteousness,
which truth is himself: Isa. 45.5, 6.
for he that is all things, cannot know any thing besides himself, there being
not any thing but himself to be known; else how is he all things except a lie?
and all the known gods of the Nations which men have worshipped, and run a
whoring after, are false Gods, and a lie, and a lie is nothing in being;
therefore is one God the truth, and all the good that is, is him, for truth and
goodness live together in God, who is good, and beholds all things good, yea,
very good, because he can see nothing but what is himself; for there is none
good but one, that is God: Mat. 19.17.
and yet the whole creation of God is said to be good by God; Genesis 1 31. Chap.
2.1, 2.
for when he had made all things and finished his work, he beheld it, and saw
it was very good.

Therefore is God in Christ said to see, know, understand and judge all things
in truth and righteousness, as being all in all things to himself, 1 John 2.21.
John 8.44.
though the things in themselves and to men are lies, yet truth in him and to
him, who is all things, and of whom and to whom nothing is a lie; for no lie is
of the truth, but all lies, as lies, are only of, and known by the Devil, the
great liar of the world, the deceiver of mankind, Isa 5 20.
that turns the truth into a lie, and light into darkness, and good into evil,
ascribing that wisdom, power, will, reason, knowledge and understanding unto
man, which is due to God, setting up man in the place of God, 2 These. 2.4.
as knowing and being something else besides God, out of God, that so himself
might have a Kingdom; this is a lie, and the liar, and the Kingdom of darkness;
unto which lie and liar (as unto the Devil and his Kingdom, sin, hell and
damnation) God will not give any place of being out of himself to remain, but
will turn it again from a lie to the truth, from man to himself, from Satan
unto God; for he only is, Acts 26.18.
and there is none besides him; so that he only is true, and all things in him
are truth.

Therefore to understand the truth, we must understand and know God, that he
only is that which is to remain, and so to understand the truth as it is in
Jesus, God in Christ manifest in flesh, the Original Center of all things, that
which makes, forms, Col. 1 16. Jer 23, 24.
creates and fills of its fullness all things that were, are, and ever shall be
in the whole Creation, world without end, himself having neither beginning nor
end, but is the same yesterday, Heb. 13 8.
to day, and for ever, and changes not.

Therefore is the truth as being the same still in God, one unchangeable,
immortal, incomprehensible, unlimited, 1 Timothy 6 16 1 Timothy 1.17
individual, divine being, full of wisdom, power, life, light and glory, or the
whole Godhead, acting, ruling and governing all things in the world, and so the
same still at all times, in all places and things, comprehending in it self all
things that are in the world as its own, and yet it self not comprehending not
comprehended of, or confined to any one thing, time, Psalm. 50.12.
place or person, but does it self make, create and bring forth from it self
(as comprehended in it self) all things visible in the world, Rom 1.20
as an Image of it self invisible.

And this is God, who when he will, can and does both break in pieces and set
together again, empty and fill again, wound and heal again, Hosea 6.1.
kill and make alive again, all things that are in generation in the world,
evermore to be changeable in it self, as made, and unchangeable in himself as
unmade, and he evermore to do the same, as being an unchangeable workman,
always making, Eccle. 1 9.
creating and filling all things that are changeable: for that which has been,
is that which shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall be done;
and there is no new thing under the Sun, and the best of men and things so
created or made, in the most pure, fine, formalists outside appearance of them,
are but Images (of the Image of God placed in man) which men would set up to
worship and adore, as Nebuchadnezzar did his Image; Daniel 3.
and they that will not fall down before it, and submit themselves to it, as to
men and their Images, ways, worships and opinions, must by the decree of
Nebuchadnezzar (or the same spirit of him now appearing amongst men) be cast
into the hot fiery furnace, made hot by men; that is to say, either silenced,
imprisoned, banished or put to death.

Therefore what are the best of Images to the thing imaged, but vanity and a
lie, being as it is changeable? All is vanity and vexation of spirit: Eccles.
1.14.
And so the best of things in its first created state, is but an image of the
most high God, which he only makes to serve its generation, and to pass away,
as we see all things do: for man in his upright state, before his fall, was but
an Image of God: Religion in the form, is but an Image of Religion in the mind
and will; so Justice and Righteousness in and amongst men, acted from one to
another, is but an Image of what it is in and from God to man; so Christ
himself in a humane appearance, as he was man, though he had in him the fullness
of the Godhead, yet was he but an Image of the invisible God, Col. 1.15.
or the Eternal Being of the Godhead in its Divine state: And all Images are to
pass away, and be removed day by day; 1 Cor. 7 31.
For the fashion of this world passes away and whatsoever passes away, must in
that state of mortality be a lie, in opposition to that which is immortal and
true, because it abides not always the same, but is changeable.

And as a thing made cannot know that which made it; so a lie cannot know the
truth, nor speak the truth, but as it is in the truth, no longer known to be a
lie, but the truth it self: 1 Cor. 2.11.
As nothing therefore but God, who is a Spirit, knows God; so nothing but the
truth, knows the truth, nor can speak the truth; and if any thing of truth be
spoken between man and man, Mat. 10.20.
it is the truth it self that speaks it self through its own image; for what
one man speaks to another in words, is but an Image of the same Being spoken to
man by the truth in silence; for the word in the sound is but an Image of what
is before spoken in the mind; and all the writings of men in the letter, is but
an Image of the writings of God in the heart and Spirit: So the Scripture,
called the Word of God, which are but the writings of men in an outward
testimony, John 1.1, 2.
is but an Image of the true Word (Christ) that spoke before in them that writ
it, and witnessed to the word by that which is written; 1 John 2, 3, 4
for what the Word of God (to wit Christ) speaks in men, that man speaks and
writes again to men: Romans 1.20.
For what we have seen and heard, we declare unto you (says Paul) and all
things in the world visible is but an Image of God, Psalm. 51.6.
or the things invisible: and so all things, as made, is but an Image of it
self as unmade.

Adam was first formed, then Eve; 1 Timothy 2 13, 14.
and the woman taken out of man, is but the Image and glory of the man, and
lives not but in the man; therefore while she abides in the Image, and is not
the same with the thing imaged, she abides in a lie, and is in the
transgression.

So in like manner all mankind, with the whole creation, as coming out of God,
is but an Image of God, as the Son is of the Father, and as the woman is of the
man, and lives not but in God the Father, that sends them forth from himself as
an Image of himself, and as it abides in the Image, 1 John 2.27, 28.
and not in him that made it, so it abides in the lie, and in the
transgression; and if any would know the truth, in the love of the truth, to
speak it, and live in it, they must wait to be taken up in the understanding,
into that which is the truth, as Christ was; and therein cease in themselves to
stand any longer in the Image, but in the substance, as Christ did when he did
ascend from the Son to the Father, and so must become the same with the truth,
in the truth it self, before they can know what the truth is in the
understanding of it: 2 Cor. 5.1^. Isa. 42.16. I n 2. Ephesians. 1.10.
so in the chang of all things in man, the woman becomes the man, or weakness
becomes strength, darkness becomes light, death becomes life, and a lie the
truth, when the truth has had its perfect work in making all things free, in
turning water into wine, and bringing all things together in one; for the truth
is not without a lie; 1 Cor. 11.11, 12.
the man is not without the woman, nor the woman without the man, in the Lord:
So not God without us, nor we without him in the truth, which truth comprehends
Father, Son and Spirit, will wisdom and power, variety in unity, and unity in
variety, the Creator and the creature; and so God himself, who is the truth in
Jesus, who is one and all, is himself the way in which all men should walk, the
truth which all men should practice, Col. 2.6.
and the life which all men should live, with Christ in God, manifest in flesh;
as he is God in union with man, and man in union with God, loving all men as
himself, doing for all men, as for himself, which should be the whole life of
all men one to another, Matthew. 5 44, 45.
living in the truth, as it is in Jesus, even to walk in him as their path,
live in him as their life; and so to follow his steps in the Lord Jesus, Ephesians.
5.1, 2. Acts 17.26. 1 Ioh. 10.11.
hating none, speaking evil of none, persecuting none, but to be friendly,
loving, kind and merciful to all, as flesh of their flesh, and bone of their
bone, being all of one blood, and so to forgive one another, as God in Christ
has forgiven them: And he who goes any other way, practices any other thing, 2
Cor. 5.18, 19. John 14.8. 1 John 1.6, 7, 8.
lives any other life, then that which is God living in them and all men,
reconciling the whole world to himself by Jesus Christ, the way, the truth, and
the life, is so far a liar, and the truth is not in him.

O how few are there that live this life of God in Christ, to be reconciled to
all men, though enemies; love all men, though enemies; be at peace with all
men, though enemies; and to do for all men as they would do for themselves, and
as they would others should do unto them: why very few yet live in the truth to
practice it, though most men profess it?

Therefore all men who live not in the truth are liars, and live in the filthy
abomination of the lie, as in sin, death, hell, and damnation, wrath, envy,
hatred, malice, persecution, revenge, and all the works of iniquity, and must
be taken up into the truth, and so cast into the lake of fire burning with
brimstone, there to be purged from all their uncleanness and filthy
abomination, Rev. 21 8.
that has defaced the Image of God as to men, before they can be lovers of God
or the truth, and cease from persecuting one another.

All things while it abides in the Image, being there in a prison, and in
darkness, is an enemy to the thing imaged, because it represents it not
perfectly, or as it is in Jesus: the thing made is an enemy to that which makes
it, the creature to the Creator, Isa. 5.9.4, 5, 6, etc.
man to God; for all men, as men and sinners, so remaining, are haters of God,
and do oppose the truth in the manifestation: But the more truth is opposed,
Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12.
the more will it increase in power, and break forth in the light of its
manifestation, to those that are opposed, and also for the good of those that
do oppose, though for a time it may be hid from their eyes.

Those that betrayed and murdered Christ and his Apostles, John 16.2, 3.
thought they did God service, and themselves good (and so they did) though
they knew it not, in persecuting, reviling, stoning and killing blasphemers (as
they said) against God; but they knew neither God, them, nor the blasphemy they
charged them with; for had they known Christ, they would not have put him to
death, nor crucified the Lord of glory, as they did; Act. 3.17, 18
yet this did bring glory to God, and good to all his people: for through death
did he ascend into the glory of his Father, John 14.3.
in which glory he returned again to his people, to take them to himself, that
where he was, they might be also; John 12.32.
and (says he) If I be lifted up, I will draw all men unto me. not only
Scribes and Pharisees, but Publicans and sinners, when the Scribes and
Pharisees thought it had belonged only to themselves, as righteous men, and
not unto sinners; Mat. 11.19.
and because he was a friend to all, even sinners, as well as them, therefore
sought they the more to kill him: yet his love was still the same, both to them
and all others, though enemies to him; for says he, of those betrayed him and
took his life from him, (...) ^3 34.
Fa^ther, forgive them, they know not what they do; and the more they sought to
betray him, the more did the people follow him, and grew in love with him: and
men can never do any thing more to the loss of their own honor, Religion and
self-interests, and more to advance the truth in the life and power of it, then
to oppose it, and persecute it ^ for then do men ^he more enquire after it, and
truth will have its perfect work, and find out a way to advance it self in the
greatest persecution, though men never so much oppose it. Therefore when men go
to stop the current of truth, and the mouths of those that declare it, by an
outward Law, they do but as those that go to make a dam to stop the current of
a continual running stream, which will suddenly make its way through it, and
carry all before it: Or, as those who go to throw oil and brimstone to quench
fire that is burning, which the more they do, the more it will flame and burn
to the destruction of that which is thrown into it to quench it: So is it with
truth, when it arises in life and power to manifest it self, Isa 27.4.
nothing is or shall be then able to stand against it, to hinder the growth and
increase of it; but it will drive all before it that shall stand in the way of
it: and as fire among thorns, so will it burn, waste, consume and bring to
nothing, all that which is abomination, and a lie, in the world, that nothing
hereafter shall be seen to stand in the high place of God; but himself will
there show himself to be all in all, as he is the One and the All, the All and
the One, though not yet manifest unto all men.

Therefore, O man, thou that would not have the truth to spread, which thou
know not, cease any longer to oppose it, if thou can forbear, for through
much opposition is the truth made manifest, and God would not be said to be a
conqueror, if there were not something of a lie in opposition to the truth to
be conquered; for were there no opposition known in men to oppose God, there
would be in men no need of the knowledge of the coming of God in Christ to men,
to oppose against that: for his coming to manifest himself, is to reconcile his
enemies to himself, and to destroy that which is enmity in them against him;
for, for this purpose was the son of God manifest, 1 John 3.^^.
to destroy the works of the devil: and men in looking upon God to be at a
distance from them through the temptations of Satan, do thereby oppose his
presence with them; for God is nigh them, Acts 17.2^^ 28.
with them and in them, as one reconciled to them, and all things in the world
with them, though they know it not; and this is man's destruction, not to know
God, as God knows man, Hosea 4 6.
but to live as one without God in the world, always fearing of God as an angry
God; and so kept at a distance from God, 2 Timothy 3.7.
by being ignorant of God; as always learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth; neither can, till they are enlightened by the light of
God in their own consciences, to see God with them, restoring rest and peace to
them, and himself to be in them the way, the truth, and the life for them; unto
the end of which way, the knowledge of which truth, and enjoyment of which
life, all men have a race to run and a way to come, before they can sit down at
the end of their journey, and live in the knowledge of the truth as it is in
Jesus.

CHAP. II.
The Authors Life and Conversation before and after the day of his Conversion;
the manner of his converting, and his zeal in searching, trying and passing by
all the Ways, Worships and Opinions of men, in their several Forms ^f Religion;
howmen appeared in it; how it all vanished away and ceased, as to him; and
when.

HEarken my beloved brethren, come behold, and see the race which you are to
run, the way which you are to come, and the price that is to be wo^, as I will
here show unto you, by setting before you the race that I have run, Phil 3. 1
Cor. 9.14.
the way that I have gone, and the price that I have won; wherein if the Lord
will, you may behold the manner and course of my life, and the dealings of God
with me all along, from the time he first created me and brought me forth of my
mothers womb, to this day; and that you by comparing with it the manner and
course of your life, and the dealings of God with you, may see how near a
progress you have made to this price, Job 42.5.
the fathers Kingdom, and end of your journey. God himself, attainable in this
life; after which there is no more traveling, but you are set down, and at
rest with the son in the bos^m of the Father And^, when once I came to this
state of the measure of the gift of Christin me, I then was in a state to see
God as he is, and the truth as it is in Jesus, made manifest in my flesh, and
so was made to look back upon what I had seen, and formerly been from the day
of my creation, to the day of my conversion, which the light of God within me
did show unto me, that I repented of, and was changed from my former life I
lived, in the time of my ignorance; and which by the light of God in me, I
shall here show unto you.

For when God created me in my mothers womb, and breathed into me the breath of
life, that I became a living soul, I was in a state of innocence, knowing
neither good nor evil; or as Adam in Paradise, Genesis 2.7.
and as all men else are when they are first created, and live; but I quickly
fell from this innocent state of Adam in Paradise, to the knowledge of good and
evil, as to the state of Adam after his fall, sinful and wicked, and taking my
own pleasure in all manner of sports and delights for outward recreation of the
creature, without any true knowledge of the Creator, which for many years I
would have gone many miles after, caring for no Religion at all neither did I
know what it was, only I heard of a God afar off, one that lived above the
skies, sitting in a golden chair, and was like my self, which the Priests and
people did talk of, as one that loved those that did well, and hated others
that did ill; and would at the last day come to judge me and all men according
to their works (but I knew him not, but by hearsay, according to the common
talk of people) and that his worship consisted in men's and women's going to
Church, and such like service (but not childrens) and that this holiness
consisted in abstaining from swearing, drunkenness, thieving, whoring, and such
like sins; which sins being not committed by me, I thought sufficient to save
me, being taught so by (our Teachers) the Priests of those times, who
themselves, as well as others, committed all manner of sin and wickedness, and
who deceived both me and many thousands of souls by their delusions, but never
taught us of a Jesus, all this while, neither could they, because they knew him
not themselves; yet God was there with them under this dispensation, though
veiled, and in a cloud; Psalm 97.2.
for clouds and darkness are round about him: but these clouds in some measure
vanishing, as to me, I past them by, and pressed forwards.

And now having lived for many years in this state of ignorance, under the
Bishops and Prelatical Government; I then came to the Presbyterians, who began
to reign in the others steads, exercising the same authority over men's
consciences as the other did; and who after some short time I found to rule
with as much force and cruelty, and to be as tyrannical as ever the others
were, and that knew no more of God then the others did; only they would talk a
little more of Christ and Religion, using the outward expressions as a cloak to
cover their nakedness, and to seduce the people to them: but for any true
knowledge of Christ and Religion, they had none, neither any did they practice;
yet here was God likewise, but still in a cloud, under darkness, that I passed
by them also, and pressed forwards.

And I being yet willing to try all things; and I hearing of the Independants
and Anabaptists starting up, as those that would reign in the room of the
Presbyterians, I would try them also; and found them to be clothed with a more
finer habit then either Prelate or Presbyterian; for they had gained some finer
outside forms of Religion, Genesis 3.7.
decked over more with Scripture terms, as cloaks, or figleaves to cover their
nakedness: and called them the Ways and Ordinances of Christ, or at least, put
that name upon them, to take away their reproach, Isa. 4.
though they were still their own, and of their own inventions: for, as used by
them, they are not according to the institution of Christ in the primitive
times, as they think they are: wherefore they do but cheat themselves and
others, having no true knowledge of God all this while, but by hearsay, Phil.
3.7, 8.
and what they gain only by their outside Forms, Ways, and Religious duties,
which they are to count all lost for Christ; and in which I beheld them and all
the rest of men, with all their differing Ways, Judgments and Opinions to be
in all things superstitious and idolatrous, as Paul did the ^^emans And so
(...) the space of two years, Act^ 17.21, 22, 23.
beholding this their order in London seeing all to be but disorder and
confusion I passed them all be, and pressed forwards to the mark, for the price
of the high calling of God in christ Jesus; which is a calling above all things
whatsoever, as of Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptism, and whatsoever calling
else any man may now pretend to live; yet this is a calling above them all,
which none of these have yet attained or ^o live.

In which two years time before mentioned, of walking among the Churches in
London, of Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists etc. I applied my self
much to reading their books, searching and trying the Scriptures, whether these
things they held were so or no, and to be so practiced by them as they were,
and contended for, which I found them not to be: Also in observing duties of
prayer was I very frequent morning and evening, and as often as I had
opportunity: and in hearing or writing of Sermons four or five in a day, from
several men, which I spent much of my time after in reading.

Thus was I in that time, while I was trying their ways, as zealous as they
could be in it, even hating, loathing and despising all my own, and other men's
former ways, delights, pleasures and sports, and all delightful exercises:
which I was not so much for before, but then I was as much against, counting
them all to be but works of darkness, while they were so acted; yet was my self
still (though under this dispensation of Grace) as blind and as ignorant as
ever I was under that of nature, though I thought I saw and had knowledge: but
I found since, that all the light and knowledge that I then thought I had of
God, Christ, and the Devil, of Heaven and Hell, Salvation and Damnation, with
all things else thereto belonging in that state of ignorance, was as carnal as
ever; and I knew no more of it then I did when I was under the Prelates
Ministry; only that there was a God afar off and not within me, which I still
knew but by hearsay, as all that were of those opinions did; and therefore I
may be bold to affirm, as also by experience I have known, that all the
knowledge that Presbyterians. Independents, Anabaptists, and all others under
any form of Worship, now have of those things, while living under the
disp^^sation of grace (only) while seeking the Lord is no more then but by
hearsay, which they so long give themselves to believe, and are in bondage to,
as to men's traditions; and no experience at all have they of these things, as
to know them in truth, or as it is in Jesus. And this was all the knowledge and
experience that I had, while under that dispensation of grace, or the Son of
God manifesting (yet the same that they had) where I then saw the work but a
doing, not done; salvation but a coming, and not come, and so saw not any thing
then made perfect.

Then after two years were expired of my beholding this their order in London,
seeing all the ways and opinions of men, with all their feigned righteousness,
for to be but destruction and confusion, I prophesied of their downfall, which
would shortly after come to pass, and which I have since, in part, seen to be
fulfilled; for I saw that they were not built upon the true foundation. Christ,
as the rock which would stand, 1 Cor. 3.11.
and was laid by God; but upon the foundation and buildings of men, Matthew.
7.26, 27.
laid by men on the sands, as that which would shake and fall, and would not
endure the fire, even God when he appeared, but would, with all their Elements,
melt before him as dross, 2 Pet. 3.10.
and with all their fair heavens be burnt up before him as stubble, and vanish
away before him as smoke, and as chaff before the wind: Wherefore I seeing them
to be thus fitted for destruction, and prepared for the slaughter, I passed
them all by, that I might not in my profession be destroyed with them, and
would not go in, or be tied in covenant to any of them, being none of them
according to the institution of Christ; and they being thus weighed in the
balance of the Righteousness of Christ, by Christ, and there found too light,
they vanished away, and so ceased, as to me.

And after this legal dispensation of the knowledge of Christ in the flesh, and
the performing duties after the flesh, by me, was ended with me, John 16.25.
and Christ appearing in power and glory to me; showing me plainly of the
Father, I then saw according to that appearance of God to me in the Father,
what and where God, Christ and the Devil was, and is, also heaven and hell,
salvation and damnation, what and where that was, and is, I having had the
experience of it all within me; and so I saw, as to my self, a death of the one
part, as of the Devil, hell and damnation, with all things, at the left hand of
God; and a living of the other part, as of God, Christ, Heaven and Salvation,
with all things, at the right hand of God; which was my dying to the one part,
as to that on the left hand; and my living to the other part, as to that on the
right hand, and which was to me the day of the Lord, and a restoration of all
things to God; where, and at which time I saw one dispensation perfected in
another, or grace perfected in glory, the Son perfected in the Father, or all
things made perfect in God, the Kingdom of the Son delivered up to the Father;
1 Cor. 15.21.
and where I saw all my own works, which ever I had done under any
dispensation, before that of Christ in the Spirit, to be burnt up and made void
to me, with all my prayers which I made, books which I had read, sermons which
I had heard, besides and below Christ, all now appeared to be of no worth unto
me, Phil. 2.9. and 3 9.
as to do me any good; for I had found one Jesus, that was ascended far above
all heavens, that he might fill all things, and that had a name above every
name that was named, of things in heaven, and of things on earth; in whom I was
now found, without having my own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, who was now become my worth, my life, my
light, and my all, who had filled me with himself, and whom I saw to be all to
me, and to do all for me, and to have given an end to all things besides
himself in me; which made me now throw away all my books of Presbyterians,
Independants, Anabaptists, Acts 19.18, 19.
and whatsoever else (as the believing Jews and Grecians had done before) and
to forget all things therein, and not to know any thing any where, or in any
thing, either without or within me, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; and so
to know my self in him, to have made my progress to him in the Fathers Kingdom,
the end of my journey, where I shall no more be traveling, but be at rest with
the Son, in the bosom of the Father: Which is the race that all men are to run,
the way that all men are to go, and the work that all men are to do, even to
deny themselves, Luke 9.23, 24.
and all things of themselves, and to follow Christ, till they come to Christ,
if ever they mean to be perfect with Christ: for, If thou will be perfect, Mat.
19.21.
go and sell all that thou have.

CHAP. III.
The Authors Call and Commission to preach; what, and from whence it was; the
Parish Priests Call and Commission to preach, what, and from whence that was.

WHen God in Christ did manifest himself to me for my conversion, the
redemption of my body, and the salvation of my soul, to the perfecting of the
body of Christ in and to me, as that I knew it, and was assured of it in my
self, what, and when it was: I then savv it all to be in him, the same to all
men as to me, though not manifest unto them; and according to what I had
received of the Lord. I was commanded by the Lord in me, to publish and
declare to all sorts of men, without respect of persons or opinions, with
this Commission follovving:

First, that whatsoever I did speak or write, it was to be my own
experience in the Lord, of God manifest in flesh, justified in the spirit, seen
of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, 1 Timothy 3.16.
believed on in the World, received up into glory, Christ the same yesterday,
to day, and for ever. And that I was not to speak or write any thing that
should tend to the continuing, John 6.27.
advancing or setting up of any thing that should perish or come to an end, and
be in opposition to the Lord jesus, as the setting up of any thing besides him
was; but that it should always tend to the advancement of his Kingdom, as of
love, joy, peace and righteousness among men through Christ; and to the
throwing down of Antichrist and his Kingdom, with all deceiveableness and
unrighteousness of men: and what I did. I was to do it freely, and in love, and
not be chargeable or burdensome to any, Romans 14.17.
to hinder any from coming into the Kingdom of the Lord, which was a free
Kingdom; nor to give any liberty to Antichrists Kingdom, which was a Kingdom of
gain, hire, and self interest, and which consists of buying and selling the
word of God* and for which work the Lord would be with me, Acts 18.9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14 15, 16
to support me to the end, as he was with Paul at Corinth; and by experience I
have hitherto found him to be with me.

And thus was my Commission in and from the School of Christ, given by Christ
at Sion house in heaven, to do the work of Christ as a free workman, loving all
men, though enemies, and hating none and not from Oxford and Cambridge, or the
Schools of Antichrist, by the laying on of the hands of the Bishops or
Presbytery, to do the work of Antichrist as an hireling, loving those that
would pay me or stand for me, and hating those that would not, as most of those
have done that had their Call and Commission from thence: Neither was I to
confer with flesh and blood, as to go to Oxford or Cambridge, this Committee or
that Committee, to receive Orders from men, or to know whether I should preach
or no, and so to be settled in some place by them, receive some yearly
maintenance from them, as the Priests of England do, and have done with all
that serve in Antichrists Kingdom, and receive his wages but without all this,
or any part of it, I was immediately to go and publish him to the world, and to
sinners, yea all men, without respect of persons, notwithstanding all the
opposition that I might meet withal from all sorts of Religion, and among all
sorts of men living under any Dispensation or Administration whatsoever, below
this which I my self lived in, and was to declare.

And the first day that I began to prosecute this my Commission, as it was in
me in the life and power of it (which I received not of man, nor by man, but of
and by the Lord, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead, out of the
grave, and in me) then was I persecuted, hated and rejected of men that knew it
not, but were enemies to it; yet did no more to me, then what had been done to
others that were before me, and will be done to those that come after me; which
I also looked upon to be part of my portion which was to follow and I to go
through, and which I was yet to be possessed withal while I was in this work of
preaching: but knowing this that still filling up the rest of the sufferings of
Christ, which supported me, when I had finished my course, I should receive my
crown; Having suffered with Christ, I should also reign with him; and so
enduring to the end, I should be saved, Mar. 13.13 1 Cor. 9.17 18. 2 Cor.
10.16, 17.
and this was my portion also with the Lord, and the reward I received of the
Lord, and is a living on the Gospel, with me; as it is written, He that
preaches the Gospel, shall live on the Gospel, and not on other men's labors,
nor walk by other men's lights, but the light of Christ in the Gospel
dispensation: And now so far hitherto as I have fell short in any thing of this
my Commission, to the knowledge of any, let me be blamed.

But to proceed, I shall go on as brief as I can to show you the manner of my
proceedings, and how I have been carried forth to this day, as shall be readily
witnessed by the people of those parts in which I have been, and thus proceeded
in the practice thereof, as follows.

CHAP. IV.
The Authors first prosecution of his Commission, and his being opposed for the
same; how, by whom, and after what manner; who are the Ministers of Christ, and
of Antichrist, with their different proceedings, both in judgment, doctrine,
practice, manner, time, place, freedom and reward.

FIrst, Paul in his time speaking of himself and his own call, said then, That
above fourteen years ago he knew a man in Christ, 2 Cor. 12.
whether in the body, or out of the body, he could not tell, but such an one
caught up into the third heaven, or paradise, and heard unspeakable words,
which were not lawful for man to utter: And why unlawful? In respect of the
Law of God it could not be unlawful; for God reveals nothing that is contrary
to himself, or his own law, neither does he make a law contrary to what he
reveals: but it might be contrary to the laws of men, which they had made,
and do still make, and so unlawful; and in this sense Paul might say, it was
unlawful for man to utter, though not unlawful for God to utter: and for
these reasons; first, in respect of the company amongst whom Paul was then
living, when those words were made known to him, they being not able to
bear them: And secondly, it may be that the laws of the times were such, that
if it should have been spoken, it would have been counted blasphemy, and
himself have been persecuted for it, as it seems he was for many things that
he then spoke: And so in all ages since, whatever of God has by God been
revealed to men, contrary to the law of the times, has been by that law
unlawful to utter, and so by men counted blasphemy, and the authors thereof
accused as blasphemers. Was it not so with Christ, and with Paul, and the
rest of the Apostles? And has it not been so since? and is it not so now? I
am sure my self with many others, can by experience witness it, and set our
seals to it, since we knew it, and were assured of it.

And now from the time that these things were first made known to me, and I
commanded to declare it to the world, it was with much opposition, and with so
little outward freedom, that I was forced to appear in the clouds, and speak
something darkly, and under parables, I abiding at that time in Barkshire,
among a people whose spirits were not able to bear the sound of the truth, they
being ignorant of it, and so enemies to it; and which the laws of the times
were then against, and most men's judgments and opinions contrary to it, and
men more ready to persecute it, then otherways, as they have ever been. And I
having not my freedom to speak, fell a writing; which things were printed, and
brought forth to public view, in a Book entitled, Divine Teachings; which
many Ministers and Pastors of Churches living thereabouts, did streightway
oppose, being that which was contrary to their judgments, doctrine and
practice; whose names are as follows, Lancaster, Powel, Harrison, Pendarvice,
Wells, Hughes, and Burgess, who were then in Barkshire; with Osburn, Woolly,
Glin, and many others in Oxfordshire; who cried down all for heresy and
blasphemy therein contained, without naming any particulars, saying it was a
dangerous principle which it all tended unto, that if it were suffered, it
would overthrow all (Men's) Religion; whereupon several disputes were occasioned
between me and the said Ministers; they all still endeavoring to confute me,
or bring me to a recantation of these things revealed in me, and declared by
me, which they counted erroneous and blasphemous; and of which if I would have
recanted, preferment by some was proffered me; but there was one within me
which resisted, and said, Get thee behind me Satan, I will none of it: neither
is it Herod with all the chief of the Priests and Scribes of the people, that
he had gathered together, that can destroy the child Jesus after once he is
born; nor could these with all their subtilty, destroy that which was born in
me, or bring me to a recantation of what I had declared, that I immediately
departed out of these coasts, and saw much of God in it; for I went strait
abroad publishing the same things with boldness, both in writing and speaking,
in several Countries where I was desired to come. And there living in that
Country of Barkshire, where I first began to publish these things, a man of
eminency in the world, whom the Priests knew to be zealous for them and their
ways, and they having not prevailed with me to write a recantation of those
things I held, they then prevailed with him to join with them in buying up as
many as they could get of the foresaid books, (entitled, Divine Teachings) in
which those things were published, that they might spread no farther amongst
the people; of which books they bought to the value of about ten pounds worth,
having no other way to stop them, and which the Priests would have had him to
have burned; but he was wiser then so; and said, that he would rather keep them
for waste paper, and did not know but that they might yield him his money
again, if the things should after come in request; but however, these books are
again reprinted, and the things therein still maintained by me, being the same
in me.

Thus we see how some men, out of zeal to their own opinions, and others for
lucre of gain, not yet knowing the truth, will endeavor to binder the
spreading of truth, and so through ignorance and blind zeal, will turn
persecutors of Christ, his Kingdom, and the Righteousness thereof.

This Kingdom of Christ, and all things therein, as love, joy, peace, life,
light, heaven, and salvation in Christ alone, I ever since I knew it, and
tasted of it, have not ceased to write of, publish and declare in several
Countries, Acts 28.30, 31.
both in public and private, from house to house, in their Churches, Streets
and Market places, where the Lord has been pleased to carry me, and where
people desired me to come and were assembled together to hear me, I never
desiring to be chargeable to any, to hinder any from coming into the Kingdom of
the Lord, which is a free Kingdom; 1 Cor. 9 12, 18, 19.
neither would I ever yield to take any outward maintenance from any upon that
account of preaching, for that was but Antichrists hire, in Antichrists
Kingdom, which most men yet have appeared to live in, nay, the purest Churches
of Independents and Anabaptists, as well as Prelates and Presbyterians which
though they have not all took tithes, they have took money or moneys worth; and
so cannot say, as Paul did, I have coveted no man's gold, Acts 20.33
silver, or apparel: which is all but Antichrists pay, in Antichrists Kingdom,
to Antichrists servants, whose servants all are that preach for gain or hire,
and not for pure love to Christ and all people: John 10.8.10.
and Christ says of the hirelings, that they are but Thieves and Robbers, and
fly when he that is free comes; and this would quickly be maniefest, were but
tithes and the Priests hire put down, and every one have freedom to preach that
could; I will warrant you that those Preachers that were sent from Oxford and
Cambridge, would quickly fly from you, leave you, and preach no more to you,
and yet you would have more Preachers then are now: for then every one that had
received any thing of God, would freely declare it; and this would be according
to the Gospel rule, which says, When thou art converted, strengthen thy
brother; and, As every man has received the gift, so let them administer one
to another; and not one to forbid another: for let one that preaches freely
come into the Church or Parish of him that preaches for hire, and the hireling
will presently forbid the freeman; saying, this is my house and my Parish (or
Foxes hole) you shall not preach here: Ma^th 8 20.
and though the men of the Parish (to wit, the Master) would have him yet the
servant forbids him: And does not the servant here exalt himself above the
Master, the Priest above the people? but surely he that exalts himself shall be
brought low, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted; and it is enough
that the servant be as his Master, and not above his Master, though it has
been so hitherto between the people and their Ministers. What is the Church but
the Townhouse, in which the Priest, the Town-servant, is to do the Towns work,
for which he receives the Towns wages? And what if the Master be willing that
the servant should sit still, and set another to do his work notwithstanding
the servant shall still have his wages? O but here is a slavish fear in the
servant, that if another should do his work better then him, it would be to his
disgrace; and more then that if the master should once find that he could have
his work done freely, he would then hire no more; and what would then become of
the hireling? he must pack up and be gone: and so says Christ, The hireling
flies, because he is an hireling, John 10.13, 14.
and cares not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd (says he) and know my
sheep, and am known of mine: And sure Christ never preached for hire, nor any
that ever he sent, that ever I read of in Scripture: then those that do, were
never sent by him, but by his enemy the Devil, or Man of Sin, to keep up a
Kingdom contrary to his: and it is very likely, that the Man of Sin is their
Master that sent them, because they so much preach up sin unpardoned, which is
the keeping up of his Kingdom in which they live, and without which they could
not live, as to keep up that trade of buying and selling the Word of God: for
they live by telling the people of their sins, Jer. 5.30, 31.
and some people love to have it so, who live in the same Kingdom with them,
and that love to pay them.

But in the Kingdom of Christ, which is a free Kingdom, there is no such thing;
there is no sin unpardoned, therefore no telling the people so, neither do the
people there love to have it so: but there is all sin pardoned for all men,
past, present, and to come; and those that are sent by Christ, and that live in
that Kingdom, come with that message in their mouths, That all sin is
pardoned, and all men forgiven, Dan. 9.24.
sin and transgression finished, and everlasting Righteousness brought in by
Christ alone: and this is my message which I have to all the world, and which I
am to deliver freely, and for which those that have not the same message to
deliver, do hate me, and persecute me: but I passed them all by, and would not
be partaker of their sins; and he that has kept me hitherto, keeps me still,
that I may not do Antichrists work, neither receive Antichrists wages, or live
by the sins of the people, as some others do.

But some may say, Did you never receive any money for preaching? I answer, I
never received any that ever I put in my own purse; but where there was money
appointed for preaching, and no Priest there to challenge it as his propriety,
that either I must dispose of it, or others whom it concerned not, must put it
in their own purses, I gave order that the poor of each Parish might have it,
as will be witnessed in several places: Acts 20.33, 34, 35.
and therefore can say with Paul, I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or
apparel: yet of this will I not glory, but I will glory in the Lord, who has
so far kept me from being a hireling in Antichrists Kingdom, that he will
rather make all my ways appear more for the abominating and throwing down of
all such Antichristian ways of maintenance, then for the setting of it up; for
which the Priests, and all Impropriators, with all that live in that and the
like maintenance, that knew me, or had heard of me, could never abide me, but
always persecuted me, sought for my imprisonment, banishment or silencing, and
also my life. While I was thus carried forth in contending for the truth, yet
was I still ready to spend and be spent for the good of all people, even my
enemies; and was more ready to give then to receive, according to my ability, 2
Cor. 12.15. Acts 20.35.
and so still at peace in my self, through all things with Christ in God, that
ever I undertook, and went through by him, in all my proceedings, to this day.

CHAP. V.
The Authors further proceedings in his dealings with men in all conditions,
under their several Forms and Administrations: That his Doctrine never tended
to draw men to any Opinion under any one Form of Worship; but to press forwards
to the life of God in Christ, above the Whorish Religion and Vanities of the
World; that to l^ve in Unity, Peace, and Love with all men, having peace with
God, is the pure Religion.

ANd now the manner of my farther dealings in Judgment and Doctrine with men
in all conditions, under their several Forms, Administrations or Dispensations,
was still a pressing of them forwards after Christ, to the knowledge of the
truth as it is in Jesus, and not a staying of men any where, or endeavoring to
draw men to any Form, Way, Worship or Opinion from Christ; neither to rail
against any man of any opinion whatsoever, but to speak the truth to all,
showing what all those opinions of men are, and what, and where they themselves
are, while under them; and how they are to forsake all, and follow Christ, be
they Prelates, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, or whatsoever opinion
else may be found out by man besides Christ, all are to pass away; and they are
to pass them all by, as by so many harlots houses, Prove. 7.
standing by the ways side, by which poor souls are to pass, before they come
to their rest; and into which, as into so many Alehouses or Taverns, many
thousand of poor souls are allured and drawn aside to eat, and to drink, and
commit fornication with the Inhabitants thereof, neglecting their journey to
Canaan or Mount- Sion; and where, for some time, they take up their rest, that
many pass by them, and get into heaven before them, while they are feasting
with harlots, Rev. 17.14, 15.
the daughters of the great Whore that sits upon many waters, and on the
mountains of men's holiness, eating bread, and drinking wine, until the Lord
come to feast with them there, and by a strong hand overcome them, pull them
down, or bring them forth, and so lead them on, carrying them by all those
opinions of men, only to knock at their doors, as some have done before look
in upon them, and behold their devotion; but not to go into them, Prove. 7.27.
lest they should be devoured by them: For their house is the way to hell,
going down to the chambers of death: Therefore let not your hearts be inclined
to their ways, go not astray in their paths, lest you should stay or be
seduced by them: But say, friends, come away, this is not your rest, arise,
depart, for it is polluted, and if you stay, it will destroy you with a sore
destruction; Micah 2.10.
This say unto them, but go not in; for if you go in to them, the Devil will
come and take you, make you drunk, and there cause you to stay, and so make you
become Devils with him, or them, to accuse and persecute, eat, devour and
condemn one another, or all that come not in to you and be the same with you in
your opinions: Therefore I advise you not to stay any where, Col. 3.1, 2.
nor to set your minds, desires and affections upon any thing below Christ, in
the way you are to go to Christ; but still in all this your worshipping of God
(as you call it) to press forwards to the mark, Phil. 3.
for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; where you will then
rest, be at peace, and be satisfied, and where you will no more accuse,
persecute, judge, devour and condemn one another, as you do; but where you will
be reconciled in love one to another, and to all men, though your greatest
enemies.

And this is the advice that I give to all men, in all that I say unto them, to
press forwards to the knowledge of the truth, as it is in Jesus; and I do not
go about to set up any thing below the Lord Jesus, nor to draw men to any
opinion of things besides him; but to show them the vanity and nothingness of
all the ways and opinions of men below him, declaring what they are in
themselves, and their places, showing that they are but notions, and so men's
inventions, shadows dying vanities, tormenting pleasures, things that would
perish, and come to an end with the using, after the commandments and doctrines
of men; Job 14.14.
yet never declared against them, so as to forbid any of them, that saw their
life in them, but bid all men to wait till their change come, and not to go
forth by their own strength, or awake their beloved before his time, Cant. 2.7.
till he shall come with a strong hand, and lead them forth, and so place them
in their own land, as in himself: And now having showed them the vanity of all
those things, I then set before them the love of God in Christ Jesus, with
exhortations to love one another, as a sure testimony of their love to God; for
the which I have been hated and persecuted by some men of all opinions and
religions whatsoever in the world, whether Papists, Prelates, Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, Ranters, Quakers, and whatsoever opinion else below
the truth; though I love them all, and am with them all, and they all with me
but a cloud is over them, that they see me not, neither know me, that is, they
see not my life, being not yet reconciled to it: yet when this cloud shall be
taken away from all, and the Sun of Righteousness risen in all, Matthew 23.^.
then shall they see both me and one another, and have joy in each other, and
be at peace with all men, as being all brethren of one family, sons of one
Father, heirs of one Kingdom, and so see themselves and all men dwelling
together in one City, or heaven [God.]

And this is pure Religion, the new Jerusalem, the Kingdom of the Lord, and end
of their journey; where the wolf shall dwell with the lamb (that is, the wicked
with the godly, or men of all opinions meet and agree in one union and
fellowship in the Lord Jesus) And where the leopard shall lie down with the
kid, and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatlings together, and a little
child (to wit Christ) shall lead them; and the cow and the bear shall feed (or
all men who have been of different judgments, shall be of one mind in the
Lord) their young ones shall lie down together (all men shall bring forth their
seed unto God) and the lion shall eat straw like the ox (or God will tame the
wildest of creatures, the persecutingst: and most devouringst of men, or of
things in men, that all shall be alike in knowledge) and the sucking child
shall play on the hole of the asp, Isa. 11.
and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice den (or he that is
sucking at the breast, and he that is weaned from the breast of his own
Religion, and shall not one envy another) for the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea: that is, God will so
manifest himself, that all men and creatures shall be in union together, love
one another, and do unto others, as they would others should do unto them: this
is the Law and the Prophets; and this is the Kingdom of the Lord, and high
calling of God, which all men are to press after, and not to rest till they are
come in to it, and is no more nor no less then what I have always declared, as
that which I received of the Lord; yet not that I Richard Coppin, as a
creature, could at any time give to another what I my self have received, or
teach another what I am taught, or do for another what the Lord has done for
me in that case, but I only declare what I have received of the Lord, and am
taught by the Lord, and what the Lord may do for others, when the time
appointed of the Father shall come; for he that gives to me, as a creature,
must give to them as creatures; Isa 2 22.
and he that taught me, must teach them, if ever they be taught the truth:
therefore cease from man, whose breath is in h^ nostrils, 1 John 2.
for wherein is he to be accounted of? and eye him the Lord Jesus, or that
anointing within you, who is the salvation of all men, and whom you are to hear
in all things; for all others besides him, that go forth as Teachers of the
people, are but false Teachers, and Seducers, according to the Scripture, but
the Lord alone, or this anointing in us is our only Teacher; and men in
speaking one to another, can do no more, as they are men, but tell one another
what the Lord has done for them; as the Prophet David says, Come hear, and I
will tell thee what the Lord has done for my soul; and, what we have seen, and
heard, we declare unto you, says Paul: which declarations of men may conform
each other in something which they before have had some little experience of in
themselves, the Lord working with it, though they did not so know it as to
utter it, which when it is declared to them, they may then set their seals to
it as truth to them, there being in them the same spirit witnessing to the same
things, which makes them believe it; For he that believes has the witness in
himself; but if there be not the same spirit witnessing in him that hears, as
is in him that speaks, they cannot believe, or set seal to the truth of what is
spoken, any further then it agrees with their own spirits or opinions but will
rather persecute it to the death, and also them that shall declare it, as they
have done to Christ, the Apostles, and others since; that from thence and from
^uch arises all persecutions.

And so having brought you thus far, to show unto you my proceedings hitherto,
both of my life and doctrine delivered to the world; I shall go on, and therein
set before you a larger path of my persecution and trials, both at Worcester,
Oxford, and at Gloucester, as of things considerable, from the first beginning
to the end, as a further testimony to the truth: And first of my trial at
Worcester, and the proceedings thereunto.

CHAP. VI.
The Ministers malicious proceedings against the Author in Worcestershire, to
bring him to a trial: His examination before several Justices and Ministers,
and his being bound over to Worcester Assizes; how, and for what.

THe first proceedings of the Ministers against me, to bring me to a trial at
Worcester, was from my preaching at Emload in Worcestershire, where I was
desired by some of the Eminentest men of that Parish to come, and there to
preach, where I continued for the space of four days, declaring the things
which I had seen and heard of the Lord, both in public and private, with the
desire of the people, and the consent of the said Minister of that place: But
the said Minister finding the people so much adhering to what I delivered, and
believing in it more then in what he himself usually delivered amongst them, he
began to be wrath, and was troubled; and fearing that he should lose his flock,
or at least the benefit he received of them, he sent and caused a dispute, or
at least a vain jangling to be between some certain Ministers of that Country
and my self, while I was there; some of whose names are as follows, Eason of
Batsford, Collier of Blackly, Nevil, and others, as Ministers to the people in
their several Parishes, but no grace could they minister to the hearers, and
therefore cannot be said in truth to be Ministers of Christ but of Antichrist,
as appeared by what they declared to the people, as also by their practice; for
they endeavored to prove the Law under that administration of Moses, to be
still in force, and that man by keeping of it, and doing the works thereof,
should be saved by it, and there would be no need of Christ (said they) which
thing I opposed them in, declaring streightway to the people, that if it were
by the works of the Law, by which no flesh should be justified, then not of
grace: but being by grace, it is no more of works, lest any man should boast,
and say, they were fain to help God; and I further said, that if it were
possible for any man now to keep the Law in every part and point thereof; yet
there were no salvation by it, because God had found out another way, a new and
a living way, even by Christ alone, or God manifest in flesh; and to this
Christ says, that he was set up from everlasting, to be the way, the truth and
the light, Pro. 8.22, 23
and none can go to the father but by him: but the people hearing this, and
therein confessing before the Ministers, themselves to be better satisfied in
that which I had said, then in what they had heard from them, the Ministers
left both me and the people, and went away raging against me, and saying, if
they had me forth of the Church (that godly place) they would knock me on the
head, or tread me underfoot: but I remained still speaking to the people, in
which time they in this their rage went to Nevils house the Minister of that
Town, and there consulted what they might do to prevent my coming again into
that Country; even as the Priests and Elders in the time of the Apostles did
consult together what they might do unto Peter and John, to prevent the
spreading of their doctrine among the people, whom they threatened and
commanded, that they should speak no more in the name of Jesus: Acts 4.
So those Priests and Elders with whom I had to do, did in their consultation
agree to get a warrant from some Justice of Peace of that County against me,
and in it to charge me with blasphemy; and also threatened me with it, making it
as publicly known as they could to fright me, though they knew not what
blasphemy was neither with what to charge me: but I hearing of it, and being
willing to answer to any thing that I had spoke or done, I came to the said
Town, where I understood the warrant was; and I abiding at a friends house,
sent to the said Minister of the same Town, to come and produce his warrant,
which he reported he had against me; for I was not ashamed to answer to any
thing that they should lay to my charge But before he came unto me, he went to
the rest of the said Ministers of that Country, to acquaint them with it, and
to confer what they might do in it, I being come to Town, and they unsatisfied
for the present what to have against me. But I willing to see the utmost of it,
and it being so appointed by God that I should, I tarried there all night, and
the next morning came Nevil with the Officer, and served the warrant upon me;
which was, that I should appear before the next Justice of Peace for that
County, to answer for speaking of blasphemy; but my accusers being not yet
provided with things against me, they reported, as I was informed, that if I
would forbear preaching after that manner, they would then forbear to trouble
me; of which I took no notice, but was willing they should proceed in the
business, I being thereunto encouraged by the Lord; then they to have time to
provide themselves, ordered, that no Justice should meddle with it till we came
to Worcester, which was from thence above twenty miles; whither I, with many
friends I had in the same Town, then went; and there tarried till the next day
before any accuser came, or that any thing could be found against me; then to
examine me they had called together several Justices, and many of the Clergy;
and having nothing at present against me, they examined me upon a paper of
Interrogatories, sent in by the Priests my accusers; which was, Whether I did
not say such things as they would there accuse me of; they thereby endeavoring
to catch something from my own mouth at that time to accuse me, having set
several Watchmen over me (to wit Clergy men) for that purpose; but having
nothing from thence against me, then Nevil, who before served the warrant upon
me, swore, that I should say, That they were evil Angels (meaning the
Ministers, said he) that brought the tidings of damnation, and such ought not
to be heard But they knowing themselves to be such that did declare such things
of terror to the people, and I so discovering of them, their malice was so
great toward me that they would then have imprisoned me for so saying, and
from the testimony of one man, my accuser; but upon farther consideration
thereof, fearing they should do more then they could answer, they passed that
by, and bound me over to the Assizes, which was within four days after, there
to answer to that, and what more they in the mean time could get witnesses to
swear; who also had appointed and employed other Ministers of their tribe in
that County, to examine before some Justices, several persons that had formerly
been hearers of me, to see what more they could get against me from thence, but
could not by them get any thing. Then the next Sabbath after my return from my
examination at Worcester, and two days before the Assizes, I came again to
Emload, the Town from whence I was accused; and I there being desired, spoke
something among the people that day; then at night, I, with other friends, met
together at one Thomas Rooks, in the same Town, where we discoursed upon the
Scriptures; in which time came in some malicious persons, as spies sent (as was
supposed) by the said Minister of the place; who there propounded to me some
questions, pretending for satisfaction, and to be informed in their judgments:
but it appeared they came to catch something from me to witness against me at
the Assizes, when they brought such things against me as (they said) I at that
time spoke in private to them. And thus you may see of the wicked plots and
devices of wicked men, to maintain their corrupt and self-interests, and to
keep up a rotten Kingdom that is perishing and decaying: Who further proceeded
against me as follows.

CHAP. VII.
Of his trial at Worcester Assizes, before the Lord Chief Barron Wild: The
particular accusations against him; and his answers to them, with the
proceedings of the Court; and how.

Upon the 23 day of March I appeared at Worcester, at the general Assizes there
holden for that County; where Ralph Nevil of Emload, and Giles Collier of
Blockly, Ministers of the said places in the same County, preferred a Bill of
Indictment against me to the Grand Jury for blasphemy (as they said) who so
found it, and returned it into the Court, where my Lord Chief Barron Wild sat
Judge of that Assize; before whom I was then called, and there made my
appearance: then the Petty-Jury, and the witnesses to the Bill being called,
the Bill of Indictment was read in the Court; the particulars whereof are as
follows:

The Charge in the Indictment.
FIrst, that I should say, That they were evil Angels (meaning the Ministers
who preach the Gospel of Christ) that told people of damnation, and that such
ought not to be heard or believed.

Secondly, That all men whatsoever should be saved.

Thirdly, That those that heard me were all in heaven, and in glory.

Fourthly, That God was as much in them as in Christ.

Fifthly, That the Day of Judgment was begun 160 years ago.

Sixthly, That there was no general Day of Judgment.

Seventhly, That there was no heaven but in man.

Fighthly, That he that thought there was abell, to him there was a hell; but
he that thought there was no hell, to him there was no bell.

And after the Indictment was read, my accusers and the witnesses to the Bill
were sworn, whose names are as follows, Ralph Nevil of Emload, and Giles
Collier of Blockly, accusers; William Petty, William Fletcher, and John
Froobury of Emload witnesses, Man. 26.60.
three in number, which was one more then Christ had; but never a couple of
them swore one thing, but differed from each other in their Evidence, and who
could hardly pronounce their words plain: but what they did swear, they had
also in writing, what the pleasure of my accusers was to give them: and who
were ready (as appeared) to swear any thing to accomplish their own ends, two
of them being sons to one that rented the Glebe-land of Nevil, one of the
accusers, for whom they swore; and the other the Clerks son of the same Town.
But this being done, I was called to my answer, and began with these
Propositions, as follows:

My Lord, I desire your Lordship that you will be pleased to grant me these few
particulars:

First, That my accusers, being not men of the same discovery of God that I am,
may therefore make it appear before this honorable Court, that they have taken
the Engagement, else they are not to have the benefit of the Law.

Secondly, That no man whatsoever may be suffered to speak any thing against
me, till they are sworn before this Honorable Court and my face.

Thirdly, That those witnesses which are here ready to testify in my behalf,
may be also heard, and these Certificates which are here brought after me by
several men, with several men's names to them, may be also read.

Fourthly, That I may have time and liberty given me to answer fully to every
particular that may at this time be laid to my charge; and having a fair trial,
I shall be thankful to your Lordship; all which particulars being granted, the
Court proceeded.

But before I came to answer their Indictment, my accusers presented to the
Judge a book, with my name to it, entitled, Man's Righteousness Examined; which
book the Judge asked me if I would own. I answered, that unless I heard it
read, I knew not that it was mine. Then said he, Here is your name to it. I
answered again, that another might write a book, and put my name to it; or
others of my name might write a book with that title: but if your Lordship will
be pleased to cause the book to be read that I may hear it, I will tell you
whether it be mine or no; who then read part of it himself, where he thought
fit, and where my accusers directed him. All which I answered, and owned to be
mine, as it was read. Then said the Judge, This book makes more for him then
against him; for you accuse him for denying heaven and hell, when he
acknowledges both in his book; which book the Judge put in his pocket, and so
came to the Indictment; to which my answer was more large then you will have it
here.

The first particular charged in the Indictment, and the answer to it was:

First, that I should say, That they were all evil Angels; meaning the
Ministers who preach the Gospel of Christ (said they) that told the people of
damnation, and that such ought not to be heard or believed.

Answ. My Lord, there are two administrations in manifestation; one of the Law,
and another of the Gospel: First, that of the Law is a ministration of wrath,
death, the curse, hell and condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.
because under it sin appears to men unpardoned. Secondly, that of the Gospel
is a ministration of love, joy, peace, life, light, heaven, and salvation; for
under that sin appeared to men pardoned. And those, who from Christ preach the
Gospel of Christ, as Paul did, bring tidings of good things, when they preach
the love of God in Christ to all people, that they appear to be good
messengers, and so good Angels, sent of God; and such ought to be heard and
believed, as it is written, Romans 10.15.
How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring
glad tidings of good things? but though we or an angel from heaven preach any
other Gospel unto you then that which we have preached, Gal. 1.1. and 4.14.
let him be accursed (says Paul) And you, says he to the Galathians, received
me as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus, when I preached unto you the
Gospel of Christ freely; when the other who preach up sin unpardoned to any
people after the coming of Christ, whose coming is to fulfill all righteousness,
and overcome all sin for all people, are not Ministers of the Gospel, but of
the Law, and so bring not tidings of good things, but of evil things; wherefore
they appear to be evil messengers, and so evil angels, reserved under chains of
darkness so long; and such men and doctrines ought not to be heard or believed,
who believe not themselves: John 14 1 and 6 45. Acts 7.37
But hear and believe in me (says Christ) for you shall be all taught of me;
and, Him shall you hear in all things, says Moses.

And so much of the answer to the first Article, to prove them evil angels,
(even as devils) who preach up sin unpardoned, and hold forth damnation
belonging to any people any longer then while they believe not: and therefore I
affirm, that such ought not to be heard or believed, who themselves believe not
this to be true.

Secondly, That all men whatsoever should be saved.

Answ. 2 Samuel 14.14
God has declared in Scripture both by the mouth of the Prophets and Apostles
the salvation of all men, without respect of persons; who says. He will have
all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth; 1 Timothy 2.4,
5, 6, 7.
and, There is one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time: And does God will and
desire the salvation of all men? Then may we say, Lord, who has resisted thy
will? let thy will be done; as has been our daily prayer unto him; and Paul
says, That as by one man death and damnation came to all, Romans 5.18.
so by one life and salvation came to all; else Christ were not sufficient to
save all that Adam lost, and to bring again all that was driven away: and it is
nowhere said, that all men shall never be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the truth: but it is said, that in due time all men shall be saved; and Paul
was sent to preach this Gospel to the world, Romans 11.32.
and to sinners, yea all men whatsoever; and he says, That God has concluded
them all under sin and unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.

And now, If any man sin, he has an advocate with the Father, 1 John 2, 2, 3.
Jesus Christ the righteous, who is a propitiation not only for our sins (or
the sins of a few, to wit, Isa. 53.
Apostles and Saints) but also for the sins of the whole world; and has made
full satisfaction for all, paid the debts of all, yea, all men past, present
and to come, and that damnation to any creature is no longer but for that time
wherein they believe not this to be done, as by experience I can testify; for
he that believes not is condemned already: John 3.16.
and a man may be an unbeliever one day, and a believer another; therefore
damned one day, and saved another: And that which all men are to be saved from,
1 Timothy 2
and in due time shall be made manifest to them, is death and hell, in which
abides the Devil, Sin and Damnation, all which shall be cast into the lake of
fire, there to be ended, that it no more shall rise up in judgment against
them, to accuse and condemn them: and God cannot, neither will he lose any
thing that is of himself, or is himself, but the son of perdition, that
damnable state of unbelievers, together with all that is of the creature as
found out by the creature, to wit, his own invnetions, in that state of sin and
death; for God made man upright, just and good; and I dare not say, that any
creature which God made shall go to any local hell to be tormented, after he is
departed out of this visible being, because the Scripture says it not, but
says, That the body when it falls, goes to the earth from whence it came,
Eccles 12.7.
and the soul to God that gave it: And it is most certain, that God gave to
every man his soul; therefore he will take every man's soul to himself again,
because it can live in no other but him; Job. 12 10.
for every thing returns to its center and still lives and remains the same in
and with God, as at the first, who will cast away none that comes to him, and
are of him; but one God made us all, and is a husband to us all, and we all are
his Spouse, though we all know it not; For thy maker is thy hushand the Lord of
hoasts is his name, the God of the whole earth shall he be called; and though
for the time of our rebellion against him, he may seem to us to hide his face
from us (in our apprehensions) yet with an everlasting loving kindness does he
still love us, and will save us, Isa. 54.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
and so cause us to behold his face again, to forget the shame of our youth,
and the things that are behind, and remember the reproach of our widowhood no
more: Isa. 54.4.
being now returned (in knowledge) to him who is our husband and first love,
with whom we shall live for ever, world without end; therefore to say that all
men whatsoever may be saved, though it appear not to them so long as they all
believe not, is no more then what the Scripture says. And so much of the
answer to the second Article, that all men whatsoever should be saved.

But my accusers were troubled, and thought my answer too large, and the time
too long that I had to plead; who told the Judge that my lungs were so strong,
that if he suffered me still to go on, I would never have done; but the Judge
honestly reproved them, saying, that he had heard them, and was now to hear me,
who bid me go on.

Thirdly, That all that heard me were in heaven and glory.

Answ. 1 Cor. 12.27.
The Saints of God, which are the body of Christ, and members in particular,
cannot be separated from their head, which is Christ, Ephesians. 5.20.
being all members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, and Christ the
head of every man being in heaven and in glory, every man therefore may be said
to be in heaven and in glory with him; yea, in the same glory that Christ
himself is in, though not yet revealed to them; for says Christ to his Father,
Father, glorify me with thy self, with the glory I had with thee before the
world was; and the glory that thou have given me, I have given them, that they
may be one, even as we are one, Joh. 17.5.22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
I in them, and thou in me, that they be made perfect in one: And the desire of
Christ then was, that they might be with him to behold his glory; and, O
righteous Father (says he) I have declared unto them thy name, and will
declare it, that the love wherewith thou have loved me may be in them, and I in
them; And Christ and they being one in another, they cannot be parted one from
another, but where the one is, the other is also; and Christ in raising up
himself to heaven, raised up them with himself; Isa. 6.19. John. 12.32.
for together with my dead body (or as my dead body) shall they arise (says
Christ) and I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me; and Paul says, He
has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus; and, Both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are
all of one (yea, Ephesians. 2.6. Heb. 2.11.
of one God and Father) for which cause he is not ashomed to call them
brethren; and as they are all brethren, so they are also heirs, coheirs, and
joynt-heirs with him in the same heaven and glory of the Father, that Christ is
heir in, though they yet know it not; and therefore all that is yet wanting in
and to men, is only a manifestation and enjoyment of this in themselves, which
in due time will be made manifest to them all, as the Lord Jesus shall appear
in them, and God by him be made known to them.

Fourthly, That God was as much in them as in Christ.

Answ. That God who is the power, life, and light of all men, and that cannot
be divided from, neither confined to any one man, is the same in all men, as he
was in that one man, called Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, and crucified at
Jerusalem, though he be not yet so fully manifested to and in all men, Romans
8.29.
as he was to and in him, he being the first born among many brethren, or the
first appearance of humane nature, in whom God did so fully and manifestly
appear to be living, moving, acting, and bringing forth himself in the
manifestation of his love in power, life, light and glory; yet that God is in
all, and all are in him (as also says the Scripture) for in him we all live,
move, Acts 17.28. Ephesians. 4.6.
and have our being; and, there is one God and Father of all, who is above all,
through all, and in all, both in Jews, Gentiles, Heathens, Pagans, Turks,
Infidels, or whatsoever else they may be called, and there is no difference, or
respect of persons with God, but in the manifestation of this to themselves,
which none can have till the Holy Ghost, even the Spirit of truth, comes upon
them, as it did on him, and reveal it to them, as it did to him, which he has
promised, that in due time shall come and bring all things to their remembrance:
and there is no man but has God in him, yea, the same God that Christ had,
though not the same measure of knowledge and understanding, till Christ in them
has revealed it. And that the Gentiles might come to know this, Paul prays for
them, that they might be strengthened with all might in the inner man (that is,
with all God) to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth, Ephesians. 3.16, 17,
18, 19.
and length, and depth and height, and to know the love of Christ, which
passes knowledge, that they might be filled with all the fullness of God, even
as Christ was, to have in them the same mind, the same love, life and light,
and so be filled with the same fullness of grace and glory, whereby they come
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ,
to know that as he was, so are we in this world; and therefore it is no
blasphemy to say that God may be as much in them as in Christ (considered as a
man) though it do not yet appear so to them, Ephesians. 4.13. 1 Ioh 4.17.
as in due time it may and will when God shall be more revealed to them, and
they more enjoy him in the manifestation.

Fifthly, That the day of judgment was began sixteen hundred years ago.

Answ My Lord, according to Scripture acceptance it was so; John 12.13.
for said Christ; Now is the Judgment of this world; now shall the Prince of
this world be cast out; John 9 39.
and for Judgment am I come into this world (said Christ) that they which see
not, might see; and that they which see might be made blind; and this coming of
Christ to Judgment according to the Scripture, was above sixteen hundred years
past, and yet is continued to this day, though most men are blind and yet see
it not, which some shall so long as they have eyes of their own to see, and
ears of their own to hear, till they see with the Lords eye, and hear with the
Lords ear; and the Apostle also said, that the time was then come, 1 Pet. 4.17.
that Judgment must begin at the House of God, even with righteous men, or men
under any form of Religion, that had any thing of their own righteousness to
trust in, besides Christ their righteousness.

That this day of Judgment did then begin, we find; for so soon as he was but
ascended and had led captivity captive, he sent the holy Ghost the Comforter,
Ioh. 16.7.8.
even the spirit of truth which should convince the world of sin, of
righteousness and of judgment; and so bring all things to man's remembrance,
destroying all that is a lie in man by the spirit of Judgment and of burning;
when he shall appear to sit (in man his Temple) as a refiner and purifyer of
gold and silver, Mal 3.3.
to purge out all dross, sin and corruption, and to make man a vessel holding
nothing but righteousness, peace and joy, which work of Judgment was then
begun with some, coming on to others, and is not ended to this day with all,
neither will, so long as sin is in the world reigning in any creature, and till
we see sin and transgression finished in us, as no more to be imputed to us; 1
Cor. 15.24. etc.
we see not an end of the day of Judgment with us, till we see Christ to have
opened the prison doors, broken all bonds, put all enemies under his feet, set
us at liberty, and delivered up the Kingdom to the Father, that God may be all
in all; and so much for the day of Judgment, that it was began sixteen hundred
years ago, according to the Scriptures.

Sixthly. That there was no general day of Judgment.

Answ. My Lord; I know no other day of Jodgement as to me, then what I have
already declared to your Lordship, which is to be the same with every creature
before it can be finished; and this may be said to be A general day, wherein
all men are to appear before Christ to be Judged by him in love; for the time
is come, etc. And though this time of Judgment may be called a day, yet this
day may be thousands of years before all the world in every man may be Judged,
all sin and transgression finished as to them, and they all set free in the
Lord; 2 Pet. 3.8.
For one day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one
day; and did men once taste and feel of the workings of God in and upon their
souls, in manifesting his love to them, for the taking away of sin and
transgression from them, they would then be satisfied touching this day of the
Lord, which for my part I am already satisfied in, and therefore cannot but
declare it, and bear witness to it as that which is truth to me, and according
to the Scriptures; and they that know any other, let them declare that, as I
have declared this.

Seventhly. That there was no heaven but in man.

Answ. My Lord; Those words do not say there is none at all, but that it is in
man, yet without confinement, and this the Scripture also declares; therefore
if we would know where heaven is, let us first know what it is, and the
Scripture tells us, that the Kingdom of heaven is Righteousness, Rom 14.17.
peace and joy in the holy Ghost, and that it is within us; for when the
Scribes and Pharisees came to Christ to demand of him when the Kingdom of God
should come, (as men still do) he answered them, that The Kingdom of God comes
not with observations, neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there; for behold
the Kingdom of God is within you; and where should the Kingdom of Christ, which
is a Kingdom of righteousness, peace and joy appear to be, that men might have
peace and joy in it, and God glorified by it, but in man, the place which the
Lord has appointed for himself to dwell in? for behold the Tabernacle of God
is with men, that he might be a Comforter to them, to increase amongst them
righteousness, peace, and joy, which is the Kingdom of the Lord; and till we
have it in our selves, we have it not any where; but if there, then every
where, which is a new name written that no man knows but he that has it; and
thus the Scripture declares unto us, what, and where heaven is, and I know no
other heaven (as to me) in which is man's salvation, from sin, death, hell, and
the world, but Christ in man, and man in Christ; and they that will have any
other, let them declare what and where that is, as I have declared what and
where this is, which is according to the Scripture, and my own experience.

Eighthly. That he who thought there was a hell, to him there was a hell; but
he that thought there was no hell, to him there was no hell.

Answ. My Lord, I yet know no other hell as to me, then what I have found in my
own conscience, though the time has been, that I have feared another as most
men do, and as all men else have done till their consciences were purged: but
this I have found in my self that when it pleased God to make know Christ to
me, to take away from me the fear of hell, he also took away hell; for fear
has torment; therefore to me it appears, that while we live in the fear of
hell, we have it, are in it, and so subject to the punishment of it, being kept
in bondage by it, till Christ in us shall destroy that fear, and so set our
minds at liberry, as is written, That for as much as the children are partakers
of flesh and blood, Jesus Christ himself took part of the same, that through
death he might destroy him that had the power of death, which is the Devil, and
so free them who all their life time were subject to bondage; and now happy is
that soul that sees himself so made free by Christ; for he is free indeed, and
now sees an end of the Devil, sin, death, and hell, which he before lived in
fear of, and was in bondage to; and therefore when the Lord Jesus is pleased to
deliver us from the fear of it, that it shall no more have power over us, and
thereby manifest in us perfect love wherein is no fear, he then delivers us
from hell it self, from which every believer is freed; Rev. 21.
but the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable and murthehers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liars, (while they so
remain) are cast into it, and so have their part in the Lake of fire burning
with brimstone, till the Lord Jesus by his mighty power shall quench the fire,
raise them up, and overcome all their enemies for them, and so restore peace to
them, in him that is their peace, the Lord Jesus; and then he that has part in
the first resurrection through Christ (or is once made free by Christ) of him
the second death shall have no power; but he is changed from death unto life by
the spirit of the Lord, and so sees an end of death and hell, as to him: All
which I shall leave to your Lordships consideration and this honorable Court,
and do give you many thanks for that I have had liberty to speak for my self.

But my accusers were much troubled that I had so fair a hearing, and began to
urge many other things of their own inventions against me, which was not in the
Indictment. First they said, that I denied the Law of Moses, in saying there
was no salvation by it, which they affirmed it was if man would keep it; That
if it were possible for a man now to keep the Law in the letter of it (which
that it is impossible) yet there would be no salvation by it for any man: God
having found out another way, even by Jesus Christ, without which no man could
be saved.

2. They said, that I denied the keeping of the Sabbath, which they went to
prove from the fourth Commandment, Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

To which I answered, that the true Sabbath of a Christian was Christ, and I
knew no other, as to me, though that day which they now call a Sabbath day, I
keep it as exactly and as purely as any of them did, in preaching to the
people; but not upon the account of a Sabbath day, but as the first day of the
week, as the Apostles did, being a day set apart for that use.

3. They said, that I spoke in derision of heaven, saying that if a Millstone
were at heaven, it would be hundreds of years a coming down.

To which I answered, That I never said the words, but one in my company did
once say, that they were spoken by a Minister in the Pulpit, who there
endeavoring to show unto the people the vast distance between heaven and
earth; told them, that if a Millstone were at heaven, it would be many hundred
years a coming down, and that one of his hearers should make answer, that if
heaven were above the skies, and a Millstone so long a coming down, how long
then should he be a going up? And this, my Lord, was declared by one of their
own tribe, yet they would ascribe it to me, though I never said the words.

4. They said, that I should deny the resurrection of the body, and said, there
was no other but what was in flowers and grass; also when the Corpse laid in a
grave were cast up again, though turned to earth, then was there a resurrection.

To which I answered, that the resurrection of the dead I never denied, but do
always affirm it; neither did I ever speak those words, though they might be
spoke in my company: Yet it may be said that in this there is a resurrection,
though not denying any other, for the virtue of every carcass laid in the
earth, does ascend upwards with the earth, and so come forth in flowers and
grass; also when a grave is dug, and the body before laid in it, though
rotted to earth, again cast up with the bones and all things thereto belonging,
then may it be said to be a resurrection of that body, and the true
resurrection not denied: but those things being thus answered, and the malice
of my accusers made manifest, the Judge appeared more satisfied, and my
accusers more ashamed.

Then after the Judge had heard the whole business, and declared the substance
thereof to the Jury (who understood it not) they went forth to consult upon
their Verdict, whether all, or any part of the charge were blasphemy by the
Act, or no; who returned in their Verdict, guilty: being asked of what part,
they said of that concerning heaven and hell.

Then the Judge told them, that unless it came directly under the Act of
blasphemy in every particular point, it could not be found as blasphemy; who
himself called for the Act, and comparing it with the Indictment, found it not
as the Jury had said, to be within the Act for blasphemy, for which he reproved
them, repeating the words of the Act to them, which was as follows.

Judge. He that shall avowedly affirm and maintain there is no heaven and hell,
its blasphemy by that Act, but that he does not say but does acknowledge there
is a heaven and hell in man, as you see him prove, and therefore does not
affirm there is none at all: and words spoken by way of private conference in
discourse, (as the witnesses do confess this was) it might be only spoken by
way of Proposition or Querie, to try the Judgments of others, and not as his
own judgment; and then cannot be said to be avowed and affirmed, therefore not
within the Act: however he shall continue bound till the next Assizes, to
discharge the Law, as said the Judge.

Then I desired liberty to speak a little more before I departed from the
Court: which was as follows.

CHAP. VIII.
The Speech made to the Judge after the Trial, to vindicate his own and other
men's preaching, without a call from the University; wherein is a true discovery
of the word of God and the Scripture, what it is. Of his taking his leave of
the Court.

MY Lord, I have here been maliciously and falsely persecuted by my adversaries,
as has appeared before the Court this day; and now is the law open on my
behalf against all that have falsely appeared against me; but he that is my
Teacher teaches me no such thing, as to seek revenge; but freely to forgive my
enemies, to love them that hate me and so leave all things to him, who will
reward every man according to his works; For vengeance is mine, and I will
repay (says the Lord.)

And the reason why those men do thus persecute me, is for the malice they have
against me for exercising these gifts that God has given me for his glory, the
comfort of my soul, and benefit of his people; which gifts they know not,
because they know not him, neither will they hear him, but speak evil of the
things that are taught by him; when without him we know nothing, Mat. 11.27.
and are taught nothing, according as it is written, That no man knows the Son,
but the Father; nor no man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the
Son shall reveal him: So the true knowledge of God is not taught of man, Gal. 1
12.15, 16.
nor by men, but comes only by the revelation of Jesus Christ, as that which
is most hated by men: And when it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, as he
did in Paul, I, with him, conferred not with flesh and blood, as those men do;
that is, I went not to this or that place, as unto men, to receive orders from
them, and to know before hand what I should have for my preaching, as other men
do, and have done; but I went immediately declaring the things I had seen and
heard from the Lord, wheresoever I was desired; and what I did, was freely, and
in love to the Lord Jesus and his people, without any price or reward of men;
when others who have their gifts from men, will look to be rewarded by men; and
good reason too that men should sell what they buy: But those men's gifts are
bought, therefore do they sell them, as other Tradesmen do, for their own
advantage; for if they can have but five or ten pound more in another Parish,
they will leave the one for the other, and yet no longer then they pay them,
will they preach to them, without going to Law with them; which sh^ws that they
preach not in love to the Lord Jesus and his people, but in love to that which
the people have, and so seek not them, but theirs; when I for my part in all my
practice of preaching hitherto, have not sought theirs, but them, 2 Cor. 12.14,
15.
and would gladly spend and be spent for them to do them good, as they will be
ready to testify: And for this am I hated and persecuted by them that know me
not; nevertheless I cannot but speak the things that I have been taught of the
Lord; for as every man has received the gift, so let them administer one to
another; and, What is revealed an secret, shall be published upon the house
tops (says the Lord) and this shall I do if God permit.

The Judge said, And you do well in so doing; for you may preach wheresoever
you are desired, so long as you keep close to the word of God, and make that to
be your rule.

I answered, my Lord, I thank you, and I shall do so. But what do you call the
Word of God?

Said the Judge, the Scripture is the Word of God.

I answered, that the Scripture, as written in ink and paper, is not the Word
of God, but a dead letter, which in the reading and hearing thereof, tells us
only in the ear what the Word of God is, but cannot teach or tell the mind;
neither does it any where say for it self, that it self is the Word of God that
can teach us; but that we are all taught of the Lord, who is himself the Word,
the Unction, the Holy one, and anointing within us; therefore let us not give
more honor to the Scripture then the Scripture takes to it self, but let
honor be given to whom honor is due, and glory to whom glory is due; and in
this we shall give all unto God, who is himself the true Word and Teacher, as
the Scripture declares him to be; for says John, In the beginning was the
Word, John 1.1, 2.
and the Word was with God, and the word was God; the same was in the beginning
with God: and this Word became flesh and dwelt among us, that it might teach us
all things (and says John) we behold the glory of him, Verse 14.
as the glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth, which
is not the Scripture, as written in the Letter, but God written in our flesh,
is this Word.

Again secondly, the Scripture tells us, that the word of God is quick, Heb.
4.12.
and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged sword peircing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart: And this the Scripture
cannot do, but God himself, as the Scripture tells us; for it says, That he is
the searcher of the heart, and the tryer of the reins, and the divider asunder
of soul and spirit, and discerns the thoughts and intents of men's hearts; and
so the searcher and tryer of all things (as says the Scripture.)

Again thirdly, the Scripture tells us of Christ's riding upon a white horse,
conquering and to conquer, and that his name was called The Word of God; Rev.
19, 11, 12, 13.
and not that the Scriptures were so called: And let not us rob God of that
honor and title due unto himself, to give to the Scripture, but what the
Scripture says both of God and it self, that let us say also. The Scripture
also says, 1 Cor. 3.6. John 14.19. Rom 10.8.
that the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives life; which spirit is the Word,
and the Word is Christ. I am come that you may have life (says Christ) and,
because I live, ye shall live also: And this Word (even Christ) is nigh us, in
us, yea round about us, still teaching of us, and giving life unto us, which is
the work of Christ, and not the Scripture. But this I will say of the Scripture
(which is what the Scripture says of it self) that it is an outward testimony
of God, his mind, Christ the Word, Faith and Eternal Life, Heaven and Salvation
to those that do believe; but not that it self is either of all these, or can
give unto us the knowledge of it; and that we might know the insufficiency of
it, Ioh. 9.39.40
Christ in it bids us search the Scriptures (for says he) in them you think to
have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me; and ye will not come
to me, that ye may have life: Yet this Scripture, as it is given by
inspiration, so it is profitable for doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
for reproof, for correction and instruction in righteousness, that the man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works: and not as it lies
in the letter, but as it is inspired, revealed or made manifest in our hearts
and minds by the Holy Ghost: for (says the Lord) I will put my law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people, Ier. 31.33, 34.
and cause them to walk in my statutes, of loving one another.

And the Word of God being once written in our hearts, it is then profitable
for us, to teach reprove, correct and instruct us, make us perfect in the
inward man, furnish us, fit and qualify us with gifts and graces unto all good
works, and no otherwise can it do it for us, but as it is within us.

And this is the honor and praise that I will give to the Word of God, and to
the Scripture, to sum it all up in God, in whom I desire to know, to live, to
act, and enjoy all things of God; and I desire not to speak, think, act or
maintain any thing that I have not the letter for, as well as the Spirit; the
truth and mystery of which letter no man knows till he has it revealed to him
by the Spirit, and Internal Word, that declares the Father plainly, which so
far as it speaks in me, Mat. 11.27.
and declares the mind of God to me, I shall not be silent.

And now, my Lord, I give you many thanks that you have so patiently heard me,
and given me liberty to speak for my self. Yet before I depart, I shall desire
to present one Scripture more, which I shall but only read, and so leave it to
the consideration of this honorable Court.

Said the Judge, I thought you had done.

Answ. If your Lordship desire it, I have.

Said the Judge, Nay, but we will hear your Scripture.

Answ. It is in the sixth of the Acts, from the 8. verse to the end.

And Steven full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the
people: then there arose certain of the Synagogue, which is called the
Synagogue of the Libertines, Cyreneans, Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia,
and of Asia, disputing with Steven, and they were not able to resist the wisdom
and the spirit by which he spoke; then they suborned men, which said, we have
heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and against God; and they
stirred up the people, and the Elders, and the Scribes, and came upon him, and
caught him, and brought him to the Council, and set up false witnesses, Acts
6.12.
which said, This man cease not to speak blasphemous words against this holy
place, and the Law; for we have heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth
shall destroy this place, and shall change the Customs which Moses delivered
us: and all that sat in the Counsel, looked steadfastly on him, saw his face as
it had been the face of an Angel.

And now I shall take my leave, according as the Apostles in times past have
done, who when they had suffered for the name of Christ, they departed from the
presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for his name (so shall I at this time) and (as) daily in the temple, and
in every house, Acts 5.41, 42.
they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ; so shall not I, my Lord,
cease to do the same, so far as God shall enable me; and so I take my leave of
your Lordship.

And paying the fees of the Court, I was discharged for that time.

CHAP. IX.
The Authors second appearing at Worcester, before Judge Nicholes and the
proceedings thereof: also his being bound from thence to Oxford; how, and for
what.

ANd I standing bound until the next Assizes at Worcester, which was then six
months to come, my accusers Ralph Nevil and Giles Collier in the mean time
employed men on purpose to follow me from place to place, where they heard I
preached or came, to enquire into my Doctrine, Life and Conversation, with
endeavors to get something more against me, to accuse me at the next Assizes
following, as my self and several persons well knew. And they hearing of some
difference in dispute that was between some Ministers and my self at Enstone in
Oxfordshire, where I had before been and preached, they came to an Inn in
Enston, and sent for the Ministers that differed with me, of whom they got a
certificate of some particulars which they said I there delivered, and which
they counted blasphemy.

And when I appeared at Worcester next Assizes, before Judge Nicholes, my
accusers gave to the Judge their certificate, which was as follows: First, That
I should say Christ ayed for his own sins as well as the Peoples. Secondly,
That there was no heaven and hell but what was in man. Thirdly, That
everlasting life should end in this life. But no witness sworn to it: And my
accusers having no witness there, they, with many fair speeches used to the
Judge desired him to bind me to appear at the next General Assizes holden at
Oxford, to answer to what was in this their certificate, and what more they in
the mean time could find against me: For, said they to the Judge, that being
his own Country, we shall there by that time get something more against him.
And the Judge willing to do my accusers a pleasure against me, as Festus did
the Jews against Paul, when he left him bound: So Judge Nicholes, without any
oath made by any man against me, demanded of me bail for my appearance at
Oxford Assizes which was six months after that, and would not suffer me to
speak for my self, but took part with my accusers.

Then I desired of him law and justice; and told him, that there being nothing
upon oath proved against me, there was no reason that I should stand any longer
bound

Said the Judge, if I will have it so, you shall stand bound, etc

Answ. My Lord, if you will make your will a Law. I cannot help that; but this
I know that as you use the exactness of the Law^n condemning those whom the Law
condemns, so you ought to use the exactness of the Law, in freeing those whom
the ^aw frees. But the Law at this time frees me, therefore I desire it.

No, said the Judge, you shall not be freed, for I understand that you take
upon you to preach and never stayed to take your degrees at the University; you
shall therefore appear at Oxford to answer to those things there. And said the
Judge, if I would take upon me to preach, I could preach as well as you, and
better, for I was bred up to more learning then you, and yet I will not take it
upon me, because I was not called to it, etc.

Answer, My Lord, I was called to Preach, and you were not; do you know what
the call is? if you did, you would not oppose it; and if it be the Lords will
that I must appear at Oxford to answer things as I have done at Worcester, his
will be done; for I remember what the Lord said unto Paul when he was bound
from place to place; Act. 23.11.
Be of good cheer Paul (said he) for as thou have testified of me in Jerusalem,
so must thou bear witness also at Rome; and now am I not only ready to be
bound, but to suffer for his name, and to bear witness of the Truth at Oxford,
as I have done at Worcester, and shall have peace in all things therein,
knowing it to be the Lords cause for which I stand bound. So giving in bayl,
and paying the Fees of the Court, I was dismissed until the next appearance at
Oxford.

CHAP. X.
The Authors trial at Oxford Assizes before Sergeant Green, the particular
accusations against him, and his answers to them, with the proceedings of the
Court, and how; also the ignorance of the Jury, and the malice of his
Adversaries discovered.

Upon the tenth day of March 1652. I appeared at Oxford Assizes, where Ralph
Nevil of Emload, and Giles Collier of Blockly in the County of Worcester
preferred a Bill of Indictment against me to the Grand Jury (as they said) for
blasphemy; the Charge therein is as follows.

The Charge in the Indictment.
FIrst. (That I should say) That Christ dyed for his own sins at well as the
Peoples.

Secondly. That there is no heaven and hell but what is in man.

Thirdly. That everlasting life should end in this life.

These are the things which by them I was Indicted for as blasphemy, and which
by the Grand Jury were so found and returned to the Court, that I was put upon
the trial thereof.

But before you come to the trial, I shall speak something of both Juries, as
of carnal natural men, and so ignorant of such things as they were to enquire
into concerning me; for the natural man knows not the things of God, neither
can he, because they are spiritually discerned: but sure for the most part they
were but carnal men, therefore in such things ignorant men, and against such
things malicious men, as has been known: being also men for the most part
known to be of the Bishops and Presbyterian opinion, very few of the
Independents, though there is but little difference between them in their
opinions concerning their judgments and knowledge in such things, of whom it
may be said and also proved, as has appeared by their practice, that they aim
more at their own worldly, private, and self-interests, then at the glory of
God, or good of other people, and which is well known have been, and gladly
would be persecutors of those that live godly in Christ Jesus, and that are not
the same with them in their opinions, as has appeared by some of them, which
both I and others have already known by experience: yet I love them still in
the same love as I love all others, and will the salvation of their souls as of
all others, though they may not so love me, but hate me, for that they never
saw or heard from me.

And therefore it is most evident, that they proceeded against me from the
malice they had to me, and not any thing known by me for any blasphemy there
was in it, for I am sure there was none, neither could any be found, either by
the Law of God or of man as first for the Law of God I am sure it is not, for
there is nothing in all the Scripture writ against it; however all blasphemy on
Gods part is forgiven, and Christ has already answered for it, in the behalf
of all men.

And secondly, for the Law of man or any late Act of Parliament made against
blasphemy, I am also sure that there is never a particular contained in this
Bill that comes within the compass of the Act: as for the first and last
particulars in the Bill, that Christ should die for his own sins, as well as
for the peoples, and that everlasting life should end in this life, there is no
mention of it made in the Act. Then for the second, that there is no heaven and
hell but what is in man, there is no mention made of it neither, as these words
are laid down and expressed in the Bill; for the A^^ says, If any shall avow
and affirm that there is no heaven and hell then it is blasphemy according to
that Act, but in this Bill, or in these words before mentioned, there is a
heaven and a hell acknowledged, though not such a one as some men would have,
but such a one as is in man, which is according to the Scripture, and some men's
experience; yet not that any other is denied, which by others may be proved,
and there being (in the Bill) a heaven and a hell acknowledged it therefore
comes not within the compass of the Act, and then cannot be found guilty by the
Act.

Again, the witnesses to the Bill do confess that these words fell in by way of
dispute or conference after Sermon, and were not spoke in Sermon, therefore
cannot be said to be avowed and affirmed, as the Judge did very well make it
appear in the trial: and which if the honest behavior of the Juries had
extended so far, they, before they had condemned it, should have examined
whether the words in the Bill did reach any Act of Parliament or no, that made
it appear to be what in the Bill it was said to be, without which they ought
not to have found it, though the Bill so said it; for let any Bill say what it
will, they are to examine it whether it be what in the Bill it is said to be or
no, as treason, blasphemy, felony, or whatsoever crime else in the Bill may be
expressed, without which they are not to find any Bill, and for want of this,
many a man and cause have suffered; and now how honest and just his Jury have
been in the examination of this Bill, according to Law and Justice, when they
found it, and brought guilty; let all men that read and hear it, Judge of it;
but so much for both the Juries; next the trial in the Court.

And then the Bill being read, the witnesses to the Bill were called to give in
their evidence, whose names are as follows.

First, one Beckingam of Enston in Oxfordshire, the Minister of the Parish
where these words for which I am accused were (as they say) spoke, and that
gave me leave to preach in his said Parish Church the whole day, but afterward
finding the people to be more taken with my Doctrine (which was the Doctrine of
free grace) then with his (that was not) and fearing his own should be no more
so well accepted, he cries out against mine as blasphemy, and so comes to
witness against me for it, who to excuse himself, said he came not as an
accuser, but was brought only as a witness, whose testimony was according to
the Bill.

The second witness was one Cannon of the same Town, a hearer of the said
Beckingam, who at that present approved very well of what I had said, as
himself afterward confessed to some others, and said it was the best Sermon
that ever he heard in his life, till his Master the said Minister of the Parish
had tutoured him and made him change his opinion, who then came as a witness
also, and whose conscience began to accuse him when he was to give in his
testimony (as it there appeared) for when he should have said life everlasting
ended in this life, he could not for his life bring forth the word everlasting
but said that this life ended in this life; and when the Judge asked him again,
he said, that when a man dyed his life ended but could not say the word
everlasting, till he had it given him in writing by my accusers Nevil of
Emload, and Collier of Blockly, two constant accusers of the brethren, and that
had been my accusers before at Worcester, as before was declared; who never
heard those things delivered by me at Ensto^, which they accused me for:
neither me, when I preached there though they here became my accusers, and did
also plead these things against me at Oxford: first to the Grand Jury, and
after to the Court, also laying many other things to my charge which I knew
not: but I believe it was with an intent to make good what they had before
said, which was, that they would not leave me till they had my life, which was
the same that the Jews said of Paul, Act. 23. ver. 12.29.
who made a vow that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed
Paul; but they were prevented, as these my accusers have been hitherto
concerning me. And Paul being accused of questions of their Law, Acts 26.31, 32.
as I now was, they kept him fast bound still for many years, and examined him
before many counsels, but in the end nothing being found against him worthy of
death or of bonds, and his accusers being weary of prosecuting, he was then
freed and set at liberty.

And the evidence being given, I was called to my answer, which begins with
these Propositions, as follows.

My Lord,
HAving here liberty to answer for my self, I therefore humbly beseech your
Lordship to grant me these particulars.

First. That seeing these my Adversaries are men of a contrary discovery of
God; and are here come against me, that they may fairly make it appear before
this honorable Court, whether they are men that have taken the engagement or
no, without which I know them not to have the benefit of the Law, and I speak
it for this reason (my Lord) because they being Ministers of Parishes, and I
knowing some of them not to observe the last thanksgiving day, with many others
before, which by the Parliament was appointed to be kept, makes me to question
this thing.

Secondly. That none might be suffered to speak any thing against me in this
honorable Court, till such time that they are sworn before this Court and my
face.

Thirdly. That those men which were hearers of me at Enston (the time when it is
said these words were delivered, and are here present) may be suffered to
speak; also a certificate which I understand is by them brought, touching the
things of my charge, and of my Doctrine then delivered, with another from
Oxford, and several men's names to them both, who are here ready to testify the
truth of them, that they also may be read in this Honorable Court, for the
satisfaction of many people; and thereby show the mistakes of my adversaries,
in the things which they accuse me.

Fourthly. That I may have liberty to speak for my self, in answer to every
particular accusation in my charge brought against me. And these things being
granted, I shall be thankful to your Lordship.

Said the Judge, what you desire shall be granted, and you shall have a fair
trial, but we shall not hear any Certificates read.

But the time being short, the night coming on, and I hastily called to answer
to my charge, being my self willing also to come to it, fearing I should be
straightened in time, and nothing doubting of my coming off, that some of those
things which were by me desired before to be granted, were passed by, and no
more remembered; and these Certificates before mentioned, being not then
permitted by the Judge to be read in the Court, it was therefore desired by
those that signed them, to have them printed with the rest, to show unto the
world what it was they set their hands unto; some having since charged them
with setting their hands to vindicate blasphemy: which Certificates are as
follow.


A Copy of a Certificate presented to the Court, by many of the godly and
well-affected people living about Enston, in the behalf of Richard Coppin.
WE whose names are here underwritten, were all at the hearing of Richard
Coppin, the time when he preached at Enston, and heard all that was then
delivered; yet heard not any thing delivered by him, but what was truth,
according to the Scripture and our experience, in which we were satisfied, and
should be glad to embrace the like opportunity, as to hear the like again, if
providence should so order it.

And whereas (through the mistake of some men in their apprehensions) he is or
may be accused for any thing then delivered: As,

First, for saying That Christ should suffer for his own sins as well as the
Peoples. We do hereby testify that he at that time did again and again say,
that Christ suffered not for them as acted by him, but as imputed to him, and
so they became his which he proved from these Scriptures, He was made (...) for
us; and, The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.

And Secondly, That he should say, There is no heaven and hell but what is in
man. He did not but did prove from Scripture, that there was a heaven and a
hell in man, not denying any other, which by others might be believed, as to
them.

And Thirdly, That he should say, That everlasting life should end in this
life. He did not; but said, That there was that written in Scripture, which was
said to be everlasting, yet had an end; as he proved from the ending of the
first Covenant and Priesthood under the Law, with the conditions thereof,
which was said to be for ever.

And Fourthly, as to his life and conversation, it has been so civil, honest
and respective toward all men, for all that ever we saw or knew of him that
none ever yet could accuse him; and therefore we do believe, that for the good
that is in him and proceeds from him, to the edifying of many people, he is
hated and persecuted. To all which particulars, we have here subscribed our
names, and shall be ready to take our Oaths.

A Copy of a Certificate presented to the Court by many of the godly and
well-affected people of Oxford, in the behalf of Richard Coppin.
WE the Inhabitants of the City of Oxford, whose names are here underwritten,
do hereby certify, That Richard Coppin has several times preached in Oxford,
and has been heard by us; who never heard any thing delivered by him, to our
knowledge, but what has been true and sound doctrine, according to the
Scripture, and the manifestation of God to us: And we do also certify, that
his life and conversation has ever been toward all sorts of men, honest, just
and upright, that ever we could see, know, or hear of him. Concerning which, we
have here subscribed our names, and shall be also ready to testify upon Oath.

The first particular Charged in the Indictment.
FIrst, That I should say, That Christ Jesus the Son of God, and Savior of the
world, did suffer for his own sins as well as the Peoples.

Answ. My Lord, for answer to this, I do affirm, and ever did since I knew and
declared any thing of God, That Jesus Christ the Son of the living God, and
Savior of the whole world, as he lives in God, never acted sin, but
imputatively all our sins became his, were laid upon him, John 3.17. 1 John
2.2. Heb. 10.5, 6.7. Romans 8.3. Heb. 2.14. Luke 1.74.
and reckoned to him by the Father; and Jesus Christ, as the Son, in obedience
to the Father, freely took them upon himself, clothed himself with our flesh,
sinful flesh, and so suffered for sin, overcame and condemned sin, and all
enemies in our nature; wherein his appearance in us, does manifest to us, that
he satisfied the Fathers justice, paid our score, and set us at liberty;
though Christ himself (which is, Mat. 1.23. 1 Pet. 2.22. 2 Cor 5.21. Isa. 53.
Romans 5.10. John 14.19
Emmanuel, God with us) did no sin, neither was guil found in his mouth (as
says the Scripture) yet he was made sin for us; and, The Lord has laid upon
him the iniquity of us all, and by his stripes are we healed: by his life are
we saved and do live; for (says Christ) Because I live, ye shall live also:
And now the head cannot be said to live without the body, nor the body without
the head; 1 Cor 11.3. Ephesians. 5.23, 29, 30. Heb. 5.3. and 7.27. 1 Cor. 12.12,
13, 27.
so not Christ without us, nor we without Christ, he being our head, and we
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones: and Christ suffering for
the sin of us ^his members) may also be said to suffer for the sin of his own
body, whose body we are: for (says Paul) Ye are the body of Christ, and
members in particular; and in this sense he may be said to suffer for his own
sins, which is no blasphemy to say.

Secondly, That there is no heaven and hell but what is in man.

Answ. My Lord, for answer to this, I do affirm, and ever did (as aforesaid)

First, That there is a God (according to the Scriptures) and that this God is
the God of truth, peace and love and the Father of it; who is called a Spirit,
and whose throne is in heaven, Isa. 66.1. 1 Timothy 6.16 1 King. 8.27. Jer. 23, 23,
24. Isa. 6.3.
and that dwells in light, and which the heaven of heavens cannot contain;
and who is not limited to any time, place, or person; but heaven and earth is
full of his glory. And so much for God what, and where he is.

Secondly, That there is a Devil (according to the Scripture) and this Devil is
the god of sin, as of this world, which darkens all appearances of good things;
2 Cor. 4.4. Rev. 20.1, 2, 3.
whose habitation is in hell and who is limited to time, place, and person,
and cannot go beyond his bounds, and is the Prince of darkness, and of death,
the power of the air, Ephesians. 2.20. John 8.44. Rev. 21.8. and 12.10. John 5.45.
Jude ver. 9.
the spirit ruling in the children of disobedience, which makes them (so long)
to continue the children of the Devil, who is a liar and the father of them,
and all lies and liars are of and in him, who shall together with him suffer in
hell fire; and who is also the accuser of the brethren, from whom all
accusations proceed, with all hatred, envy and malice, and has no part in
Christ; and that this Devil, Iam. 3.14, 15 John 14.36. 1 Pet. 5.8. Genesis 3.15.
Psalm. 110.5, 6
as a roaring lion, goes about from City to City, from County to County, or
from Worcester to Oxford, seeking whom he may devour; till the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah meets with him, breaks his head, destroys his power, frustrates
his design, and so ruins his Kingdom.

And Thirdly, That there is also a heaven for the righteous in Christ, to be
saved and made happy in life and salvation with Christ in God; and there is a
hell also for the wicked, in which they are and shall be tormented with the
Devil and false Prophets; but for the place, what and where it is, so far as
the Scripture is silent in it, we are to be silent in it, and cannot determine
of it any further then the Scripture does.

But this we may say with the Scripture first, concerning heaven, that the
Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: and, Behold
the Kingdom of God is within you; yet on high with God, Rom 14.1. Luke 17.20,
21.
above the earth or any creature

And as concerning hell, it is in Scripture compared to a grave; and we read
that Christ descended into it; and David says to God, Thou will not leave my
soul in hell (meaning the grave) nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption:
Psalm. 16.10.
and what this hell and grave is, he also calls it the lowest pit, or darkness
in the deep, in which he was shut up, and could not come forth, the wrath of
God lying so hard upon him, Psalm 88.
or the Lord hiding his face from him; and Jonah agrees with the same, who when
he was in the fishes belly, said, That he was in hell; For out of the belly of
hell (said he) cried I unto thee, and thou heardst my voice; Jonah 2.
for when thou had cast me into the deep (or depth of darkness) into the
midst of the sea (or under many troubles and afflictions) and the floods
compassed me about, all thy billows and thy waves passed over me; then I said,
I am cast out of thy sight (or saw thee in wrath) yet I will look again toward
thy holy Temple, where I shall behold thee in love, when thou shall raise me
up. Amos 9.2.
And in Amos the Lord says, Though they dig into hell, thence shall my hand
take them, and your covenant with death and hell shall be d^sanulled, says the
Lord: But it is most sure that there is a hell for the wicked, as there is a
heaven for the godly, and all that are in Christ Jesus. And for this, let us
consider of one Scripture more, in Matthew. 25. where heaven is said to be at the
right hand of God, and hell at the left hand, compared with Psalm. 16.11. In thy
presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore
(meaning in heaven with God) and how those on the right hand, and that have
increased their talents, enter into the joy of the Lord, as into heaven, where
they are at rest for ever; when those on the left hand, and that have not
increased their talents, go into utter darkness, as into hell, where is weeping
and gnashing of teeth, pining and mourning for sin, and where they are at no
rest.

And thus there is a heaven, wherein eternal life is enjoyed by Christ and all
his: and there is a hell, wherein everlasting punishment is inflicted upon the
Devil, and all his: But let us use the Scripture expression for it, if we shall
declare it, which is according to the mind of God.

Thirdly, That everlasting life should end in this life.

Answ. My Lord, for answer to this, I do affirm, That I never (then, and so)
said the words; and I do also affirm, That everlasting life with Christ in God,
shall never have an end; and that believers, or the righteous in Christ go to
it, as to God, enjoy it as God, and still remain in it, as in God, with Christ,
Colos. 3.4. John 3.36.
yea, after they have been dead, according to the Scriptures; as the wicked go
to hell and damnation, and as some who believe not, are already in it: And thus
life everlasting with Christ in God shall never have an end.

Object. But for a further clearing of this, some may yet say, Is there not a
life which shall have an end, and yet said to be everlasting?

Answ. I answer, That there is a life according to manifestation spoken of in
Scripture, which seems to have an end, or be made perfect in another life, and
yet said to be everlasting; as the life of works and of nature ends, and is
made perfect in the life of grace; the life of grace ends, and is made perfect
in the life of glory; the lesser still swallowed up of the greater, the lower
of the higher, the darker of the lighter, the weaker of the stronger, to be
made perfect; and so at last all things end and are made perfect in God.

Object. But how is that which ends said to be everlasting?

Answ. For further answer to this it may also be said, That if the first
Covenant and Priesthood under the Law, with the conditions thereof, Genesis 17.
Exo. 40.13; 14, 15,
was said to be everlasting (as that it was and is during the time of that
administration unto us) then the life which we lived in obedience to that
Covenant, while under it (which was a life of works, of fear, and of bondage)
was as everlasting as that; but when that first Covenant and Priesthood, with
the conditions thereof, according to that administration, which was said to be
everlasting (or was made perfect in a second, a new, and more heavenly) then
the life which we lived while under the first, did end also with the first, and
so with the same made perfect in a second, a new, and more heavenly life, as in
life of grace and freedom, faith and love, under the second Covenant, changed
and brought in, confirmed and sealed by the blood of the Lord Jesus, whose life
we then live, and are justified by: for where there is a change of a Covenant,
Law, Statute, Ordinances, Conditions, Administrations or Dispensations, there
is a change of a life also to the creature, even that life which we are then
bound by that Law in our consciences to live; which is a change from a Covenant
of works, to a Covenant of free grace, Romans 2.28, 29.
or from the circumcising of the foreskin of the flesh in the letter, to that
of the heart, and in the spirit; which Covenant it is that God has made with
us (according to the Scripture) and which we are to live; Heb. 8.
For after these days (says he) a new Covenant will I make, etc. therefore a
new life will he give.

And that the word (Everlasting) and (For ever) has an end with us, I shall
yet prove from several Scriptures; for in some Scriptures it is said, The earth
shall endure for ever; as Eccles. 1. in others it is said, The earth shall be
dissolved and burnt up: now that earth which shall have no end, must be that
which had no beginning; for whatsoever has a beginning, has also an end; and
what that earth is which has neither beginning nor end, the Preacher in
Ecclesiastes will tell you.

But there is a earth which shall have an end, and that is the earth which the
Devil feeds upon, Genesis 3.14.
and inhabits in, to wit, flesh, sin and corruption, the old man in us, that is
of the earth earthy, together with all carnal wisdom, 1 Cor. 15.47.
self-righteousness, flesh, form, and formality, as that which is not spirit
and truth, and that cannot endure the fire (even God when he appears in
righteousness) why this shall be burnt up, Heb. 12.29.
consumed and scattered before the Lord as dust before the wind; though it is
said to be for ever, and everlasting; as in Habackkuk 3.6. Yet when the Lord
shall so come in his glorious brightness, as is there spoken of, then shall all
things of man, and that is earthy, be scattered, bow and melt before him (as is
written) Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his
feet; he stood and measured the earth, he beheld and drove asunder the Nations,
and the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow; that
is, the mountains of fear, sin, death, the Devil, and men's pretended holiness,
heaven and happiness, which is filthiness when out of its place; Psalm 64.6.
this shall all be scattered and melt before the Lord, as mountains standing
between the Lord and us, and as so many false gods in the way of the true God,
which has been said to last for ever; yet these shall pass away, and be
removed out of their places into no place, but fly away from the face of him
that sits upon the throne, whose name is called Faithful and true, and that
reigns himself for ever and ever, world without end.

And thus one life ends in another life, the life of the old man in the life of
the new man; or we changed from life to life, from glory to glory, from one
everlasting to another, til we can change no more; Rev, 20.11.
which shows that there are more changes then one, and more everlastings then
one (as to men) and so more lives then one, which men are said to live, and be
changed from, till they are changed from all things into God, which is their
last change.

A word of Conclusion to the Judge.
AND now lastly, I cannot but add a few words more, and therein affirm both
before God and men, that ever since I knew any thing of God, my whole design
both in writing, speaking and walking according to the utmost of my power
received of God, has ever been, and I hope ever shall be, still to set forth
the glory of God, the advancement of Christ's Kingdom, peace and righteousness
among men, and the throwing down of Antichrist, the Devil and his Kingdom, with
all deceivableness, and unrighteousness of men and whatsoever else is and has
been contrary to the public peace of this Nation, under which we should be
protected, and no longer do I desire or shall endeavor to write or speak a
word, then that it should not tend to this, even the advancement of the Kingdom
of the Lord Jesus Christ, without partiality, or aiming at any private or
self-interest of my own or an^ others distinct, but for the public good of all
men, whom I desire and do still endeavor in love to serve being made willing
to spend and be spent for them, notwithstanding the many reproaches, revilings
and persecutions I meet withal; yet still that I would continue a faithful
servant to the truth in all things, by which I am made free to serve in love
and for which I am not only ready to be bound, but to suffer.

All which particulars according to your Lordships desire, I do most humbly
present you with before this honorable Court, and so leave them to your
consideration, to do as the Lord of heaven and earth shall direct you who works
all things according to the counsel of his own will, and will glorify himself
in all things that himself does.

And now what shall I say more? why let the Lords will be done, whether in life
or death, in freedom or imprisonment, according to his own will and pleasure be
it, into whose blessed arms of mercy, love, joy, and peace. I do freely give up
my self, and shall for ever lodge in his bosom of life and salvation, there to
rest and abide for ever.

While I was making my answer, my accusers with many others of their consorts,
did all the time of my pleading interrupt me, urging many things to me to
ensnare me, and to incense the Judge and Jury against me, till the Judge
reproved them for it, who after he had heard my answer, and understanding it,
knowing it also not to come within the compass of any late Act of Parliament,
and withal perceiving the malice of my enemies, did as the Lord had directed
him, who before the petty Jury went forth to consult upon their verdict (who
understood it not themselves, neither what they had to do in such a business,
being all ignorant men both of the Law, and of such things) acquainted them
with the truth of the business, that so Justice and Equity might take place,
whose directions were according to what follows.

Judge. You of the Jury, you have heard the evidence, and you have heard the
answer of his defense, which if what he has said to us be his meaning, it is
very good, and what I believe my self to be truth, and we are to take his sense
and meaning upon the words, and not another, the words being his own: but
should we take the very express words of the Indictment, without a
qualification of them, yet it comes not under the Law, or Act of Parliament,
according to the rule of which Act we are to go; as for the first thing, that
he should say Christ dyed for his own sins, it comes not near it, though indeed
the second concerning heaven and hell comes something near it, yet not so near
as to be found within the compass of it; for the Act says, if a man avow and
affirm that there is no heaven and hell; but that he does not, and this also
was by way of dispute or conference after Sermon, as you see the witnesses to
the Bill do confess; and what is said in dispute, cannot be said to be avowed
and affirmed, for it may fall in by way of an Argument, etc. And as to the last
words, that everlasting life should end in this life, there is nothing
mentioned in the Act against it; therefore we are not to meddle with it, and
you are not to bring him in guilty for any thing he is here indicted, it being
not within the compass of the Act.

And thus with other words to that purpose, did the Judge speak to the Jury
before they gave in their verdict, which none that heard it but thought it had
been sufficient to have satisfied any honest Jury in the world, had they been
but rational men; yet it satisfied not these, for they maliciously brought me
in guilty, who were prompt to it by my accusers and others that followed them
forth of the Court, contradicting the words of the Judge, saying that they were
not to take notice of what the Judge had said, neither of my answer, but the
Bill. Being asked the reason why they brought me in guilty; they said they
could do no less, they were so followed by the Priests from place to place and
importuned to it, that they could be at no quiet for them unless they did it. A
wise Jury, to be sworn and then swayed by other men! but this they did to do
the Priests a pleasure against me, as Festus did to do the Jews a pleasure
against Paul, Acts 25.9.

Then the Judge examined them what crime they found me guilty of: they answered
they could not tell what but according to the evidence; then said the Judge,
does the thing evidenced come within the compass of the Act? who again caused
the Act to be read to them and bid them take notice of it; yet they could not
tell what crime I was guilty of, but still said according to the Evidence; then
the Judge asked them what the Evidence was, and they could not declare it tell
they were told it: and now how unfit these men are to be made a Jury of such
things, let all men that hear it take notice.

Then the Judge as before (perceiving their ignorance) showed them how it came
not within the compass of the Act, and therefore ought not to be found; then
said the Jury, we will referr it to you: Nay said the Judge, I must have your
verdict: Not guilty then, said some of the Jury; others said guilty; what are
you divided (said the Judge) I will not receive your verdict till you are
agreed, and unless you will agree upon it, you shall be shut up together in one
room all night, where you shall have neither bread nor beer, fire nor candle.

But when they heard this, they began to murmur within themselves why they
should not agree, yet the judge willing to show them favor, did only rebuke
them, bidding them to bring in their verdict the next morning by eight of the
clock, upon pain of twenty pound a piece, and where I was then also my self to
appear, and there according to the request of the Judge I was to give in the
heads of my answer in writing, which then did, and it was there read to the
satisfaction of the Court.

Then the Jury being again called, before they gave in their Verdict, used the
name or one Veysie of Tainton near Burford, which (said they) desires to be a
witness against him, for saying that Christ was the cause of Cains fall.

No said the Judge ^ will hear no such malicious fellows, but will keep close
to the ^ndictment; and you of the Jury are to mention none, but to give in your
Verdict: then said they, guilty.

Now the Judge well knowing the Law, and how that those things came not within
the compass of it; also perceiving the malice of my accusers and the ignorance
of the Jury in such things, as was then manifested; and himself willing to do
justice, took bayl for my appearance at the next Assizes, at which my accusers
began to fall mad, crying out again for my imprisonment, banishment or
silencing, but the Judge told them he could do neither, but must go according
to the Law, and the Law did not require any such thing.

Then my accusers to lay another foundation again to ensnare me, having missed
the former, presented to the Judge a paper, wherein were many particular points
of their own judgment, that he should prevail upon me to set my hand to it, as
that which I would own for truth, thereby to confirm theirs, and I never more
to preach against the same; but this being offered to me, I refused it, and
desired not to set my hand to other men's writings, but to what I write my self,
unless I may read it, and also find it to be truth according to the Scripture
and my apprehension; then said the Judge (in the presence of my accusers) take
it and read it; which I did and gave it to the Judge again; and because my
accusers with others, reported that I set my hand to all that they had writ, as
a recantation of what my self formerly writ, and declared: therefore for the
satisfaction of other people, the proving of them liars, and clearing my self
in it, it is here published both what they writ, and also what part thereof I
refused, and what I signed distinctly as follows.

A Paper written by my Accusers and presented to the Judge for me to sign,
which I would not.
WHereas at several passages in a printed book that goes forth in my name, and
in a public discovery at Enston about June last, several persons have been
offended, and been induced to believe that I am guilty of holding and
publishing blasphemous opinions; for the satisfying all such persons, and
clearing my self, I do heartily and sincerely profess and declare against them,
as follows.

First, That Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, being eternal God and
equal with the Father, did in the fullness of time take to himself man's nature;
yet without sin; being holy, harmless, undefiled, as the Scripture says.

Secondly, The Lord Jesus Christ for discharging the office of Mediatorship
whereunto he was called by his Father, did perfectly fulfill the Law, endured
the shameful and cursed death of the cross, but not for himself, being
perfectly free from sin, but that he might satisfy for the sins of his people.

Thirdly, The third day he rose from the dead with the same body with which he
suffered; with which also he ascended into heaven, and there sits at the
right hand of his Father.

Fourthly, The bodies of men after death return to dust, but their souls which
die not, return to God who gave them; the souls of the righteous are received
into the highest heaven where they enjoy God in glory, waiting for the full
redemption of their bodies; and the souls of the wicked are cast into hell,
where they remain in torment, reserved to the Judgment of the great day.

Fifthly, At the last day such as are found alive, shall be changed; and all
that are dead shall be raised up with the same body, which shall be united
again to their souls for ever.

Sixthly, God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness by Jesus Christ, in which day the Apostles and Angels shall be
judged, and all persons that have lived upon the earth shall appear before the
Tribunal of Christ, to give an account of their thoughts, words and deeds, and
to receive according to what they have done in their bodies, whether good or
evil.

These things I believe, and do not publish any thing contrary to them; and for
any passages that have fell from me contrary to these ignorantly,
inconsiderately, or wilfully I do profess my self troubled at and ashamed of
but this I excepted against, and would not set my hand unto as follows.

My Lord, there are some things which I may set my hand unto, but there are
some things that are false and I shall not set my hand to that, unless they
will here make it good by Scripture before this honorable Court.

Then said the Judge to me; What is that you say is false which you except
against?

Answ. My Lord, first wherein they say several passages have been written and
spoken by me, to the inducement of several persons to believe that I am guilty
of holding and publishing blasphemous opinions, which they would now have me to
declare against, and profess my self ashamed of: when I know nothing that ever
I spoke or writ since the time of my call, that I went forth to declare any
thing of God that was so or ever could be proved blasphemy by them, though they
have endeavored to do it, therefore not to be declared against by me.

My Lord; Another thing in the fifth particular which they declare as their
judgment is, that the same body which dies, shall after death be so raised
again and united to the soul for ever; which thing is false my Lord, and I know
no Scripture to prove it; if there be, let them produce it, for here they are.

Then the Judge (looking upon them) asked if there were no such Scripture; but
they were silent and answered not a word; then Justice Jenkins who sat upon
the bench, undertook to answer for them, and said, there is such a Scripture:
produce it you then, said I, and let me see it, or I shall not believe it; but
he was silent also, and there was no man to be found that could show that
Scripture; then I instanced a Scripture in the 1 Cor. 15. to the contrar^ that
the same body was not to rise again, but God gives it a body as pleases him,
which body none of them yet knew.

Then the Judge perceiving that those things which by them were written, and by
me excepted against, could not by them nor any other be proved, he commanded
them to be crossed forth before their faces, and they had nothing to say for
themselves which was to the great shame and disgrace of my accusers, and others
of their tribe, that those things which they have so long held forth and
maintained to the people for truth, and as their judgments, that this should
now be crossed out before their faces as an error; sure as bad a thing as ever
they could have done against themselves in things of that nature; which makes
it to appear, that the greatest blasphemer cried blasphemy first, and these
things being crossed out, I set my hand to the rest, which is as follows, and
which to my knowledge I never declared any thing contrar^ to, according to the
Scriptures, and in a spiritual sense, in which sense we are to understand all
things of that nature.

The part culars which I signed.
FIrst, that Jesus Christ the only begotten son of God, being eternal God and
equal with the Father, did in the fullness of time take to himself man's nature
yet without sin, being holy, harmless, undefiled, as the scripture says.

Secondly, The Lord sesus Christ for discharging the office of Med^atorship,
whereunto he was called by his Father, did perfectly fulfill the Law, endured
the shameful and cursed death of the cross, but not for himself, being (as he
was) perfectly free from sin; but that he might satisfy for the sin of his
people.

Thirdly, The third day he rose from the dead with the same body with which he
suffered, with which also he ascended into heaven, 1 Cor. 15.
and there sits at the right hand of his Father (but not with flesh and
blood.)

Fourthly, The bodies of men after death return to dust, but their souls which
die not return to God who gave them; the souls of the righteous are received
into the highest heaven, where they enjoy God in glory, waiting for the full
redemption of their bodies; and the souls of the wicked are cast into hell,
where they remain in torment reserved to the Judgment of the great day.

Fifthly, At the last day, such as are found alive shall be changed, and they
that are dead shall be raised up.

Sixthly, God has appointed a day wherein he will Judge the world in
righteousness by Jesus Christ, which day the Apostate Angels shall be Judged,
and all persons that live upon the earth, shall appear before the tribunal of
Christ, to give an account of their thoughts, words and deeds, and to receive
according to what they have done in their bodies, whether good or evil.

These things I do believe (according to the Scriptures) and never publish any
thing contrary to them.

Richard Coppin.

CHAP. XI. The Authors second appearing at Oxford Assizes before Judge Hutton,
and what was there done.
I According to my engagement appeared the second time at the general Assizes
holden at Oxford, there expecting again to have seen the faces of my former
accusers, they having before said they would follow me to death; but they
finding nothing against me came not there; and proclamation being made in the
Court for my discharge, and none other having any thing against me to declare,
one Keat the then Sheriff for that County, sitting in the Court, being of a
bitter spirit, and also an enemy to truth, as he then appeared, stood up as one
among the rest of the accusers and informers, saying that he could declare
something against me, which was spoke in London; but when he was asked what it
was, no particular could be mention, but said that he had heard very strange
things declared by me at S. Dunstons Church in London, before a great
Congregation of people of great quality, to the great dishonor of God, and the
people disturbance, as said this informer Mr. Keet, who earnestly importuned
the Judge to restrain me from preaching; in answer to which the Judge told him
that a man's liberty was precious, and there was no reason any man should be
restrained from his liberty therein, by any man's words whatsoever, unless oath
were made against him that he had offended the Law. Therefore (said the Judge)
I cannot do it upon your words, nor any man's else; for then I should be
partial, and I came not only to bind, but to free men

Then the Informer Mr. Keat by name receiving those repulses from the Judge,
was silent, and sat him down with shame, and then the bitter spirits of others
in the University, whose mouths were ready to be opened in malice against me,
were quashed, my freedom ordered, and my enemies ashamed.

CHAP. XII.
The Authors humble appeal to his Highness Oliver Lord Protector of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, as a General redress for all people.

My Lord,
FOrasmuch as it has pleased the Lord of Lords to call you to this high place
of Protectorship (under himself) and according as he shall protect, counsel,
guide and direct you, as he did Christ and the rest of the Kings of Israel, so
you may act like them in walking before the people to do justice among them;
For by him Kings reign, and Princes decree justice, Prove. 8.15.
who himself reigns in them to be their wonderful Counselor.

And now, as according to the counsel of the Lord, your Highness has been
pleased to declare your self both by promise and oath to seek the peace,
freedom and liberty of the people of this and other Nations against oppression
and tyranny, and to protect them in their just rights and privileges,
according to the mind of God written in Scripture for Christian Religion, that
then (in the Lords time) and as he himself shall appear to go before you, and
act in you, so you may according to his directions follow him in persuit
thereof, bringing glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, and good
will toward men.

Which you shall, so far as you follow the counsel of the Lord, and not of men,
Isa. 30.1.
who are to be counseled by you, and not you by them; and men in their counsel
toward you, are only to assist you in carrying on that work which the Lord
shall advise and counsel you in; whose counsel shall stand, and he will do all
his pleasure, when men and their counsel shall fail: for as he himself has
chosen you, and shall put his spirit within you to instruct and counsel you; so
will he himself be with you to protect you, that you in him may protect his
people, and therein become a nursing father (in him) to them, to increase among
them their just freedom and liberty in the Lord Jesus. Isa. 49, 23.


That this freedom of theirs, as it is in the Lord, and wrought by the Lord is
not to be settled or established upon any one sort of people, under any one form
of Religion whatsoever, any further then the Lord has called them, and shall
himself establish it in them, but all are to have like freedom, according to
the several Dispensations or Administrations they yet appear to live under, 1
John 2.12, 13, 14.
according to the measure of the gift of God, in their several places, or
degrees of callings; as they are either children, young men, or fathers in the
faith of Christ.

And you, like Christ to be a nursing Father to them all, without having
respect to particular times, places, persons and interests, or any degree of
calling whatsoever distinct, but to assist and protect all whose practice is
not licentious, and who in their ways are not destructive to true love, peace
and unity among men.

And how you are not to hinder any, but to further all that does any thing of
the work of the Lord, for the glory of God, and the good of one another; and so
according to the example of Christ, Isa. 42.1, 2, 3, 4.
you are not to break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, to
destroy those for whom Christ dyed; but rather to save them, and as much as in
you lies follow peace with all men, seek to increase and blow up the coals of
divine love among them, that so both you and they may alike walk together in
the light of God, and live in the power of divine life, and so be gathered up
with the arms, and carried in the bosom of him that gently leads those that are
with young, Isa. 40.11.
and by the same power may be enabled to do the same work of love one for
another, Mal. 2 10. Acts 17 28 Ephesians. 4.6.
to live and act in the same life, that shall bring joy and comfort to each
other, having all one God, and one Father, in whom we all live, move, and have
our being: and who is over all, through all, and in all, God blessed for ever.

And now that your Highness cannot be ignorant of the oppression and cruelty
that the freeborn people of the Lord yet lie under, and is still continued
against them by a generation of oppressive people that would still Lord it over
their lives, liberties and estates; and endeavor to bring all men to their own
ways and customs, and so keep their poor brethren in bondage and slavery still
under them, never suffering the freedom of Christ to break forth, in and among
his people; but instead of increasing the light and liberty thereof, they
rather seek to quench and inthral it.

But this I know, and therefore am at peace in my self, that the Lord Jesus
will suddenly arise with deliverance for his people, to bring them out of their
captivity, into their glorious liberty, and so restore peace to all men, and
himself then reign as a Prince of peace in all Nations.

This work of the Lord, for the glory of God, and good of all people, which is
now to be done, you know to be recorded in the 58. Chapter of the Prophet
Isaiah, from the 6. verse to the end; and the reward that will follow the
accomplishment of this work: which work, says the Prophet, is, to loose the
bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go
free, etc. and that ye break every yoke; also to deal thy bread to the hungry,
and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house; when thou see
the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thy own
flesh, etc. then shall thy light break fo^th as the morning, and thine health
shall spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and
the glory of the Lord shall be thy reward, etc.

That then according (as this is to be done,) as God shall enable you, and in
every thing fit and qualify you for this work of his, so you may as a just and
impartial Governor in the hands of the Lord, be pleased to come forth in a
general redress for all people to make good this good work of the Lord, which
he has been pleased to put you upon the promise of for the deliverance of his
people, that so under your protection they may live securely, walk cheerfully,
and sit down contentedly in that which makes most for the peace of their own
souls, the safety of their bodies, and the happy success one of another in the
Lord Jesus, to the end that God both from your self, and all others, may in all
things have all the glory; his people, peace and freedom one with another, and
you the reward of a true servant of the Lord

And therefore now inasmuch as by your Highness (in whose hands under God the
power of this and other Nations is at this time seated, the Lord has been
pleased to promise a performance of this work, give me leave to proceed in this
humble appeal to your Highness, to set before you some abuses offered against
the Laws and Liberties of the people now under your protection, as will appear
in that which follows; and how according to my experience the people of God
have always suffered for the testimony of Jesus, in pressing after, and walking
in their liberty in him, which those that knew it not, ever did, and still do
oppose.

And that upon consideration thereof, you may to the uttermost of your
endeavor in the Lord Jesus, stand by his people to relieve them, protect,
support and defend them in their just rights and privileges, their lives,
liberties and estates, against their enemies that oppose them, you will
evermore engage the hearts of the free born people of the Lord, in love to
serve you, as you in love and the presence of God shall serve them* and the God
of love and peace* give patience to all his people to wait upon the Lord, for
what he in his own time shall be pleased to bring forth by you: Isa. 28.16.
and then he that believes, shall not need to make haste.

CHAP. XIII.
The sufferings of Christ, his Prophets, and Apostles, together with the
Authors sufferings, briefly discovered and presented to his Highness, in his
humble Appeal.

My Lord,
ACcording to the Declaration of Scripture, we find, that whatsoever of truth
has at any time been held forth or declared by any to whom God has made
himself known, that the publishers thereof were sufferers therein: This we find
in the truth it self, the Lord Jesus; for declaring himself in love to men, was
always a sufferer by men, who understood him not; Mat 2.
for from the first day of his birth, that he was but reported to be the Son of
God, did Herod, together with the chief Priests and Pharisees, send forth after
him to destroy him; and the more of God or that divine life there appeared in
him, the more did they seek to take his life away from him; not for the envy
they had to his person only, but to that life which was indeed the life of God
manifested in him, which life they knew not; For had they known him, they would
not have crucified the Lord of glory: but they knew him not, neither would they
own his life, and power to be of God, but rather of the Devil; for said they,
He casts out Devils through the Prince of Devils, Mat. 9 34.
etc. and Christ himself tells us, that so they did by his Prophets that were
before him, some they stoned, and put to death; Mat. 5.11.12
others they persecuted; even so is it now.

The like appeared in his Apostles, who after their conversion, that they were
called to the preaching of the Gospel, what sufferings, stripes, bonds and
imprisonments, did they undergo for their faithfulness therein? and thus has
it been ever since to this day, with those that have been faithful, 1 Cor. 4.9,
10 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16
in holding forth any thing of the love of God manifest in them, by Jesus
Christ, for the glory of God, and peace of all men.

And now since the day that the Lord Jesus had made himself known to me, and I
by the power of his living in me, as the least and worst of all Saints, have
been made to go forth, proclaim, publish and declare freel^ to the world and
sinners, the unchangeable love of the Lord Jesus, according to that measure of
the gift given me by him: I have uffered with Christ, in exercising the gifts
of Christ, which according to the manifestation of that life and power in me, I
have published and declared, not for price nor reward of men^ but freely, and
in love to the Lord Jesus and his people, as can be witnessed by the people of
those parts into which I have come: And to satisfy any that shall question the
truth of what I hold concerning God, and the things of God, and that have not
at all heard me speak thereof, and now have any desire to know my principle, Of
the several Books written by me.
judgment or doctrine therein. I shall direct them to several Books of my
writing now extant; the one is called Devine Teachings, in which there are
three together; the other, Man's Righteousness examined, and wherein found too
light, reproved; a third, Saul smitten, for not smiting Amaleck, etc. a fourth,
A Man Child born, or God man fest in flesh: And what is therein written, is
the same that I still am in judgment, and for which I have hitherto suffered,
been indicted, falsely accused, slandered reproached and reviled, and for
several Assizes kept bound, by a party of the Ministers of England, and enemies
of Christ, who live by the gain they make of the people; and who have appeared
to be the chief instruments and agents for the promoting of wars and divisions
amongst men, to advance their own interests; with whom I have also had several
disputes, contentions and controversies about Religion, I being engaged by
them, who sought thereby the overthrow both of me and the things of God
revealed in me; but they not prevailing against me, have much abused me, and
several times charged me with blasphemy, brought me before Rulers, Counsels,
and Judges of Assizes, twice at Worcester, and twice at Oxford: where they laid
their several accusations of blasphemy (as they said) against me; but could
never be proved by any Law to be so: whereupon, according to the will of God, I
was still delivered, both by Law and Judges, the Lord enabling me to speak for
my self; and also working upon the hearts and understandings of the Judges, to
understand the answer by me made, and thereby free me from the cruelty of my
enemies, though still found guilty by the Juries, who themselves understood it
not (being also prompt by my adversaries, as several witnesses can testify)
and for which the said Juries were reproved by the Judges in the open Court:
The particulars of which trials I shall present to the world more at large
hereafter.

Thus for my faithfulness to the truth, have I suffered by my enemies, who
behind the backs of the Judges did accuse them for injustice, concerning my
deliverance, when according to law and justice they did act and that these my
enemies have since vowed (by me, Acts 23.12.
as the Jews did by Paul) they would follow me to death, as can also be proved
by several witnesses; for the performance of which vow, and to a further
discovery of their malice toward me, and the truth revealed in me, they yet
cease not to follow me, with endeavors to make good this their evil intentions
against me; but rather then they will want something whereby to accuse me (for
which they have watched daily over me, Luke 6.7.
as the Scribes and Pharisees did over Christ) Judge Green (one of the former
Judges, being dead) they reported they would again revive some of the former
accusations against me, and so again bring me to a trial thereof: Their illegal
and unjust proceedings will appear in that which follows, in the reading of
which, I shall humbly crave and desire your patience.

CHAP. XIV.
A further discovery to his Highness, of the malicious practices, ignorant
censurs, and illegal proceedings of two Justices and certain ministers at Stow
on the Old in^ locestershiere, March 19. 1653. against the suffering Author.

My Lord,
Upon the ninteenth day of March last past, being the Lords day, I (through the
desire and earnest request of very many of the Town and Parish of Stow on the
Old in the County of Gloucester, and by several other of the neighbor Parishes
and Towns near adjacent) was at Stow, where I was to preach, to answer the
desires of those people that were there, and that desired me to come, where and
at which time I went to the Church or common me ting place in the morning and
heard one Mr. Elmes then Minister of Winchcombe preach who there delivering
something contrary to truth, and having ended his Sermon that the people were
departing, I with his consent, propounded to him a question as follows.

Sir, Inasmuch as by the providence of God and the civil request of many
people, I am here this day, and at this time a hearer of you, I shall, if I may
in love be admitted in the afternoon, be a speaker, if not in this place, then
in some other place where the Lord shall direct us; for to that end and purpose
was I invited to Town this day.

He answered, that he himself was a stranger and could not grant it, but said
that he thought I had had something to say against his Doctrine: to which I
answered, I had; and so showing him his error, I declared against it, that the
people might not be deceived by it.

For that which he said was this, as the whole Congregation can witness that
God feeding his people Israel as a Lamb in a large place, was his leaving of
them to themselves, a letting them loose to all manner of sin and wickedness to
run head long into hell; which appearing to me so gross an error, I could not
let it pass; but answered, that God feeding his people Israel as a Lamb in a
large place, was an enlargement of the manifestation of his love and favor to
them in Christ Jesus, in their return to him from their backsliding condition;
it was a bringing of them into that City and Sion of the living God, Isa. 33.21.
where the glorious Lord himself will be unto us a place of broad Rivers and
streams, and then shall we run the way of his Commandments, (and not our own)
when he has enlarged our hearts; and people fed by God as Lambs, cannot be
said to be left of God or forsaken, but are fed with Christ who is their daily
bread from heaven, and God cannot be said to feed his people, Psalm. 119.32.
Isa. 24 14.
when he is said to leave them; but according to your own principle you will
say, that those that are let loose unto all manner of sin and wickednesses, to
run headlong into h^ll, are not fed by God but the Devil.

And now answer being thus made in as civil a manner as could be, and there
being ^resent one John Crofty and Richard Aylworth, Justices of the Peace for
that County, who hearing this my speech made to their Minister, were much moved
and enraged in their spirits against me, as appeared by their rude and uncivil
carriage at that time toward me who also said I should have spoke to their
Minister in private and not in public; to which I answered that no time and
place was so fit as then and there, the people being present; for truth seeks
no corners; whereupon the said Justices to carry on their design of a further
proceeding against me, did immediately charge the Constables with me,
commanding them to bring me into the Ministers house, where they and Elmes the
said Minister was, and so commanding the doors to be shut, they desired I would
answer some questions which they should propound; I told them that what they
had to propound in love and for edification to any, I should a^sw^r them; which
was as follows.

First Question; Whether I did believe there was a God, and a Devil-a heaven
and a hell? I answered, that there was both God and Devil, Heaven and Hell, 1
Cor. 8.5, 6.
salvation and damnation: and I further said that there were also Gods many and
Lords many in the world, known as to men and worshipped by men, Acts 17.23.
though but one true God and him most men did ignorantly worship.

Another question they asked me, whether God would save all men or no? I
answered, that what the Scripture said I would say; and the Scripture said of
God, that he will have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6.
and to come unto the knowledge of the truth; for there is one God and one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom
for all, to be testified in due time; but we see that all men are not yet
saved; for all men have not yet this testimony, or do not yet believe, for he
that believes not is condemned already, John 3.18. 1 Ioh 5 10. Rev. 1 5.
and he that does believe has the witness in himself and this witness is
Christ.

A third question was; Whether I did believe there were three persons in the
Trinity? The Trinity I acknowledged; and demanded of them what they meant by
person, whether a material body of flesh and bones or not? To which they did
not answer; but asked me again, if there were not three distinct beings? I
answered, 1 Ioh 5.7, 8.
that according to Scripture there were three that bear witness in heaven, and
three that bear witness on earth, and each three did agree in one; so that
there was but one being of all things, and that being was eternal; then they
asked me what the three that bear witness in heaven were, and whether they were
not three persons? I answered that according to Scripture they were known by
the name of Father, Son and Spirit, and were three in respect of manifestation
to the creature, and yet but one in union and being with the Creator and Father
of all things: they again asked me how far these three were distinct one from
another? I answered, that so far as the Father is from the Son, Ioh 14 10, 11.
and the Son from the Father, so far are they distinct one from another.

And thus they provoking and urging me with many questions, sought to ensare
me, as it is written the Scribes and Pharisees did by Christ, Luke 11.53, 54.
laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of his mouth that they
might accuse him: but I answered as the Lord did enable me, and according to
Scripture.

And now I having thus answered to their questions, and they therein receiving
nothing against me, told me that I had formerly spoken things that were
blasphemy, and they would question me for that; I told them again that nothing
of blasphemy could ever yet be proved against me, though endeavored by my
enemies; and what I had been formerly charged with as blasphemy; I have already
answered, and now should at any time be ready in love to answer them or any
other that should ask me a reason of the hope that is in me; and the practice
of Christians (as they professed themselves to be) I told them was not to lay
violent hands on any, charging Officers with them, for speaking of the things
of God in a way contrary to their judgment or apprehensions; and so to make a
man an offender for a word, Isa. ^9.21.
and how we never found in Scripture thar A Christian living in the Faith of
the Lord Jesus, did ever persecute, accuse, charge, judge or condemn any in
point of worship toward God, but were themselves always accused, judged and
condemned by others that believed not; and men may differ in opinion or
judgment of things, and yet be good Christians; but though we may thus differ,
yet let us be reconciled together in love, and not Judge one another; for love
is a fulfilling of the whole Law; and not to love is a breach of the Law.

And (said I) as I have heard your Minister, so both him and you if you please
may in like manner hear me; and if I shall err in any thing I speak, then you
have your liberty to show me wherein, and we in love to discourse it forth
before the people, which thing might tend much to the glory of God and the
edification one of another; but this they refused, and would not grant, but
told me that unless I would come to Church in the afternoon, and hear their
Minister without objecting any thing against him, they would still keep me as a
Prisoner; to which I answered, that unless I might speak as well as hear,
having an opportunity when their Minister had done, I would not come, but would
in some other place speak what God should make known to me: and I further said,
that the Antichristian Law of compelling men to Church, was not now in force,
but men were to have their liberty therein; whereupon they gave the Constables
further charge of me, commanding me not to speak anywhere within their liberty;
and they not to suffer any people to come near me, nor I to come to them for
that day, and in the time of their afternoon exercise, they commanded me to be
kept close prisoner, which I was for above two hours, as will further appear in
that which follows; all which proceedings of theirs seems much contrary to what
your Highness has been pleased to declare in your 36. Article in the 43. page
of The Commonwealths Government, signed by your Highness December. 16. 1653. that
none should be compelled by penalty or otherways to the public profession
held forth and that all Laws contrary to Christian liberty were to be null and
void, how contrary were these men's actions then to that?

But the Constables being present all a long from the beginning of this
business, who seeing and hearing all that past between us, and finding no evil
or misdemeanor on my part committed, yet were always in my company, were
themselves willing to hear me; and the people both of Town and Country being
many, and no house there able to contain them, they before one of the clock
that day were assembled together in the street, the number of which were
supposed by many people to be near one thousand, to whom began my discourse
thus.

Friends, The afternoon Sermon being not yet began at Church, and because we
will not be idle, I shall in the mean time, while we have an opportunity, speak
something to you for your souls edification and comfort; and then you that will
go to the Church may; and this I shall also desire of you while you are here,
that nothing may be said or done on your parts contrary to the present power
and public peace of this Nation, by which we should be protected in this our
Godly exercise; and you that are Officers, take notice of any that shall in
this our meeting make any disturbance, etc.

But after half an hours space that I had proceeded thus in speaking to the
people, Mr. Crofts and Mr. Aylworth the said Justices, and Elmes the said
Minister, with their horses came riding in amongst the people in a tumultuous
manner, and disturbed the whole company, laid violent hands on me, commanding
the people to assist them in it, who refused, but rather endeavored to
persuade the disturbers of the peace (at that time) to be quiet, the people
still calling upon me to speak on, and they would still hear, in the interim
two mastive Dogs fall on the Justices horses, as if they had known them to be
the disturbers of the people. Then the said Justices departed a little from the
company; but Elmes the said Minister urged them again not to depart away till
they had dismissed our meeting; whereupon they came again in like manner as
before; and while a Warrant was a preparing to apprehend me, they with some
others would not let me go on in my former discourse, but would engage me upon
a dispute, taking an occasion to quarrel with me for preaching with my Hat on
my head, though in the street, and said it was contrary to the rule of the
Gospel. I demanded of them what was meant by head; they said the head of man's
body; to which I answered, that it was not that head meant in the Gospel: if it
were, then any thing on the head were a covering; but your Minister had this
morning a Cap on his head, when he both preached and prayed, therefore was his
head covered; and no greater dishonor could I at this time give to my head
then to keep my hat off, having no cap to put on, for the wind blows very cold;
besides the Sun shines full in my face; but that this is not the head there
meant, consider; for it is written that the head of every man is Christ, 1 Cor.
11 ^.4.
and Christ is the wisdom and power by which all men should both pray and
prophecy; and any mand praying or prophesying without this, having Christ his
head covered, veiled or hid in him, and not manifest in him or known by him,
Romans 2.23.
all that he speaks and asks in pretense for Christ, is to the dishonor of
Christ; and any man having thus his head covered, he dishonours his head.

Then said the Justices in answer to this: O horrible blasphemy! what, will you
say that Christ is the head of every man, and that he may be covered? you shall
answer for this at Gloucester; and so they presented to the Constables a Warrant
to apprehend me, commanding others also to assist them (but were constrained to
do it themselves, and then carried me to a house in the Town, where they kept
me close prisoner for the space of above two hours (while they went to their
afternoon exercise) suffering none to come at me, neither I to speak to any so
much as through the window; after that I had liberty to go to my Inn until the
next day; and then by the Justices Order, I was to give bayl, or go to Jayl.

The next day being come, I appeared before John Crofts one of the said
Justices, with whom there were assembled several Ministers, the said Elmes,
with one Palmer, and others, who again urged many questions to me to ensnare
me; and the Justice demanded of me bail; but I desired first to know my
accusers, and what evil I had done. He answered, that my accusers were not yet
known, neither the accusations; neither was I to know them till I come to
trial. But, said he, we have sent warrants about the Country to summon in
several persons whom we do believe will be your accusers; and that we are
shortly to have a meeting at Stow, where the persons summoned are to meet us;
after which time if you send to me, you shall have a Copy of your accusers
names, and also the accusations: In the mean time (said Crofts) we have power
in our selves to bind you to appear, or send you to Goal.

And so without any thing being laid to my charge, either by themselves or
others, they according to their own wills, bound me to appear at Gloucester
Assizes following, to answer to what was not yet charged against me: and
according as the Priests and Elders desired of Festus judgment against Paul,
Act 25.14, 15, 16.
before his accusers were come face to face, so the said Ministers then present
with the Justices, would have had me been sent to Goal, before I was accused of
any thing; and said, That both I and all that adhear'd to me, deserved no
better place.

After this, I went the same day to Stow, where was news of several other
Ministers of the same Country then come to Town to enquire concerning me, some
of which were my former accusers at Worcester and at Oxford: And I being again
desired by many people of the Town and Parish of Stow, went again into the
street, and there preached that day; after which I took my leave of the people,
rejoicing that the Lord for carrying on so good a work, had again chosen me as
an instrument in his hand, to bear witness to the truth, and suffer shame for
his name.

And now, my Lord, after the consideration of all the foregoing discourse, let
it please your Highness to do what to your own wisdom shall seem meet, that
your practice may answer your title, even to protect the innocent from those
that would devour them; for there are many wolves in lambs clothing, who under
the pretense of standing for the truth, and the faith once delivered to the
Saints, do persecute the pure appearances of God in his people; 2 Timothy 3
like unto those which Timothy speaks of, who having a form of godliness, deny
the power thereof.

Wherefore I being persuaded of your Highness's tender care toward such as
love the Lord Jesus in sincerity and truth, was occasioned in boldness to
present this unto your Highness, to rightly inform you of the rigorous and
illegal proceedings of some mennow in power, who under a form of godliness, do
envy the pure appearances of Jesus Christ in spirit and truth: Wherefore, as
the eye of Jesus is continually toward those that love him, for good; and that
in all their afflictions he is afflicted; so you may be like Jesus Christ, in
tendering those that are precious in his sight, that so the beloved of the Lord
may lie down in safety.

And lastly, as it has pleased the Lord to advance your Highness above your
Brethren, for their protection, preservation and deliverance, as he did Joseph
above his brethren, when he made him Lord of all Pharaohs house, and Ruler
throughout all the Land of Egypt; so you (like him) may not always be as a
stranger to your poor, grieved and oppressed brethren, to try them, Genesis 45.
but that you (like Joseph) may also make your self known to them, by doing
good for them, to comfort and relieve them in their several wants and
necessities, as Joseph did his brethren, that so you may not only be blessed
in the Lord, but that both this and after-generations may also call you
Blessed, according as it is written, The memory of the just shall be blessed,
Prove. 10, 7.
but the name of the wicked shall rot.

July 1. 1654. So waiting upon what the Lord shall be pleased to direct your
Highness to do, in reference to these particulars, I remain, Yours to serve you
in the Lord, Richard Coppin.

CHAP. XV.
The Authors Trial at Gloucester Assizes, before Sergeant Glyn'; and the unjust
proceedings of two Justices, John Crofts, and Richard Aylworth against him, the
22 of July, 1654.

Upon the day and year above written, I made my appearance at Gloucester
Assizes, there expecting a trial with my then two adversaries Joh. Crofts and
Richard Aylworth, two Justices of the Peace for that County, who themselves
were there with many Ministers of the same County, conferring together
concerning what they might inform against me, having nothing before; for
nothing justly could they find then; but their malice being great, the Justices
with the said Ministers had framed a scandalous Paper, in which were many false
and scandalous informations of their own inventions, as a map of malice, which
they presented to the Court, to which was only the name of John Crofts, and to
which they themselves durst not swear, neither could they get any other, though
they sought much for it; which particulars were as follow;

The Information.
FIrst, That I had several times caused to come together to hear me, a very
great multitude of wicked and profane people, to the disturbance of the peace.
Secondly, That I disturbed their Minister in the Church, and that some of my
company should call out to have the Minister pulled down, saying, Touch Coppin
who dare. Thirdly, That believers need not pray for the pardon of sin.
Fourthly, That there was no heaven nor hell, but belief and unbelief. Fifthly,
That I should call to the people to stand to their liberty, and not to suffer
the Justices to entrench upon it. Sixthly, That I would not obey the Justices
Authority. Seventhly, That I was a continual breaker of the peace.
And now I being called into the Court on Saturday night, a little before the
Court rose, the informations against me were read; but nothing of it being
proved, there was no answer required of me; and the Judge being removed to the
other Court, my accusers would have been my Judges, and also witnesses for
themselves; but I excepted against them, and the Court reproved them.

Then I declared against their informations, showing them to be false, and they
themselves to be no true Christians living in the faith of the Lord Jesus, so
long as they did inform against, or prosecute any for their judgments;
whereupon their proceedings upon the informations were stopped.

Then they presented to the Court several books with my name to them: And the
Court demanded of me, if I would own them. To which I answered, That I had
written such books, with such titles; but whether those particular books they
produced were the same I writ, I knew not, unless I heard them all read. And I
further said, That if they had any thing against me, for breach of any ^aw, I
desired them to proceed according to the Law, and I would further answer them.
Whereupon the Court told them, That they could proceed no further by these
informations; but if they had any thing to accuse me withal, they were to
proceed by way of indictment.

But my accusers not yet knowing with what more to charge me, desired to know
of the Court if they might not indict me for disturbing their Minister in the
Church. The Court answered They could not do so the Minister having done before
I began, and therefore it could not be proved any disturbance. But said the
Court, If you can pick any thing forth of the books which you say are his, and
prove it to be blasphemy, you may indict him for that, proving first that he
saw every line of the books printed: But at this my accusers were much daunted,
knowing not how to prove any thing against me, and so could not find any thing
justly to accuse me. Whereupon they desired longer time, until Monday; which
time the Court granted them.

And now Monday being come, I was again called into the Court before the Judge;
where the said Justices, my accusers, were present, but no Minister with them,
for they were only the setters on of the Justices: who then proceeded as
before, and finding nothing more against me, the foresaid informations were
again read: But the Judge perceiving them to be in malice, and there being no
proof to them, he seemed to slight them, saying, He did not like informations
in such a nature; to which my accusers answering not; I then desired to speak
my self (though I might have chused, there being nothing proved against me) and
the Judge giving me leave, I declared unto him in open Court the substance of
the whole business acted against me by the said Justices at Stow, as is before
written at large; and thereby proved my accusers themselves to be guilty of
what they informed against me; and for the proof of which I would have produced
several witnesses that were then present* But the Judge answered, he was
already satisfied in what I had said, that the wrong was done to me, and
therefore desired no further witness.

Then my accusers again urged the books. To which I answered as before, naming
the several titles of the books I had written. Out of which books my accusers
had picked here and there some part of some particular sentences, which they
preferred to the Judge to examine me upon. But the Judge, after he had read it,
told them, that they had given him that which was nonsense in taking part of a
sentence, and not the whole; for in so doing (said he) you may wrong the sense
of any man's words; and you are not to do so; but you are to take the words
before, and the words after, and then the one might explain the other, as said
the Judge. To which my accusers were silent: so nothing at all being proved
against me, the Judge asked them, what my life and conversation was; against
which they also had nothing to say. Then they gave the Judge a note of my
former accusations at Oxford, declaring that I had since spoke the same things;
and so importuned the Judge to keep me bound till the next Assizes. But the
Judge told them, he could do no such thing, unless they could prove that I had
transgressed the Law: and, said he, for that which ye reckoned an offense
already committed by him, which for my part I cannot, you have already punished
him contrary to the Law, in keeping him bound till now.

And, said the Judge, as touching the accusations at Oxford, I understand he
there answered them before my brother Green, then Judge of that Assize, and I
am not to question him any more upon that; therefore unless you have any thing
against him, he ought to be freed.

But nothing else could they find, though they sought and tried every way for
it, to the uttermost of their endeavors. Whereupon I was freed, to the shame
of my enemies.

And now what an advantage might I take against those men, for the wrong done
unto me by them, if I would proceed according to the Law? but my principles
lead me to no such thing, as to seek revenge against any man, but freely to
forgive my enemies; and to love them which hate me, as Christ in me gives me
Commandment; and in so doing, though in many things I suffer, yet in God I find
rest for my soul.

FINIS.

