AN ANSWER To certain PRINTED REASONS For Knights and Burgesses in the County
Palatine of Durham.
1. IT has always been held a special Privilege belonging to the Bishopric
and Countie-Palatine of Durham, To be Exempt from sending any Knights or
Burgesses to sit in Parliament for that County.

2. All the Bishops of Durham, at their first Entrance and Inthronization, take
a Solemn Oath to Defend and Preserve all the accustomed Rights, Privileges,
and Immunities (whereof the aforesaid Privilege and Exemption is One)
appertaining to his Bishopric and Countie-Palatine. And this Oath the Bishop
is bound to Observe; nor does he yet know any Expedient that will free him from
it.

3. If any Law should be now Made to take away that Privilege, it would prove
to be a great Innovation, and alter the Condition and Constitution of that
Bishopric.

4. The Election of Knights and Burgesses cannot be made in that County without
the King's Writ. But Breve Regis non currit in Comitatu Palatino Dunelmensi:
Which is the usual Return that the Bishop of Durham makes to any Writ sent
unto him, in case any of his Liberties and Immunities be infringed by it.

5. The City of Durham, and all other Corporations in that County hold their
Charters from the Bishop: to the observance of whose Privileges they are all
Sworn, and Bound not to Attempt, or Act any thing to the contrary.

6. This Attempt for Knights and Burgesses was first of all (about fifty three
years since) Projected and Made by a few discontented Gentlemen, who sought
thereby, as they then threatened, to lessen the Bishops Power in his Courts and
Jurisdiction over that County Palatine. But, their Attempt prevailed not at
that time, nor ever since, in any Parliaments following to this day. Neither
could the King's Royal Progenitors ever be persuaded to give way to any such
New Attempt or Innovation.

7. The whole County has heretofore withstood that Innovation, when it was
first begun without the Consent of the Bishop: And in like manner many of the
Freeholders and Gentlemen there withstand it now, though some others among them
show themselves vehemently desirous of it, and for the better obtaining of
their Purpose, have, by their Agents offered the Bishop for the time being,
that he shall have the Nomination of One Knight, and One Burgess, if by Consent
an Act of Parliament may be passed for it.

8. There was never yet any Precedent for sending such Knights and Burgesses
out of his Bishopric and Countie-Palatine, but only in the time of CROMWELL
the Usurper, who violently took away the Rights and Privileges of it, and gave
leave to the disloyal and disaffected Party of the Country to choose One
Knight, and One Burgess, after the Murder of the late King.

9. The Persons who now labor to set up Knights and Burgesses in this
Countie-Palatine (and tell the Bishop that they hope and expect to prevail in
it, whether he will give his confent to it or no) have neither any Right nor
any Necessity to do it.

10. For though they pretend to have the same Claim and Right, which all other
Countries have in this particular, yet the Prescription, Custom and Practice
in this County-Palatine is against them.

11. And whereas they complain that diverse Taxes and Royall-Aides are imposed
upon them in Parliament, without their Consent, having no Knights and Burgesses
there to sit and vote for them; Yet this Imposition is no other then has been
always heretofore used, nor has any Exception till now of late been taken
against it, Neither herein do they suffer any Injury or Inconvenience, having
had special care taken of them in all times by the Bishops of Durham
concerning the proportion of their Taxes, whereof (being equally rated with
Other Counties, they have no reason to complain:) And having received the
Benefit of all other Laws made for the Kingdom; and in particular the late
Law of freeing them from Wardships, when they had no Knights and Burgesses of
their Own to speak for them in it, or to give Consent thereunto, as all the
rest of the Kingdom did. Add hereunto for further answer to that Objection and
Complaint, That diverse such Taxes and Impositions are laid upon the Clergy in
that Bishopric and County-Palatine, who have no Representatives admitted to
consent and vote for them in Parliament but only their own Bishop of Durham.

12. But the Bishop of Durham in declining to give his Assent unto the present
Desires of some Gentlemen in this Countie-Palatine, who endeavor to make
themselves Knights and Burgesses after the Example of the Countie-Palatine of
Chester (which is a Case far different from this of Durham) is tender herein
of the Good and Welfare of the County, in saving them much Trouble, Expenses
and Charges, which might otherwise be brought upon them; and careful to
preserve the Ancient Constitution and Custom of his Bishopric, and
County-Palatine, which He and his Predecessors have held by Prescription for
many ages; being well assured, that the People and Inhabitants within this
Countie-Palatine do receive a great Benefit, Ease, and Quietness by the
Immunities and Privileges which they continually enjoy there under the Bishop
of Durham. Of which Privileges and Immunities, this is and ever has been One,
to be Exempt from Sending any Knights or Burgesses to Parliament.

JOH. DVRESME.


