THE Way of the Churches OF CHRIST IN NEW ENGLAND. OR THE WAY OF CHURCHES
walking in Brotherly equality, or co-ordination, without Subjection of one
Church to another. Measured and examined by the Golden Reed of the Sanctuary.
Containing a full Declaration of the Churchway in all Particulars. By Mr. J.
COTTON, Teacher of the Church at Boston in New England.

1 THESE. 5.22, 23. Prove all things; hold fast that which is good; Abstain
from all appearance of evil.

Published according to Order.



LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons in Aldersgate-streete. 1645.

(...) (...) not in our apprehension be said to hold no analogy. Yet with much
sweat, and wiles, some messengers have got through that Court of Guard, to
anticipate, or satisfy (if it might be) those clamourers for a larger
Narration.

1. The 32. Questions, or Church Government, and Church Covenant, done by some
Elders of N. E. they have had; with seconds of frequent intimations, that we
hold with the Churches of New England.

2. The Apologeticall Narration they have had, with our general approbation of
it.

3. Mr Cotton of the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven they have had, with our
Brethrens Epistle to it, how far they approve it.

4. The Reasons of the dissenting Brethren are in Print.

5. We have been informed that those our Brethren formerly have tendered
themselves, that in case they might be put into a Committee, or like meet
posture for such a work, they would bring in the whole frame of their
judgments in a body, with their grounds and reasons.

6. That now very lately they gave in seven Propositions to be discussed, with
promise of more. But neither of them was debated. Which we allege rather to
vindicate our particular charge, then to blame men whose reasons we know not.

7. With much ado we have presented you with a fuller declaration of all our
way, according to the Scriptures, in this learned, yet modest Treatise of THE
WAY OF THE CHURCHES OF CHRIST IN NEW ENGLAND, etc. Written and sent over by
Mr. Cotton. And we do in this Epistle certify our assent thereunto, saving
that we do not yet fully close with some expressions passim in the Book,
before some of which we minded it to note a * in the Margin. This we could not
but say and do (pace tanti authoris) or we could not assert the Book. If all
things in this Treatise, as now printed, do not answer punctually word for
word, to the first written Copy, let the reverend Author, and the candid
Reader pardon us, because we had not the fairest Copy, nor knew we, till the
Book was near done, that there was a better to be had, nor to this day yet ever
saw it.

Therefore we were forced to shift with this, so as to keep the mind of the
Author, make it constare sibi, and by an interpretative leave in his absence,
not only to do as we would be done by, but also as he himself would have
done (we are confident) if he had been in our case, or present here.

Least any should imagine, that every thing in the Keys does not fit all the
wards in this Treatise to an hair, we will here insert Mr. Cottons own words,
in his Letter coming from him in New England to our hands in the very nick of
time, whiles this Epistle lay under the Press; viz. If you think the Draught
of Church Discipline, which was sent over in your Ship, varieth from that of
the POWER OF THE KEKES, sent over the year after; you may have some occasion
so to conceive from some difference of expression in LOGICAL TERMS, but not a
jote in any DOCTRINE OF DIVINITY, or CHURCH-PRACTISE. So Mr. Cotton in his
Letter to Mr. R. M.

Diverse Objections formerly laid against the Printing of this Book (to the
sadding of the Author.) Some whereof are now answered by the late season of
printing it. Others, by the necessity of them, that conscientiously and
heartily cry out for information. Others, by the fore-printing of the Keys, to
open the full mind and whole sphere of the Authors judgment in this. Others,
by that putting forth in print of an answer to this Book, before this was
mid-wised by the Press into the world. All reason therefore (now it can
speak) that it should answer for it self.

We hope we have satisfied the mind of the Author as well as our own; and
of others too, of the other judgment; especially of those that call for fuller
Declarations. The Lord root out of all our hearts the spirit of contradiction;
that we call not for Books, with a resolution, rather to confute them (as we
imagine) then to throw down our selves humbly under the power of truth.

We are now fighting Modo militari, for reformation; let us not therefore
fight against it more ecclesiastico. With how much gravitie, soliditie, and
modesty, have Mr. Cotton, the Apologists, the Authors of 32. Questions, or
Church Covenant, and other mild and judicious Authors written in our cause?
But with what a different spirit have the adverse part replied; as if personal
invectives, and imbittring a style, were Gods way of bettering a cause, or
battering an opinion?

Here is a Book so grave, and solid, that it cannot be justly despised by
ingenuous learned men. So full of necessary cases and truths, that it cannot
but be desired of those that would be knowing men. And so mild and gentle,
that it cannot but be causlesly quarrelled, if quarrelled by Choleric men. Had
we not been persuaded, that it would prove a welcome Tract on all hands, for
the reasons afore-intimated, we could with our enjoyment of the written Copy,
well have saved this great travel. If it fall out otherwise, as it has with
diverse of the like nature; Golden Lavers, or Vessels made Common-shores and
receptacles to be filled with all filthy contempt; we shall then clearly and
fully decerne men's spirits, and descry their intents in challenging us for
larger Narrations; and shall beware for time to come, how we anger them with
kindnesses. But if this be heartily entertained of them, then have they
encouraged us in due time to impart (if God permit) a fuller Treatise of the
same subject, with amplior demonstrations, by joint consent of the Churches of
Old and New England: and mean while, they have abundantly recompensed the
labor of love, of theirs in the Lord.

N.H. I.H.

THE Way of the Churches of Christ in NEW ENGLAND, Measured by the Golden Reed
of the SANCTUARY.
CHAPTER I. The Order of gathering dispersed Christians into a Church.
PROPOSITION I. SECTION I.
THat the Church which Christ in his Gospel has instituted, and to which he
has committed the keys of his kingdom, the power of binding and loosing, the
tables and seals of the Covenant, the Officers and censures of his Church, the
administration of all his public Worship and Ordinances, is, Coetus fidelium,
a Communion of Saints, a Combination of faithful godly men, meeting for that
end, by common and joint consent, into one Congregation; which is commonly
called a particular visible Church. For the Church to the which Christ
committed the power of binding and loosing, was a company of such (as whereof
Peter was one,) Believers professing that faith on Christ, whereon (as on a
rock) the Church is built, Mat. 16.18, 19. and such as unto whom Peter, or any
brother offended, might (in due order) tell the offense which any brother had
given him, and persisted in, Mat. 18.17. And the Church of Corinth, to which
the Apostle commends the casting out of the Incestuous Corinthian, (1 Cor.
5.) was such a Church, of which the Apostle says, They were Saints by calling,
sanctified by Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.2. and all of them, even the whole Church,
did meet together every Lords day, in one place, for the Administration of the
holy Ordinances of God, to public Edification, 1 Cor. 14.23. and 16.1.2. Which
frequent meeting every Lords day in one place, to such ends, cannot possibly be
compatible to any Diocesan, Provincial, or National Assembly.

PROPOS. 2.
It is the part of all Christians, who look for salvation by Christ Jesus, to
join themselves (if God give them opportunity) to some one or other such a
particular visible Church of Christ; for of such a Church as continued in such
Church Fellowship ( Act. 2.42.) it is written, The Lord added to the Church
daily such as should be saved, Act. 2.47. And seeing there is no holy Ordinance
of Christ, but every Christian stands in need thereof for his spiritual
edification in holy fellowship with Christ Jesus, (or else Christ ordained them
in vain) and seeing withal Christ has committed all his public holy
Ordinances to his Church, it will be needful for every good Christian, to whom
God gives opportunity, to join himself to some one or other Church of
Christ, that so he may not deprive himself of the benefit and comfort of any
of Gods holy Ordinances.

PROPOS. 3.
For the joining of faithful Christians into the fellowship and estate of a
Church, we find not in Scripture that God has done it any other way then by
entering all of them together, (as one man) into an holy Covenant with
himself, To take the Lord (as the head of his Church) for their God, and to
give up themselves to him, to be his Church and people; which implies their
submitting of themselves to him, and one to another in his fear; and their
walking in professed subjection to all his holy Ordinances: their cleaving one
to another, as fellow members of the same body, in brotherly love and holy
watchfulness unto mutual edification in Christ Jesus: For thus the Lord
accepted and entered Abraham's family into Church estate, by receiving them and
their children into such a Covenant with himself, though In general terms,
yet such as imply the substance both of Christians and Church duties, Genesis
17.7. And after that when the posterity of Abraham had violated this Covenant
in Egypt, the Lord again made another Covenant with them, whereby he took
them to be a peculiar people unto himself in the Wilderness and Mount of
Sinai, Exodus 19.1.5. Whence they were called the Church in the Wilderness,
Act. 7.38. And by reason of this Covenant, God calls the whole body of that
people as his own Spouse; I entered (says he, speaking of that time) into a
Covenant with thee; and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16.8. Moreover, the next
generation after them, he established them to be his Church and people, by
entering them again into a Covenant, according to the Covenant made with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Deuteronomy. 29.10. to 13. By virtue of which Covenant, as
well as by the former, they were joined, not only to the Lord, and to the
Officers (the Priests and Levites) which he had given them, Deuteronomy. 12.19. but
also to mutual watchfulness over one another, Levit. 19.17. Deuteronomy. 29.18. In
so much that through their neglect thereof, the sin of one Achan, was the
sin of all Israel, Josh. 7.11.

Which kind of Covenanting with God, we find diversely translated in
Scripture, and every way sufficient for the constituting of a godly society or
company to become a Church unto God: Sometimes God, or his Messengers in his
stead, propounds and gives a Covenant unto a people, and they accept it,
though not in express words, yet by silent consent, Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. 29.10. to
the end of Chap. 30. Sometimes the people declare their consent, and
restipulation by express words, Exodus 19.8. Deuteronomy. 5.27. and Josh. 24.16, 17,
18.21, 22, 24, 25. Sometimes they writing and sealing, Neh. 9.38. In all which
Covenants, sometimes they make no express terms of cleaving to their
brethren, but only in general terms submitting themselves to every Ordinance
and Covenant of God, (as in the places alleged) sometimes they expressly
declare their steadfast cleaving to their Brethren also, and to their Officers,
Neh. 10.28, 29. and ver. 35. to the end the rest of the people every one might
have knowledge they cleave to their Brethren, and entered into an Oath, etc. In
some we account it all one, and of like value, when a Covenant of God is
propounded and given on Gods part to a people, whether they receive it by
silent consent, or by express terms, either by word of mouth, or by writing
and seal, and whether their cleaving to their Brethren and Officers, and
mutual watchfulness over one another, be expressly mentioned, or included
only in their general profession of subjection to all Gods holy Ordinances
and Covenant; For we see it evident by comparing the former Scriptures, that by
any one of these ways a people is received and established to be a peculiar
people and Church unto the Lord, and each of them lay hold of the same
spiritual privileges, and hold forth the same holy duties.

Neither is there any color to conceive this way of entering into Church estate
by Covenant, to be peculiar to the Paedagogy of the old Testament; for it is
evident by the light of nature, that all civil Relations are founded in
Covenant. For, to pass by natural Relations between Parents and Children, and
violent Relations between Conquerours and Captives; there is no other way given
whereby a people ( sui Juris) free from natural and compulsory engagements,
can be united or combined together into one visible body, to stand by mutual
Relation, fellow members of the same body, but only by mutual Covenant; as
appears between husband and wife in the family, Magistrates and subjects in
the Commonwealth, fellow Citizens in the same City: and therefore in the New
Testament, when a people whom the Apostles by their ministry had converted,
were to be gathered by them into a Church estate, what did the Apostles else
but combine them into one body, as one chaste Virgin and Spouse unto Christ? 2
Cor. 11.2. And how could that (not universal, but particular) Church of
Corinth be offered up in one body, not as many Spouses, as all the particular
members of that Church were by their conversion, but as one Spouse unto-Christ,
but only by joining all together in one Covenant, or Espousage, to worship the
Lord Jesus, according to all the Ordinances of his house?

PROPOS. 4.
We conceive it cannot seem unreasonable that in the same way by which
particular godly persons do enter into the fellowship of the Liberty of those
holy Ordinances which Christ has appropriated to his Church; in the same way
it were meet that an whole company of Christians should enter into Church
estate; for in entering of them into Church estate, the Lord calls as well
whole companies, as particular persons, to enjoy the like liberty of all his
holy Ordinances; the enjoyment of like liberty requires preparation thereunto
by the like duty. In the times of John the Baptist, such as were received into
Baptism, they did first make confession of their sins, and therewith of
their repentance, and of their faith also in him who was to come after him,
Matthew. 3.6. Act. 19.4, 5. And in the times of the Apostles, Philip received the
Eunuch unto Baptism, not until he had made profession of his Faith in Christ
Jesus, Acts. 8.37. But now for as much as we all who are borne in Christian
Churches, are baptized in our infancy, and such as are baptized infants, are
not admitted to the Lords Table in well ordered Churches, till they have
approved, and in their own persons publicly confirmed that profession of
repentance and faith, which their parents, or others in their stead professed,
and promised for them at their Baptism; it cannot be thought unreasonable,
that such a company of godly Christians, having been baptized infants, should
now make the like profession of their repentance, before they are admitted into
Church estate, which others made in the Primitive times before Baptism, and
all grown up to ripe years are wont publicly to make, (or at least ought to
make) before their admittance to the Lords Supper. Besides when upon Peter's
confession of his faith in Christ Jesus, Christ said that upon that rock, or
foundation, he would build his Church, Mat. 16.16.18. does he not plainly hold
forth, that every Christian Church is founded, as on Christ; so on Christ in
this way, to wit, on Christ believed on by faith, and that faith publicly
confessed before God and men?

PROPOS. 5.
To the erecting of a Church, as the presence of Christ is necessary for the
acceptance of it, so the presence of neighboring Churches and Brethren, is
requisite to cry, Grace, Grace unto it; For if David's advertisement be (as it
is) necessary, and of important weight, Except the Lord build the house, they
labor in vain that build it, Psalm. 127.1. how much more important is it that
the Lord (who alone builds his own Jerusalem, Psalm. 147.2.) be sought unto
with unfeigned humiliation and fervent prayer, for his presence with his
people, and acceptance of them in such a work; and if the Apostle Paul thought
it requisite to communicate with the Apostles at Jerusalem about his
Apostolical doctrine, and proceedings, partly to prevent suspicion of dissent
between him and them, lest by any means he should run in vain; partly to hold
forth mutual communion with them, in giving and taking the right hand of
fellowship, Gal. 2.2.9. How much more requisite will it be, for such as go
about to gather together scattered Christians into a Church estate, to
communicate with the Elders and Brethren of other Churches, craving their
presence, and counsel, and communion in so great a work? And seeing Christian
Magistrates being also Brethren and members of Churches, are called of God to
be Nursing Fathers unto the Church, Isa. 49.23. it cannot but encourage them to
take the more special notice and care of every Church, and to provide and
assign convenient allotments of land for the maintenance of each of them, when
in times of peace they are made acquainted with the persons and proceedings of
such as gather into Church Fellowship, under the wing of their Government: And
yet seeing the kingdom of Christ is not of this world, nor regulated by the
wisdom of this world, we do not doubt but that a Church may be clearly
gathered, and rightly ordered, though they want opportunity, or omit to
acquaint the Magistrates with their proceedings, especially when Magistrates
are not acquainted with the Laws of Christ's kingdom.

SECT. II.
NOw then to apply all these Propositions to our present order and practice, in
the gathering of a Church; thus it is, when many Christians are come over into
these parts, they desire to join themselves unto some Church or other,
according to the second Proposition, professing that it was the principal end
of their coming, to enjoy the presence of the Lord in the liberty and purity
of his Ordinances: And if the company of such as come together, be so well
known one to another, that they are loath to part company, and yet so great
that they cannot well join in any one Church already established, without too
much impeachment of their outward estate and livelihood, the chiefest part of
the lands belonging to each Church, being prepossessed by others before them,
they then take that course which other companies took before them, they
consider of entering into a Church estate and fellowship amongst themselves: And
for that end, first commending themselves to the Lord, they enquire out some
one or other of Eminent gifts, usually such as have been Preachers of good
esteem in England, who may guide and go along with them in so great an
Action, and if God see good, may afterward be called to place and Office
amongst them; And then such whose hearts God touches to go along with them in
this work, they often meet together about the things of God, and perform some
duties of Prayer and spiritual conference together, till a sufficient company
of them be well satisfied in the spiritual good estate of one another, and so
have approved themselves to one another consciences in the sight of God, as
living stones fit to be laid in the Lords spiritual Temple, which is his
Church, according to the first Proposition.

Now because (through the grace of Christ) our Christian Magistrates are
nursing Fathers to the Church, and the Churches already established, are
carried not only with a pious desire to enlarge the kingdom of Christ, but
also with brotherly love to such as intend so good a work; those Christians
therefore that desire to enter into Church Fellowship together, do acquaint
the Governor, and some of the nearest Magistrates, and those Churches which
are next adjoining to them, with their intentions to enter into
Church Fellowship, and crave the presence of some from amongst them (at the day
appointed, some few weeks after) to help them with their prayers, and with
their counsel, (if need should be) in so weighty a business, as being
themselves for the most part, less experienced in the ways of Christ's
Kingdom, then those who have gone before them in such a work; as also
desiring to approve themselves and their course, to the consciences of the
Brethren of other Churches, that they may more freely give them the right hand
of fellowship, and so receive them to all Brotherly communion in the Lord,
amongst the rest of the Churches; and this agrees with the last part of the
fifth Proposition.

So when the day appointed for the Church-gathering is come, the persons
deputed from the neighboring Churches are present, (who commonly be the
teaching and ruling Elders) and as many also of all sorts as are willing to
partake with them at that time, the whole day is kept as a day of humiliation,
especially the former part of it, in seeking the face of God in prayer, and
preaching the Word, (according to the former part of the fifth Proposition) the
Brethren of the Church to be gathered, selecting some chief one among
themselves to be their mouth for those services: which done, then on the latter
part of the day, one of them appointed and chosen by themselves to order the
work of the day, stands up and addresseth himself, with the rest of his
Brethren, to make profession of their faith, and repentance, before the Lord,
and before the whole Assembly; according to the fourth Proposition.

This done with the silent approbation of the whole Assembly, he propounds
the Covenant of promise, Ephesians. 2.12. denying also any sufficiency in themselves
to keep Covenant with God, (as having been transgressors from their youth up)
they profess in the name of Christ their acceptance of the Lord for their God,
and the Lord Jesus (the head and Savior of his Church) to be their King,
Priest, and Prophet; and give up themselves in professed subjection unto all
his holy Ordinances, according to the Rules of the Gospel; withal they
profess their full purpose of heart, to cleave one to another in Brotherly
love, and mutual subjection, according to God; not forsaking their Assembly,
(but as the Lord shall call) and ministering one to another (as becomes good
Stewards of the manifold graces of God) till they all grow up to a perfect man
in Christ Jesus.

Having thus, or to the like purpose propounded the Covenant himself, with the
rest of the Brethren, who are to join in Church Estate, they all declare their
joint consent in this Covenant, either by silence, or word of mouth, or writing.

Then the Brethren of other Churches finding the presence of God accepting
them, by the heavenly fire of his Spirit come down amongst them in their
performance of their holy duties, they appoint some from amongst them, in the
name of all the Churches from whence they come, to reach forth unto them the
right hand of fellowship, testifying their proceedings to have been according
to God, and the Churches acceptance of them into brotherly fellowship, and
exhorting them to stand steadfast in the Lord, and to grow up in holy fellowship
with him, and one with another, and with the rest of the Brethren of all the
Churches, according to these beginnings: And so prayers being made unto God for
the pardoning and acceptance of this people, and of all the duties of the day;
as also for his blessing upon themselves, and all the Churches, both in this
Country, and throughout the world, especially in England; a Psalm of praise
is sung.

Quest. What could be done more, if a Church were to be gathered out of
Infidels?

Answ. 1. If a Church were to be gathered out of Infidels, they were first to
be converted, that they might become believers, and so fit materials for
Church Fellowship, before any of these could be done by them; whereas these
here spoken of, are persons converted already.

If it be said again; But are not all Baptized persons fit for
Church Fellowship, as all Circumcised persons were admitted to the Passover?

Answ. There is a difference between the Passover, whereto all Jews were
admitted, young and old, unless defiled with some pollution, and the Lords
Supper, whereto persons of growner years, and fit to examine themselves, are
invited; and therefore neither children, nor ignorant persons, nor profane,
nor scandalous persons, are admitted to the Lords Table, nor into
Church Fellowship.

If it again be Objected; But are not all Baptized persons Church Members
already by their Baptism?

Answ. No.

1. Papists and other notorious Heretics are Baptized. 2. And many in other
Churches have cut themselves off from the Covenant by their notorious
wickedness and profaneness, Psalm. 50.16. 3. A Church Relapsed, with all the
members of it, before they can be accepted with God in their Church Fellowship,
are bound to renew their Covenant; which is, as it were, a new entering into
Covenant; the same which in effect is done with us. 4. Though godly men
Baptized members of a pure Church, are to be accounted Church Members as long
as they continue their habitation and election to that Church; yet several
Baptized persons broken off from their several Churches, to which sometimes
they did belong, and now meeting accidentally in one place, are not therefore
one Church anew amongst themselves, unless they will imagine that Chimaera of
an universal visible Church.
CHAP. II. Touching Church Officers, with their election and ordination.
SECT. I.
THE Church being thus gathered, as has been described, our next care is that
it may be supplied with all those Officers and members which Christ has
ordained to continue in his Church until his second coming, for they are all
given for the edifying and perfecting of his body, until we all grow unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. The
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, they still continue in their writings, to
be Master Builders of the Churches in all ages, and therefore the Church is
said to be built upon their foundation, that is, upon the foundation which they
by their writings have laid, Ephesians. 2.20. but in their Successors in the same
eminent calling they continue not: whence the Apostle speaks of himself and
Barnabas, as the last Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.9. And when the new Jerusalem (the
Church of the Jews) comes to be planted, it is not said to be planted by new
Apostles, but by the former twelve Apostles of the Lamb, Rev. 21.19. to wit,
by them, in respect of their Doctrine still left behind them in their writings.

It remains therefore, that the ordinary Officers of the Church which are to
continue to the coming of Christ Jesus, are either Elders, (whom the Apostle
calls also Bishops, Tit. 1.5.7. Act. 20.17.28.) or Deacons; of Elders he
makes two sorts, one sort he calls them that rule, the other them that
labor in the Word; whether of Exhortation, as the Pastors, or of Doctrine, as
the Teachers, 2 Timothy 5.17. For the two sorts of ordinary preaching Elders, the
Apostle calls Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. And such several kinds of
laboring in the Word, by the one in a word of Exhortation, by the other in a
word of Doctrine, the Apostle expressly holds forth, Romans 12.7, 8. He that
teaches (says he) let him wait on teaching, and he that exhorts on
exhortation; which argues a difference of their functions by the distinction
of their proper or especial actions.

If it be said, the difference of those actions do not argue a diversity of
functions, but both teaching and exhorting are co-incident to one and the same
Office, as being several actions of several gifts, not of several Officers:

Answ. The contrary is evident from the Text, as may appear by three several
reasons from the words of the Text.

Reas. 1. From the words which the Apostle uses, (...), which do not
distribute several gifts only, but several persons, to whom those several
gifts are severally committed, according as the same Apostle distributeth the
same diverse sorts of gifts to the same diverse sorts of persons, 1 Cor. 12.8. To
one (says he) is given a word of wisdom, (to wit, for direction of practice,
whereto the Pastor attends) to another the word of knowledge (to wit, for
direction of the judgment) whereto the teacher attends, and both by the same
Spirit, who distributeth to every man severally, ver. 11.

Reas. 2. Though Office be one thing, and gift to discharge an office another,
and the actions or exercise of every several gift does not always argue a
several office; yet in this place it is the scope of the Apostle to express
the different offices, or functions of Pastors and Teachers by their different
and proper acts; for here he speaks of the diverse members of the Church, as
of diverse members of the natural body, who having diverse offices, or functions
in the body, are to perform different proper actions, according to their
different functions; as we having many members (says he) in one body (ver. 4,
5.) and all the members have not one office, (as the translator turns it when
the Original says, have not one action, or practice, but both expressing the
same meaning;) so we being many are one body in Christ, and every one members
one of another, having then (says he, ver. 6.) different gifts (gifts
comprehending both offices and grace) whether Prophecy, let us prophecy
according to the proportion of faith, or ministry, let us wait on our
ministry, whether he that teaches on teaching, or he that exhorts on
exhortation. And look then, as in the natural body, it being the action of
the tongue to speak, it is his function and office to speak, and not to see:
and it being the action of the eye to see, it is his function to see, and not
to hear; So it is in the members of the body of Christ, it being the action of
the teacher to teach, he is to attend unto teaching, not unto exhortation; and
it being the action of the Pastor or Exhortor to exhort, he is to attend on
exhortation, not on teaching.

Reas. 3. If the Apostle speak here only of several actions or exercises of
several gifts, but both co-incident to the same person and officer in the
Church; why then does he command the Teacher to wait on teaching? and the
Exhorter to wait on exhortation? for he that performs an action according to
this gift, which is not peculiar to his office, but common to him with men of
other offices, is never commanded, nor is it his duty to attend or wait on
such an action. As if a man have a gift of love, or mercy, or liberality, and
according to that gift be fit to perform an action of giving Alms, yet he is
not commanded to attend or wait upon Almesgiving, unless it be his office as
well as his gift?

Object. Attending, or waiting, is not expressed in the Original, but in the
translation only.

Answ. Though it be not expressed in the Original, it is necessarily intended,
for either such a word as expresses waiting, or at least the verb substantive
(...), must needs be understood, which holds forth the same sense; He that
teaches, let him be teaching; he that exhorts, let him be in exhortation;
which is all one, as let him attend to it, let him make it his proper and
constant work. So a like example in 1 Timothy 4.15. (...), which is the same
phrase, and which is fitly translated, Give thy self wholly to them; the same
with (...), ver. 16. Continue or dwell in them.

And indeed experience shows, that teaching and exhorting are so far
different one from another, and flow from such different gifts, that they are
seldom found, at least in any eminency, both of them in one and the same
person; and therefore require several officers for the dispensing of them: you
have many men of eminent dexterity for clear opening of a Text, for judicious
gathering and handling sound Doctrine from it; and also acute and strong for
conviction of a contrary error and heresy, who yet are very cold in
exhortation; and on the other side, you have some very fervent in exhortation,
who are very confused and general and common in teaching.

But besides this, the need of the Church, and the weight of both, the works of
teaching and exhorting, calls for several officers to attend to both, the
explication of Scripture, and of the Principles and Doctrine of Religion
solidly and distinctly, with the discussion of controversies, which are
included in ((...)) Doctrine and Reproof (2 Timothy 3.16.) well attended too, will
take up the whole time and talents of a most judicious Divine; and on the other
side, the direction and instruction of the people in matters of practice, the
reformation of their manners, both in their private carriage, and in their
families; as also in the Church and Commonwealth; and the stirring up of men
thereto, with the reproof of all disorders and abuses in life and conversation,
which are included in (...) instruction and correction, 2 Timothy 3.16. these well
attended to, will take up the vigor and strength of the most prudent and
vigilant Pastor of any Congregation. All which things considered, we have
thought it needful to make use of the bounty of the Lord Jesus, to finish our
Churches, (as we bless his Name, most of them be) with both these sorts of
preaching Elders, Pastors and Teachers; nevertheless, he that is gifted for
both these in any good measure, let him use both; yet attend principally on
that, to which he is most eminently gifted and called.

SECT. II.
AS for ruling Elders, the same Text of Scirpture ( Romans 12.8.) speaks as
expressly for their distinct office also; for there speaking of the several
members of the body of Christ (which is his Church) he directing them to attend
to their proper work: as the Teacher to teaching, the Pastor to exhortation,
the Deacon to give with simplicity, he directs also the Ruler to rule with
diligence: and who is that Ruler in the Church, but the ruling Elder? of whom
the Apostle says to Timothy, The Elders that rule well are worthy of double
honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. But, as the wisdom of man is enmity to God; so the
wisdom and wit of man has found out many inventions and exceptions against
every Scripture that holds forth this Ordinance.

Object. 1. The Elders the Apostle here speaks of, may be rulers in the
family, as Parents are rulers to children, husbands to wives, Masters to
servants. Answ. The Church and family are two distinct bodies: the Apostle
speaks here not of the members of the families, (as such) nor of the
functions and duties of family-members, but of the family of the Church, and of
their functions and duties one toward another: His words are plain, ( verse. 4,
5.) As we (says he) have many members in one body, and all the members have
not the same office; so we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one
members one of another. One body in Christ is not one family (in Scripture
phrase) but one Church; and of this body of the Church, the members they be,
whom Paul directs to the due dispensing of their several functions and
gifts; namely, the public officers of the Church, (Teachers, Pastors, Deacons
and Elders,) to attend upon their proper work, teaching, exhorting, giving,
ruling, verse. 6, 7, 8. and all the rest of the members to walk in such duties
of love and pureness, brotherly kindness and modesty, diligence and fervency,
etc. as are requisite for every Christian, verse. 9. to the end of the Chapter.

Object. 2. But Paul speaks not of lay Elders ruling in the Church, but of
Rulers. Answ. Neither do we acknowledge ruling Elders in the Church to be lay
Elders properly; for to say nothing of the distinction between the Clergy and
Laity, which is of a later edition then Apostolic times; the ruling Elders
being ordained to the Office by the election of the people, and imposition of
hands (as well as the preaching Elders) they are no more lay men, or private
Christians, then the Teachers or Pastors are lay Ministers; and though the
Pastor and Teacher be either of them Church-rulers, yet the Ruler is here
distinguished from them, as a distinct member attending to his action of rule
as his proper function.

Object. 3. Paul speaks of several gifts, not of public offices in the
Churches, for he speaks of the several powers and action of all the members
of the body of Christ; now the officers of the Church, they alone are not the
body of Christ, but all the multitude of believers; which of all these gifts in
those times, was not common, as well to the people as to the Ministers, and to
women as well as to men? Answ. 1. Paul speaks as well of public officers as
of particular gifts, as has been showed by three reasons above, out of the
words of the Text. It is true indeed, he speaks of particular gifts also,
not peculiar to any office, but common to all believers, from verse 9. to the
end; but gifts are not the members of the body of Christ, but the persons
endued with those spiritual gifts; neither can it be said, that all the
members of the Church have all these gifts without manifest contradiction to
the words of the Text, for then all the members had the same power to do all of
them the same actions, which the Apostle expressly denies, verse. 4. all the
members (says he) have not the same action, which is translated office; whence
it is, that when he speaks of different offices, he divides them by
particles of partition, (...), verse. 7, 8. and he injoyneth each office to
attend his own function, but when he comes to speak of the private members,
and of the gifts common to them all, he neither makes any partition of them
into several sorts, nor binds them to attendance on the employment or
exercise of any special gift, as he does the former.

But that as every truth, so every ordinance of God may be confirmed by two or
three witnesses; there be other Texts of Scriptures which bear witness to,

For ruling Elders, In 1 Cor. 12.28. the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that
God has set in his Church several members: as first Apostles; secondly
Prophets; thirdly Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healing, helps,
governments, diversities of tongues Where government is expressly reckoned
amongst these offices, which God has set in his Church for the government
thereof, long before it enjoyed civil Magistracy, and therefore he means
spiritual government, or Church rulers.

Object. 1. But these governments are spiritual gifts, not spiritual offices
or administrations.

Answ. That they were gifts we willingly acknowledge, because all the offices
and officers of the Church were given to the Church as well as the spiritual
gifts and graces, whereby they do execute those offices; for so says the
Apostle, When Christ ascended up on high, he gave gifts to men.

What gifts? some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors, and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.8.11. but yet governments, and all the rest there
mentioned are spiritual offices, as well as spiritual gifts, as will appear
from the context; for the Apostle in this Chapter, puts a manifest
difference between spiritual,

1. Gifts and Graces, (...); making the holy Ghost the giver of them, verse. 6.
2. Administrations, or Ministers or Officers, (...): making the Lord Jesus the
giver and institutor of them, verse. 5. as he does also, Ephesians. 4.8.11. 3.
Operations, efficacies, or successees of their administrations, making the
Father (the foundation of all power) the giver of them, verse. 6.
Now having spoken of the end for which spiritual gifts are given, verse. 7.
he reckons up nine of those several spiritual gifts, verse. 8, 9, 10. he
declares them to be given to several members of the Church (not all to any
one) that so every member might stand in need of the help and gifts one of
another; and thus having discoursed of the variety of spiritual gifts and
their use, he comes in verse. 28. to 31. to declare the variety of spiritual
administrations (that is, Ministeries or offices) which God has set in his
Church, and reckons up eight. First Apostles, secondarily Prophets, under
whom your Evangelists are comprehended, as being of equal rank with them:
thirdly Teachers, under whom he includes Pastors also, the office of both
whom, was to teach or practice in the Church; after that miracles, or as the
word in the original is, powers, to wit, to cast out Devils, or to do the like
works; then gifts of healing, helps, (opitulations) that is, Deacons,
governments (who else can they be but governing Elders? for we hear of
teaching Elders before;) lastly, the gifts of tongues, true it is indeed, the
Apostle reckoned up three of these before for spiritual gifts, (...) verse. 9,
10. Miracles, or powers, gifts of healing, kinds of tongues; but here he
reckons them, not as spiritual gifts, and graces, for that were a tautology,
and unsuitable to the method of his discourse, but speaks of them as several
functions or offices, wherein these gifts were exercised.

Object. 2. But if these Governments were Officers or functions, they were
extraordinary, and so are now ceased, as gifts of tongues, and healing, and
miracles be. Answ. Not so, for no offices are ceased, but such as had their
chief use, not for believers in the Church, but unbeleevers out of the Church;
but governments are of perpetual necessary use in the Church, even as teachers
and helpers, unless we shall say that Anarchy were fitter for a settled
Church Government.

Object. 3. But why may not these Governors be the Pastors in the church, who
have received an ordinary power of Government in the Church? Answ. The order in
which the Apostle reckons these governments, will not suffer that; for here
the Apostle reckons five several ranks, the former expressly precedent in
order before the other; God (says he) has set in his Church; First, Apostles;
secondly, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers; after that Miracles, which is a fourth
rank; then in the fifth place, gifts of healing, and helps, governments,
diversities of tongues. Now if by Government, had been meant Pastors, he would
not have reckoned them in a lower order, so far after Teachers, seeing they
are of the same rank with them.

Object. Why, but here helps or Deacons are set before Governments; which
argues the Apostle did not regard to rank them in due order. Answ. It is
evident by the words of order, which the Apostle uses, that he intends to
reckon the four first sorts in their due order, and the fifth sort of them all
in a latter order after the former, though in a promiscuous manner, without
respect of order amongst themselves; for so he says; First, Apostles;
secondarily, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers; after them Miracles; then gifts of
healing, helps, Governments, diversity of tongues. As Apostles are before
Prophets, so are Prophets before ordinary teachers, the teachers before workers
of Miracles, the Miracles before them that have the gifts of healing; for the
gifts of healing follow after works of miracles, with a note of order, Then.
But all those last four, gifts of healing, helps, Governments, diversities of
tongues, are reckoned without respect of order amongst themselves. What order
is due to them, is not expressed in this Scripture, though it be in some other,
(at least for some of them) but clear it is, all these last four sorts, are
reckoned in order after the first four sorts.

Object. 4. But it may be the Church, in which the Apostle says all these
members are set, is not meant every particular Church, but the Catholic
Church; for every particular Church had not Apostles and Prophets. Answ. It is
true, every particular Church had not several Apostles, apart by themselves,
nor was it needful they should, after that Churches were once planted, but
every particular Church had need of his own Governors within it self, or else
we shall make one Church subordinate to the Government of another, which is
incompatible to the Church of the new Testament. The Lord having instituted and
ordained no particular Church, but the Church of a Congregation for the
administration of his Ordinance, unto which Congregationall Church he has also
appointed the same sort of Officers, without preferment of one before another.

Object. 5. For humane wisdom is pregnant and full of objections and
exceptions against the ways and Ordinances of God. may be, say some, these
Governors are no other but Arbitrators, which the Apostle bids the
Corinthians set up in the Church for the deciding of differences amongst
brethren, 1. Cor. 6.4. But now since God has set up Christian Magistrates,
there is no more need of such Arbiters to be chosen by each Church, to compound
their difference. Answ. These Arbiters in the Church had not place or office of
Government, but of Counsel only, to direct brethren in the judgment of right
and wrong, equity and inequitie; nor was such a power of such Arbitration any
special gift; for the Apostle thinks every member of the Church, even the
least capable enough of it, and sufficient for it. Nor is it well said, since
God has set up Christian Magistrates, there need no Arbiter to be set up in
the Church, nor Church Governors; For it is plain, the Apostle makes it a
fault or defect in the Church of Corinth, that any of their members went to law
at all for such suites, as the least member of the Church, (if he were called
to hear the case) might arbitrate and determine; and he makes it a further
fault, that they go to law under Infidels. Now therefore, says he, there is
utterly a fault among you, that brother goes to law with brother, and that
under Infidels, ver. 6, 7. The former is a defect of brotherly love, the latter
is a neglect of the honor of Christ, and of his Church: and before Infidels.
If brother goes to law with brother before Christian Magistrates, the latter of
these faults is avoided, but not the former. Neither may it be thought, as some
have done, that the benefit of Christian Magistracy takes off the necessity
of Church Government: For the government of the Church, is as the Kingdom of
Christ is, not of this world, but spiritual and heavenly. The power of the
keys is far distant from the power of the sword, and though one of them may
need the help of the other, when they go astray, yet when they are rightly
ordered, and administered, the one of them does not intercept, but establish the
execution of the other.

A third witness to the office of ruling Elders in the Church, is that well
known and much agitated Text in Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.17. The Elders who rule
well, are worthy of double honor; especially they who labor in Word and
Doctrine. This text, though it have been much vexed and rackt to look and
speak another way; yet when all is done, it still gives a clear and steadfast
evidence to this office. The most learned Adversaries of this Ordinance would
fasten four other interpretations of the place, and each of them (as they
pretend) more pertinent to the scope and sense of the Apostles words, then this
of ruling Elders.

1. Say they, by ruling Elders may be meant Deacons; for the Apostle giving
Timothy to understand, what manner of persons they be, with whose maintenance
the Church is to be charged, having before informed him of widows, now tells
him the Deacons also are to be maintained, yea, and with a double portion above
them; and either the Deacons are not to be maintained at all at the Churches
charge, or else the Apostle provideth for their maintenance in this place, or
no where. Answ. 1. There is no man to be maintained at the Churches charges,
but either in respect of his present poverty and necessity, or in respect of
his office, which calls him off from the attendance to the maintenance of his
private family unto the public service of the Church. In the former case, if
it fall out that the Deacons be in necessity, they may be supplied with some
maintenance from the Church, as well as any other of the poor brethren; and
so, though this Text says nothing concerning them, yet other Scriptures take
care for them: for the Deacons, by the very institution of their office, were
to take up the function which the Apostles laid down (as over troublesome, and
incompatible to their Ministerial employment,) now that which they laid down,
was the serving of tables, and distributing to every brother according to his
need, Acts 6.2. with 4.35. if then their own need require, they may with the
Churches allowance, take themselves of that supply which they dispose to
others. But in respect of their office, there is little cause they should
expect maintenance from the Churches charge; for their office takes them very
little off from attendance to the maintenance of their own family. Seeing by
the Ordinance of Christ they spend no time to go in and out to collect moneys,
but only receive what is brought to them, as an oblation to the Lord, laid down
before them every Lords day in the face of the Church, or else what is brought
home to their own houses, according to the bills they put in on the Lords day;
and look what time they may spend in keeping a just account of what they lay
out, or in visiting any sick or poor brethren, their time and labor spent
herein is sufficiently recompensed by the use of the Churches stock, or
treasury lying in their hands. Secondly, besides, this Text calls for
maintenance to those Elders in respect of their office of ruling well, but
neither are Deacons styled Elders in any place of Scripture, neither is their
office a place of rule, but of service to Tables; so that this Text will by no
force be racked to bear this interpretation.

2. Another interpretation is fetched from that which is said to be the proper
and usual force of the word (...), which is more then simply to labor, even
to weary a man's self with labor; so that this sense they make of the Apostles
words, the Pastors or Elders that discharge their places well, are worthy of
double honor, chiefly they which weary themselves with labor and care to
teach and admonish.

Answ. (...) in the Apostles language, does not note out any intention or
labor in some above others, but simply such pains, in a place somewhat
parallel to this, 1 These. 5.12. where the Apostle exhorts the Thessalonians
to acknowledge their Ministers and Rulers with singular love for their works
sake, he calls all their Ministers (...), and makes their (...), the common
work and labor of them all, not any intensive or eminent labor of some above
others; and in Romans 16.12. when the Apostle speaks of some godly women, that
either took pains about him, or about other spiritual work, when he speaks
of intensive or eminent pains and labor, he adds another word to (...), that
may express so much; but if he speak simply and positively of labor, henseth
the word (...) alone, Salute (says he, v. 12.) Tryphena and Tryphosa, (...),
which is translated simply, who labor in the Lord; but when he speaks of
others, that took more painful labor, salute Mary, verse. 6. (says he) (...),
which bestowed much labor upon us, and ver. 12. salute the beloved, (...),
which is translated who labored much in the Lord; and therefore in this Text
in Timothy, if we strain not Paul's words beyond his wonted meaning, he means no
more by Elders (...), then such who labor in word and doctrine, and then he
distinguishes the Elders that rule well, from the Elders that labor in word
and doctrine simply, by their different acts, about different objects, some
Elders being conversant about the well ruling of the lives and manners of the
people, others being conversant in labors about the word and doctrine.

3. A third interpretation is given of these words, That by Elders ruling well
should be meant Pastors, and Teachers, such as were resident, and abiding in
the Church, affixed to the place for the rule of it, and by (...), those that
traveled from place to place, to visit and to confirm the Churches. To confirm
this sense of (...), the place, 1 Cor. 15.10. is quoted, where Paul says of
himself, (...), which if he had meant of labor in Word and Doctrine, it might
have seemed arrogance in him to prefer himself before the rest of the
Apostles in that work, and it would have imputed some aspersion of negligence
to them; but if it be meant of his labor and travel through many countries
and nations, for the spreading of the Gospel, so he might speak truly, and
soberly, that he had labored more abundantly then them all: to the same
purpose, Mary's (...), and the labor of Tryphena, Tryphosa and Persis are
alleged out of Romans 16.6.12. as if the first had traveled much for Paul; and
all of them had labored in the Lord, in ways of travel, far and near, by
private persuasions, to propagate the Gospel.

Answ. This interpretation, is indeed traveled for, and far fetched, but such
is our nature, willing enough to travel, far and wide, to avoid the authority
of an unwelcome truth; how much nearer at hand and fitter were it, to fetch the
Apostles meaning from himself, and to take the sense of his words here,
according to the sense and use of the same words in a like place, 1 These. 5.12.
where the Apostles (...), are not travelers abroad, but (...), laborers
amongst you. Their own Pastors, and Teachers, resident with them, and laborers
amongst them. Paul's laboring more abundantly then all the rest of the
Apostles, if it were not in word and doctrine, is impertinently alleged to
show the sense of the word in this place, where he speaks expressly of
laboring in word and doctrine: Nor had it been arrogance in Paul to have
spoken of his own greater labors, then of his fellow-Apostles in the Ministry
of the Gospel, without respect to his travels, for his Ministry was
accompanied more then all the rest, with greater afflictions and wrastlings,
both within and without, whether he stayed in any place, or traveled abroad;
and he might well think it necessary for him (as indeed the law of
righteousness and gratitude required it of him) to take the more pains for
Christ in preaching of the Gospel after his conversion, who had labored more
busily then all the rest against Christ, and against the Gospel before his
conversion; nor is (...), or (...) an usual word in that language, to express
traveling to be more then any other labor either of body or mind.

The (...) or labor of Mary does not appear to be in travel up and down with
Paul, but rather in some diligent hospitality and service unto him; but whether
in travel, or in her house, is not at all expressed in the Word: Sure it is
Paul denies the taking of a sister or wife up and down in travel, though he
acknowleged it lawful to have taken a wife, 1 Cor. 9.5. but to have taken a
sister along, to have traveled up and down the countries with him, may well be
thought to be far from him, who was ever careful to follow things of good
report, and to provide for things honest, not only in the sight of God, but of
all men. The labors of Tryphena and Tryphosa, and Persis, do not imply
traveling up and down, but rather their own wrastlings with spiritual
conflicts, either in their own hearts, or else with other conflicting
Christians in the places where they dwell, to settle them in the peace of the
Lord Jesus, according to the same sense of the word, Mat. 11.28.

The 4th and last interpretation of these words in Timothy (which we see
takes with the most judicious amongst the adversaries of this Ordinance) is,
that here not two sorts of Elders, but two parts of the office of preaching
Elders are set forth: The one, good life and good government; and the other,
good doctrine and painfulnesse therein; and this latter preferred before the
other, as more worthy of due honor and recompense.

Now for answer hereunto, it may be considered, that good government, either of
a man's life, or of the people, or as the Apostles words be, their ruling well,
may either be taken properly and strictly, as rule is distinguished from
ministry of the Word and Sacraments; or more largely for the whole office of a
good Elder, Been praeesse, to be a good president. If to rule well, be taken in
the former sense properly, then it acknowledges Elders that attend to rule, to
be worthy of double honor, without respect to their labor, in the ministry
of the Word, which is the sense of the place that we build upon; for if it
should be said, that the Apostle speaks of Ministers or Preachers, that they
ruling well, are worthy of double honor, though they do not labor in Word
and Doctrine; the wiser sorts of opposites do discern that would not suite
with the Apostles mind, who would be so far from thinking, that well ruling,
but not painful preaching Ministers should be worthy of double honor, that he
would account them worthy of little or no honor at all. And they fitly quote
for this purpose, the place before alleged, 1 These. 5.12. where when the
Apostle calls for singular love, and honor to their overseers, for their
works sake, he puts in there, Laboring amongst them (to wit, in the Word)
without which no such respect were due to them. They therefore take the Apostles
words in the latter sense; understanding by well ruling, the whole office, even
all the duties of good presidents: As if the Apostle had said, the Elders that
rule well, that is, who are good rulers, and presidents, They are worthy of
double honor; chiefly they who labor in preaching the Word. And they give for
example this instance: Logicians, who reason well, that is, all good Logicians,
are to be honored, especially those who judge well, or are judicious; where,
not two sorts of Logicians are held forth, but two duties or faculties of all
Logicians, in respect of which they are to be honored; the one general to
reason well, the other special to judge well; and these disposed, not in a
distribution, but in a comparative sentence, preferring the later before the
former.

Answ. But neither will this sense stand with the Apostles words and meaning:
for hereupon this absurdity would follow, that if well-ruling in the former
part of the sentence, held forth generally all the duties of good Ministers,
and laboring in word and doctrine, (in the later part) one special part of
their office, then the other, good Ministers, for doing all. Neither does the
instance given of Logicians help: for it may be truly said of Logicians; that
Logicians who reason well, that is, all good Logicians, are worthy of honor,
especially they who are judicious, because, if they only reason well in
invention, though they be not judicious, yet such also are commendable. But
it is not truly said of Ministers, that if they rule well, that is, do their
office well in Discipline and Rule, though they labor not in word and
Doctrine, that they are commendable; but otherwise, if Logicians, be good as
well in judgment as in invention, and so perform both the parts of their art
well; it may be said indeed, that they are commendable and honorable, but it
cannot be said without absurdity, that such as are judicious are more
commendable, or chiefly to be honored above those that are both ingenuous and
judicious, both parts are doubtless better then either alone: neither will the
absurdity be helped by saying Logicians that reason well, both in invention and
in judgment, are worthy of honor, or double honor, especially they that
excel in judgment; for though speech be rational, yet the like cannot be
applied in this Text: for it is not said in the Text, the Elders that rule well
are worthy of double honor, especially they that excel in preaching, which
labor does not hold forth excellency (as has been showed before, but only
positively and simply pains taking, in preaching, the common act and work of
all good Ministers, 1 These. 5.12. The issue of all is, that when men of
learning and judgment have wearied their wits and strength, to shoulder out
ruling Elders, from this Text, yet such is the evidence and wisdom of the holy
Ghost, in the word, that it may well appear, the weakness of God is stronger
then men, and the foolishness of God wiser then men; the words cannot but
approve two sorts of Elders, and both worthy of double honor, both they that
rule well, though they labor not in preaching, and especially they that do
labor in preaching; but this interpretation will by no means satisfy some of
a contrary judgment, for three reasons, to speak nothing of the fourth, the
pretended probability of other interpretations, which have been refuted already.

First say they, the Text it self clearly renounceth non-preaching Elders; for
both sorts of Elders spoken of, are expressly acknowledged in the Text to be
worthy of double honor, that is, not reverence only, but maintenance at the
charge of the Church; but that non-preaching Elders should by Gods institution
have received maintenance at the Churches hand, is a thing so strange, and
unheard of, that until I see it justly proved, (says B. Bilson) I cannot
possibly believe it. Answ. It is very true, the Apostle by double honor, does
not mean reverence only, but maintenance; But why should it seem so strange a
thing, and unheard of, that ruling Elders, though not Preachers, should partake
in maintenance from the Churches treasury? do you think such men speak in good
earnest, when they so speak? Whence have the Chancellors, Commissaries, and
Officialls their maintenance, but from the Church? and do they labor in word
and doctrine? are not most of them Civilians? and if we may use the word
without offense, mere Laymen? but our ruling Elders, we utterly deny them to
be Laymen as the word is commonly meant in this controversy; but
Church Officers set apart to their office by the election of the people, and by
imposition of hands: but if they were Laymen (which they are not) yet you see
it is no strange or unheard of matter, that Churches should be bountiful to
the maintenance of sundry sorts of Church Rulers, who are merely Laymen, as
their adversaries misconceive these to be; yea, what were the many Cloisters of
Munks, and Friars and Nuns, in the times of Popery? were they Preachers of the
Word? were they not Laymen and women? and yet did the Churches of those times
grudge them their maintenance upon pretense of their laity? But the world will
love his own; be there never so many idle Droans, or stately Rulers of man's own
devising, the Church must supply them not only with maintenance, but with
magnificence; but let the Lord appoint ruling Elders, according to the
simplicity of the Gospel, to assist his Ministers in the work of government,
that they might attend the more to labor in the Word, if they shall expect
from the Church any maintenance for their works sake, Oh! that seems a
strange matter, and unheard of from all antiquity, till this present age.

The second Reason why lay Elders, (as they miscall them ruling Elders (as we
with Paul call them) are not meant in Paul's Text, is because Paul mentioning
the Presbyters but once in all his Epistles, excludes all lay Elders from that
Presbytery, Neglect not (says he) the grace which is in thee, which was given
thee by prophecy, with impositions by the hands of the Presbytery, 2 Timothy
4.14. This Christian Presbytery gave imposition of hands to ordain Ministers;
but lay Elders had no right to impose hands to that purpose; therefore Laymen
were none of this Presbytery; for if the Presbytery be taken for the company
of Elders, none were of that company but such as might give imposition of
hands; or, if Presbytery be taken for the office of an Elder, then none might
take that function on him, but must receive imposition of hands, as Timothy
did, then Laymen which neither give nor receive imposition of hands, are
wholly debarred both from the degree, and from the society of the Presbytery,
that was in Paul's time. Our answer consists of three points:

First, Lay Elders we disclaim, but ruling Elders, though not attending to
preaching, as they have their election from the people who are the body of the
Church; so are they ordained and set apart from amongst the people by
imposition of hands of the officers of the Church, who are the Presbytery, the
company of Elders: for by Presbytery, we conceive cannot be there meant the
office of an Elder; for he speaks of such a Presbytery, as laid on hands:
now it is not the office of an Elder, but the company of Elders, that lay on
hands.

Answ. 2. When it is said, no man can give what he has not received; the
light of Nature, the law of Moses, the Gospel of Christ, do all of them make a
ready answer for us. The law of Nature tells us, It is not necessary, that they
that give should always formally have beforehand received that power which
they give; it is enough if they have received it virtually: For instance, a
multitude of free people may elect and ordain a King over them, and yet none of
them had before hand received Kingly power; it is enough they have a virtuall
power, to set up and to submit unto any lawful form of government, which they
see good for themselves in the land. The people of Israel (to wit, some in the
name of the rest, for all could not at once) impose their hands upon the
Levites, Numb. 8.10. and yet they were not Levites themselves, nor had received
imposition of hands themselves, and yet may nevertheless impose hands upon
others. In the Gospel of Christ, the power of the Keys is given to the Church,
to Peter, not as an Apostle, nor as an Elder, but as a professed believer; in the
name of believers, and upon occasion of the profession of his faith, Mat.
16.16. to 19. whereupon the binding and loosing (which is the power of the
Keys) is attributed to the whole Church, Mat. 18.17, 18. If then the power of
the Keys which is the whole body of Church Power, be given to the body of the
Church, though it be not in their power to exercise their pastoral preaching
of the Word, and administering of the Sacraments, yet it is in their power to
elect such whom God has furnished with gifts among them unto such offices as
may dispense all the holy things of God to them; and by imposition of hands, to
dedicate them to God, and to the public service of his Church. Now if the
whole Church have this power to impose hands upon their officers, in their
first ordination, how can it seem a strange and unheard of thing, or an absurd
matter, that ruling Elders should together with the Pastor and Teachers, (all
of them making up the Presbytery of the Church) impose hands in the name of
the Lord, and of the Church upon the ordained?

Answ. 3. Besides, there be that conceive, and that not improbably, that in
ancient time, the children baptized in the Church were not received to the
Lords Supper, nor into the full fruition of all Church liberties, until that
they being grown up to years, did publicly before the Church profess their
faith, and ratify the covenant made for them in Baptism, and so were
confirmed (as they (...) (which is but a small remnant in comparison) 300.
years were spent in the Primitive persecutions, whereof we have few monuments
of Antiquity extant, written in that time; those we have speak so of Elders,
as do indifferently comprise as well Ruling Elder, as Teaching Elders;
Ignatius his Presbyters, whom he styles the Court of God, the Combination of
the Apostles of Christ, the holy Assembly, and Counselors and Assessors of the
Bishops; with all these Epithets may as well agree to Ruling Elders, as to
Preachers: The Scripture does not disdain to admit Civil Magistrates into the
fellowship of Gods Tabernacle, Psalm. 82.1. And why not then the Rulers of his
Church? For Tertullian his Elders, who were Presidents over the Censures of the
Church, and attained that honor, not by Bribes, but by approved Testimony,
Apologetic. Chap. 29. what is there in his whole description of them, but is
compatible to Ruling Elders, as well as to Preaching? Yea Cyprian (who lived in
those ancient bloody, but zealous times) does expressly acknowledge Elders that
were not Preachers: For it evidently appears in the fifth Epistle of his
fourth Book, that he ordained Calinus and Ancellus to be Presbyters of his
Church, who were no Preachers but readers only; and yet were to be maintained
Sportulis communibus, (that is, at the common charge of the Church) with the
Presbyters, and to sit with himself in their grown years. It appears also
in the tenth Epistle of his fourth Book, That he ordained Numiditus a
Confessor, to be a Presbyter of his Church, who was not at first called to be a
Preacher. Ambrose, though he outlived those times of purer government, yet
bears full witness to the honorable use of Ruling Elders in the Church
before his time; For in his Comment on 1 Timothy 15.1. giving a reason why the
Apostle would have Elders in years honored, even in the healing of their
faults, he urges the honor of old age in all Nation. Whence, says he, it was
that the Synagogue, and afterward the Church had Elders, without whose
Counsel nothing was done in the Church: which by what negligence is grown out
of use in the Church, I know not, unless by the sloth of Teachers, or rather
pride, whilst they only would seem to be somewhat. Against this testimony,
because it is pregnant, sundry exceptions (or rather evasions) are taken. As 1.
That the Author of this Testimony was not that ancient Ambrose, the famous
Bishop of Millaine, but some other later of that name Ans. And what though? yet
all men acknowledge this other Ambrose, whose Testimony this is, to be an
ancient learned Writer, and therefore his Testimony of the Antiquity of Ruling
Elders, is sufficient to silence that charge and brave flourish, that Ruling
Elders are utterly unknown, and unheard of from all Antiquity for 1500.
years. A second Exception they give, is that Ambrose speaks not of Elders in
Office, but in years, without whose Counsel, not without whose authority
nothing was done in the Church.

Answ. 1. It is evident he speaks of the Elders in the Church, as in the
Synagogue,; now the Elders were Rulers in the Synagogues, as appears by
sundry places in the Gospel. 2. That nothing was done without their counsel,
implies, that nothing was done without their authority, as the same phrase of
other Ancients imply, when they speak of the concurrence of the Council of
Presbyters in Church Government; for in that sense speaks Cyprian to his
Presbyters, ( Epistolarum lib. 3. Epist. 10.) A primordio Episcopatus mei, I
determined with my self, nihil sine consilio vestro and sine consensu plebis
mea privatim sententia gerere, and that not out of courtesy, but as the words
in the next sentence implies, Sicuti honor mutuus poscit. And in the same sense
Jeromes words to the like purpose implies Authority in such Councels, whereby
the Presbyters of each Church governed their own Church; though otherwise in
governing other Churches, they imply rather advice then authority: his words
are before factions and schisms grew in the Church; Communi Presbyterorum
consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur. Hierome in the 2. Tome of his works, and upon
Titus. A third exception they give is, that by Elders are meant preaching
Elders, whom the Bishops were wont to consult withal, in government, but now
had left it off, either by the idleness of the learned Teachers, who for their
own ease gave over meddling with matters pertaining to government, or by the
pride of the learned Bishops, who took all upon themselves, that they alone
might seem to be somewhat; For if you expound Pastorum for the Teachers or
Pastors of Parishes only, as the Presbyterians do; or for Bishops alone, as
others do; I cannot see (says Dr. Downham) how the excluding of Seniors and
taking the whole burden and employment upon themselves, could by Ambrose be
imputed as a matter of sloth and idleness, either in the Pastor to exclude lay
Elders, or in Bishops to exclude learned Presbyters. Ans. 1. The words of
Ambrose do plainly imply, not only that consulting with Elders was grown out of
use, but that the Elders themselves, who were wont to be consulted with, were
grown out of use also: for his words be, the Synagogue, and afterward the
Church had Elders, without whose counsel nothing was done in the Church, etc.
which plainly intimates, the Church formerly had such, but then has them not,
they are obsolete, and accordingly consulting with them is obsolete also. 2. It
is plain these Elders are opposite to Doctors or Teachers, or (if you will so
construe them) learned men, and therefore these Elders were neither Doctors nor
Teachers, nor Learned men. But to appropriate the name of Doctors or Teachers,
or Learned men to Bishops only, were too great an arrogance in Bishops, and too
great an injury to the learned Pastors and Teachers in every age, till
Antichrist his darkness overwhelmed all in ignorance, as well Bishops as
Pastors. 3. It may be marvelled, why those learned opposites, that make this
exception should understand Ambrose to attribute it to the idleness of the
Teachers, that for their own ease they gave over meddling in matters
appertaining to government, when as rather it was the Bishops and their parties
idleness, that they gave over laboring in Word and Doctrine, and their pride,
that they engrossed all rule and government into their own hands; and
therefore, when they say, they cannot see how the excluding of Seniors, and the
taking of the whole burden of government upon themselves, could by Ambrose be
imputed as a matter of sloth and idleness, either in the Pastors or Bishops;
surely, if men do not willingly shut their eyes, they may see, and daily
experience makes it palpably evident, that they who are most idle in teaching,
are most busy and proud in government; so that the Doctorum desidia, aut magis
superbia, which Ambrose makes to be the two causes why Seniors in the Church,
and consulting with them, were then both of them grown out of use, need no
Comment to expound the same, but the perpetual practice of those persons, who
have from the former ages, to this very day, usurped all Church Government into
their own hands.

If any man say (as some have done) that whatsoever this Ambrose says, yet
that famous Bishop Ambrose does utterly disclaim it, in his Epistle to
Valentinian, that any lay Ruler should be Judge of Church-offices and causes;
let him take for an answer that which has been often given; that we utterly
deny those ruling Elders to be Laymen, or lay Judges, but part of that Church
body which those ancient times called Clerus.

If it be said again (as also it is) that Ambrose calls his Presbyters,
Antistites, and Vicars of God, and such like styles of high honor, let them
understand, that the least office of rule in the Church of God, (to a
spiritual eye) will easily and safely admit as great acknowledgements as these
be; only to flesh and blood nothing seems divine and high but secular pomp
and worldly glory.

Having thus rescued the Testimony of Ambrose unto Ruling Elders from all
Exceptions (of any colorable weight) made against it; Let us add only one
observation out of Antiquity, which may give some further light to the cause
in hand. It is well known to all such as are studious of Antiquity, that it
was counted a rare and insolent matter for an Elder to preach in the presence
of a Bishop, which was the cause why the good old Bishop Valerius was hardly
spoken of, for suffering Augustine, a Presbyter (though a learned Presbyter) to
preach before him; which is said never any African Bishop had allowed before
him. Now whence should such an offense as was taken against Valerius arise, but
from translating the silence of Ruling Elders from Preaching in the presence of
Pastors and Teachers, unto those Presbyters also, who were called often to preach
the Word freely and diligently as well as the Bishops themselves? But when
through corruption of times, Bishops claimed to themselves the principal
pastoral cure of Souls, then it was taken for an offensive matter, that
Teaching Elders should preach before them; as before it was unwonted for Ruling
Elders to preach before the Teaching ordinarily.

Object. But there remains one objection or two, which some learned and
prudent men have made against the office of Ruling Elders.

Object. 1. It is not credible that the office of Ruling Elders should be of
Divine or Apostolical Institution, and no footsteps left of it in any Church
of Christ, for these many hundred years. Popery it self, though it corrupted
all Ordinances, yet retains some footsteps of every Ordinance of Christ,
though much perverted from the first Institution: But there are no footsteps at
all of those Ruling Elders extant, in any Church, but those of Genevah, and
such as have followed their pattern. For though some tell us of Churchwardens
and Vestry men in the Parish Churches of England, who assist the Preachers in
the governing of the Church, yet there is a great difference between them and
Ruling Elders; For these Churchwardens and Vestry men, are appointed not for
assistance to the Ministers in governing the Church, but for other purposes: As
Churchwardens for keeping the Churches stock, and laying it out upon necessary
repaires of the place of Gods Worship, (called the Church) and the Vestry being
a company of the wisest and richest Parishioners, that have been, or are to be
Churchwardens, are exercised in auditing the accounts of the Churchwardens
and Collectors for the poor. And though now and then they are taken up in
admonishing an unruly neighbor, yet they do it not by Authority, as Rulers,
but by Christian discretion and charity.

Answ. We do not say, that Churchwardens and Vestry men, are the same with
Ruling Elders; for though they are both chose by the body of the Church, yet in
the choice, the qualifications of Ruling Elders are not attended to; nor are
they so ordained, either with the like holy Solemnity, or invested with the
same measure of spiritual power, nor allowed to continue for life, as Ruling
Elders are, and ought to be; But yet such as they be, we may see in them some
footsteps and remnants, (and as it were Rudera) of that holy and ancient
Ordinance, so much as is escaped out of the ruins of Antichristian Apostasy:
For to say nothing of Chancellors, Commissaries, and Officialls, (who are mere
Lay Elders, and yet administer Church Government, not in one Church only, but
in many scores of Churches,) what other thing sounds the very name of
Churchwardens, Guardiani Ecclesiae, but Church-Guardians, or Church-Rulers?
And what is the company of Vestrymen, but a kind of a Consistory?

Secondly, Though by the Sophistry of Satan and of his Vicar (the man of sin) a
great part of this care is transformed from ordering the spiritual body of the
Church, to take care of the body of the material Church or Temple, yet what
power of Government is left in any Congregation (besides Preaching the Word)
the Churchwardens and Vestery men do assist the Ministers in managing the
same: they observe all scandalous disorders, that are found in any of the
Church-Ministers or people, they admonish the offenders: And though they be
over-rulers to present all disorders to the Cathedral Church (and the Officers
thereof) which of right they should complain of (when the offenders are
incorrigible) only to their own Congregation, yet it is an usual thing for
the Bishop, and his Officers, to return such offenders (having first paid them
their fees) to the Minister, and Churchwardens, to make acknowledgement of
their offenses before them, and to profess their amendment, of which also they
must bring a Certificate under the Minister and Churchwardens hands. Yea, (of
our knowledge) there be some peculiar privileged Churches in England, exempted
from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop, and his Officers, where the
Churchwardens, and Ministers, either by themselves, or with the consent of the
Congregation, do transact all that Government, which in other Churches the
Bishop and his Officers do invade and usurp; as to admonish offenders, to
enjoyne acknowledgement of scandalous offenses, and to debar from the
Sacraments, etc. And by this means they repress idleness, drunkenness,
swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and the like disorders, with better success then
other Towns can do; who have the help of Major and Justices, but not so much
spiritual power in the Church: but by that power which is still left in some
Churches unto their Ministers and Guardians, (or Rulers) it may not obscurely
appear, that anciently they did enjoy it amongst themselves, before one Church
began to Lord it over another.

Object. The other Objection which is made against Ruling Elders is, That it is
a matter of perilous consequence to set up Rulers in the Church, and that by
Authority from the Word of God, when yet the Word has no where set forth the
limits and bounds of their Authority.

Answ. The word of God has clearly enough limited the bounds of a Ruling
Elders Calling, and the work of his Rule: For since all Ecclesiastical power,
is the power of the keys; (not of the Sword, Matthew. 16.19.) And, the Kingdom
of Christ is not of this world, Joh. 18.36. It is plain, no Church-Governour
may take up the power of the sword, to wit, Civil Jurisdiction, without
usurpation; The power of the sword is Princely, Lordly; But the power of the
Keys is only Stewardly and Ministerial; For so it is said, the Keys of the
House of David to Eliakim, Isa. 22.22. And, he was over the House, Ver. 15.
Which phrase of being over the House, is translated properly, Genesis 43.19.
Steward of the House. Seeing then the Kingdom of Christ is spiritnall, and not
worldly, and the Government of his Kingdom is not Lordly, but Stewardly and
Ministerial, evident it is that these Ruling Elders in the Church, may only
attend to works of spiritual and ministerial Rule: And further, because such
acts of spiritual Rule, as are dispensed in the preaching of the Word, the
Ruling Elders are not called to attend unto, but that work is left unto
Pastors and Teachers; Therefore plain it is, that what acts soever of
spiritual Rule and Government, Christ has committed to his Church over and
above the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments: All such acts of Rule are
committed to the Ruling Elders, and none but such.

To Instance then in the particular duties of the Ruling Elders Office: The
Ruling Elders having received the keys of Christ's House, as his Stewards; it
does belong to their Power.

1. To open and shut the doors of Christ's House or Church; that is, to admit
and receive all members and Officers into place in the Church, (with the
consent of the Church) and to keep out the unworthy: Hence Ministers are said
to be ordained and admitted into office by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. And if Ministers be admitted through their hands into
office in the Church, how much more private members after due trial.

2. If they have power to open the doors of the Church, by admitting officers
and other members into the Church, and keeping out the unworthy, (shutting the
doors against them) Then they have also power (with the consent of the Church,
and their fellow- Elders, as in the former) to cast out of the Church by
Excommunication such as fall into scandalous offenses within the Church, and
do persist therein; For Ejusdem porestatis est destituere, cujus est
instituere, The same keys that have power to open the doors, have power to
shut it.

3. As it is the office of a Steward in a family, so it is of the Elders in the
Church, To see that none live Inordinately, without a calling, or idly in a
calling, but every one employed and set a work to his Lords advantage, 2 These.
3.10, 11, 12.

4. As a Steward in the family is not to suffer any members in the family to
hinder his fellows in his Lords work, so neither ought the Ruling Elder to
suffer any to walk scandalously in the Congregation; for that hinders
edification, which is the work that each one in his place is to set forward in
the house of God: And the Church-Rulers are to attend to see it done
accordingly.

5. It is the Ruling Elders office to prepare matters for the Congregation, as
much as may be, to prevent their trouble, by keeping out such complaints, and
other matters, as are not yet ripe for the Churches cognizance; And by ordering
such things as are to be presented to them; Paul consulteth with the Elders as
well as with the Apostles at Jerusalem, before he presented himself to the
agitation of the Church, Act. 21.18. to 24.

6. It belongs to the Ruling Elders (as well as to the Teachers) to moderate
the carriage of all matters in the Congregation Assembled, as to call on
Strangers of other Churches or members to speak upon occasion, Act. 13.15. And
such as may call men forth to speak, may call for silence when speech is
unseasonable.

7. Those Elders of Ephesus, whom Paul sent for, to wit, both the Teaching and
Ruling Elders, (Acts 20.17.) those he commands to feed the flock of God, ver.
28. which implies they should be able, not only to rule, but to instruct the
people, though not by attending to a word of Exhortation, (which is the Pastors
office) nor by attending to a word of doctrine, (which is the Teachers office)
yet by attending to a word of Admonition; For the Apostle makes Admonition the
work of them that are over the Church in the Lord, 1 These. 5.12. that is, that
Rule over them. The same word which is ascribed to Ruling Elders, (1 Timothy
5.17.) whom he joyneth with those that labor in word and doctrine in both
places. And indeed Rule without counsel and instruction is dumb. Thus all
Elders are apt to teach, according to 1 Timothy 3.5.

8. It is a part of their office (though it be not theirs alone) to visit the
sick, (especially when they are sent for) and together with some counsel and
admonition to pray for them, and to help forward their spiritual estate; as
Jam. 5.14, 15, 16.

We have been the more large in clearing the several sorts of these Elders,
which Christ has ordained in his Church, because we find Satan has been
very busy to set the wits of men a work, both to confound the several
Functions of the Pastor and Teacher, and utterly to abandon the office of a
Ruling Elder.

Now for Deacons, which are the other ordinary Officers, ordained by Christ for
the perpetual service of the Church: All men do acknowledge them both to be
Instituted expressly in the Scriptures, ( Acts 6.2. to 6. 1 Timothy 3.8. to 13.)
and continued in the Church throughout all ages, though not without sundry
mixtures of corruptions in the practice of the Church, which is impertinent to
our purpose to prosecute, who only intend to declare and clear our own
practice and proceedings.

Deacons therefore we reserve in our Churches, but without distinction of
pre-eminence of some of them above others: much less over the Ministers and
Elders: Neither do we employ them about the Ministry of the Word, nor about
the Government of the Church; For the Apostles thought themselves unmeet, both
to attend to the Ministry of the Word, and to prayer, and to serve Tables
also; And therefore the work which the Apostles laid down, and which the
Deacons were elected and ordained to take up, was the serving of Tables, Act.
6.2. to wit, the serving of all those Tables which pertained to the Church to
provide for, which are, the Lords Table, the Tables of the Ministers (or
Elders) of the Church, and the Tables of the poor brethren, whether of their
own body, or strangers; for the maintaining whereof, we do not appoint them
to go up and down to collect the Benevolences of abler Brethren, but as the
Apostles received the oblations of the Brethren, brought and laid down at
their feet, ( Acts 4.35.) and thereby made distribution as the (...) use of
the Church required; so the Deacons being ordained to take up and execute that
part of the office which the Apostles laid down; they receive the Oblations of
the Brethren every Lords day, brought unto them and laid down before them, or
else brought unto them on the week day, and distribute the same, as the use and
need of the Church does require.

SECT. III.
AS for Widows, whom Paul speaks of, as Vervants to the Church, (2 Timothy 5.9,
10.) we look at them as fit Assistants to the Deacons, in ministering to the
sick poor Brethren in sundry needful services, which are not so fit for men
to put their hands unto: only we find it somewhat rare to find a woman of
so great an age (as the Apostle describes, to wit, of threescore years) and
withal, to be so hearty, and healthy, and strong, as to be fit to undertake
such a service.

SECT. IV.
HAving thus declared what are the Officers we desire to supply each of our
Churches withal; we come now to declare in what manner they are Chosen and
Ordained unto their Offices.

When therefore any of the Churches are destitute of any of these Officers, the
Brethren of the Church (according to the Apostles advice, in defect of Deacons,
and so in defect of all other Officers) they look out from amongst themselves,
such persons as are in some measure qualified according to the direction of the
Word; Elders according to 1 Timothy 3.2. to 7. Tit. 1.6. to 9. Deacons according
to Acts 6.3. 1 Timothy 3.8. to 12. For the Church has not absolute power to
choose whom they list, but ministerial power only, to choose whom Christ has
chosen, has gifted and fitted for them. If the Church can find out none such
in their own body, they send to any other Church for fit supply, and each
Church looks at it as their duty to be mutually helpful one to another, in
yielding what supply they may, without too much prejudice to themselves,
according to Cant. 8.8, 9. Such being recommended to them for such a work, they
take some time of trial of them, partly by their own observation and
communion with them, partly by consultation with the Elders of other Churches
(continuing there) in so great a work; to fulfill the command of the Apostle,
Lay hands suddenly on no man, 1 Timothy 3.22. For every man of good gifts is not
always endowed with an honest and good heart; and every good heart is not
fitted to close (so fully as were meet) with every good people: Every key is
not fit to open every Lock; nor every good man's gift fit to edify every
people: But when upon trial, the Church does find every man's spirit among
them desirous of the fellowship of the man, and his gifts; then they agree
amongst themselves upon a certain day, wherein in a solemn manner they intend
to Elect him to office amongst themselves. Of this they give notice to all the
near adjoining Churches, whom, and when, and to what office they intend to
choose such a man, whom they nominate to them, entreating their presence, and
brotherly counsel, and assistance at the day appointed: They give notice also
thereof unto the Governor, and such other of the Magistrates, as are near to
them, that the person to be chosen meeting with no just exception from any, may
find the greater encouragement and acceptance from all.

When the day is come, it is kept as a day of humiliation, with fasting,
praying, and preaching the Word, according to the pattern, Act. 14.23. and
13.1, 2, 3.

Toward the end of the day, one of the Elders of the Church (if they have any)
if not, one of the graver Brethren of the Church, (appointed by themselves to
order the work of the day) stands up and inquireth of the Church, If now
after this solemn seeking of God for his counsel and direction in this
weighty work, they still continue in their purpose, to elect such a one for
their own Pastor, or Teacher, or Ruling Elder, whom before they agreed upon;
Then having taken their silence for a consent to their purpose. He proceeds
to inquire into the approbation of the rest of the Assembly, not only the
Messengers, and Brethren of other Churches present, but of all that stand by;
because and Elder is to be a man of good report of them that are without, (1 Timothy 3.7.) how much more well approved of the Churches of Christ? He demands
therefore of the Churches first, and then of the rest, whether any of them have
known of any evil, in the man presented before them, either in judgment, or
practice, which might give them just cause to forbear his election? If all
keep silence (as usually they do, for if any have any just exception against
the man, he is wont to acquaint some or other of the Church with it before the
day) he turns himself to the Church again. Now seeing all is clear for
their free election of him to such an office, he desires all the Brethren of
that Church, to declare their Election of him with one accord, by lifting up
their hands; which being done, he desires to know of the party chosen,
whether he does accept of that calling, which the Church has given him in the
name of Christ unto that office? He having expressed his acceptance (upon such
grounds, as wherein he has chiefly seen the hand of God leading him
thereunto,) the Elder does then admonish the Church what duties the Lord
requires of them all in his Word toward him, whom they have thus chosen; And
afterward advertiseth him what duties the Lord requires of him in that place
toward the Church; And having taken the acknowledgements of them both, of
their mutual duty toward one another; He then with the Presbytery of that
Church (if they have any, if not two or three others of the gravest Christians
amongst the Brethren of that Church, being deputed by the body) do in the name
of the Lord Jesus ordain him unto that Office, with imposition of hands,
calling upon the Lord, (who has furnished him with spiritual gifts, and bowed
the hearts of the Church to call him to that office) to accept and own him
therein, to enlarge his heart and spirit, according to all the duties thereof,
to breath in all his administrations, and to guide and bless all his going out
and coming in before them: And so turning his speech upon the person on whom
their hands are imposed, He as the mouth of the Presbytery, expresses their
ordination of him to that office in the name of the Lord Jesus, and puts a
solemn charge upon him to look well to himself, and to the whole flock, over
which the Holy Ghost has made him an overseer, as one that must give account
of all their souls unto the great Shepherd of the sheep, at the day of his
appearing. After this the Elders of their Churches present, observing the
presence of God, both in the duties of that day performed by the Officer then
chosen, and ordained, and in the orderly proceeding of the Church to his
Election and Ordination, one of them in the name of all the rest, does give
unto him the right hand of fellowship, in the sight of all the Assembly,
testifying their Brotherly acceptance of him, and their thankfulness to God
for his gracious gift bestowed on him, and does exhort him in the Lord to
fulfill the ministry which he has received of the Lord.

And, so after public praise given to God by him in the name of the Church, he
dissolveth the Assembly with a Blessing.

SECT. V.
FOr our calling of Deacons, we hold it not necessary to ordain them with like
solemnity, of fasting and prayers, as is used in the Ordination of Elders;
because we do not read the Apostles gave any president thereof in the
Ordination of the first Deacons at Jerusalem, Act. 6. But the Brethren of the
Church having looked out among themselves men fitly qualified for that calling,
according to the Scriptures formerly mentioned, and having made some proofs of
them according to the Rule (1 Timothy 3.10.) the Elders with the consent of the
Church upon some Lords day, or other public holy meeting, do ordain them to
the Office, and appoint them over that business, with prayer and imposition of
hands.

SECT. VI.
OBject. Two things are here demanded; First, by what warrant the People choose
their Officers?

Answ. From the President of the Apostolical Churches. In the choosing of an
Apostle, the voices of people went as far as any humane Suffrages could go;
of an hundred and twenty, they chose two, and presented them before the Lord,
and his Apostles. And because and Apostle was immediately to be called of God,
out of those two God chose one, Act. 1.15.23.26. Act. 14.23. The Apostles are
said to have ordained Elders by lifting up of hands, (to wit, of the people) as
the original word implies: And the multitude of the Disciples are directed by
the Apostles to look out and choose seven Deacons, Act. 6.3.15.

The practice of succeeding Churches for many years after, is plain from
Cyprians words, Lib. 1. Epist. 4. Plebs maxim potestatem habet vel dignos
Sacerdotes eligendi, vel indignos recusandi.

Object. 2. It is also demanded, by what warrant does a particular Church
depute such who are not Presbyters, to lay their hands upon Presbyters? Were it
not more regular and orderly to repair to some Bishop, to receive imposition
of hands from him? or as the Presbyters in every Church in Crete, received
imposition of hands from Titus, who was left in Crete with Episcopal
Authority for that very end, Tit. 1.5? or rather then take imposition of hands
from laymen (as they are called) why do not the Churches rather entreat the
Elders of other Churches to supply the defect of their own Presbytery, by the
Presbyters of other Churches?

Ans. The warrant by which each particular Church does depute some of their own
body (though not Presbyters) to lay their hands upon those whom they have
chosen to be their Presbyters, is grounded upon the Power of the keys, which
the Lord Jesus Christ (who received all fullness of Power from the Father) has
given to the Church: For the power of the keys, is the power of opening and
shutting, binding and loosing, Matthew. 16.19. And this is given to the whole
Church met together in his name, Mat. 18.18. Whatsoever (says Christ, speaking
of the Church) ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: which is the
whole ministerial power of the Keys.

SECT. VII.
Object. 1. THe Church is not the first subject and receptacle of all
Ecclesiastical power; For though the Church elect a Pastor or other Elder, yet
the office of a Pastor is from Christ, Ephesians. 4.8. And so is his Authority from
Christ also; And if he have neither his Office, nor his Authority from the
Church, how can he be ordained by the imposition of the hands of the Church?

Answ. 1. Though the office of a Pastor in general be immediately from Christ,
and the authority from him also, yet the application of this office, and of
this authority to this elect person, is by the Church; and therefore the
Church has sufficient and just warrant, as to elect and call a Presbyter unto
office, so to ordain him to it, by imposition of hands: They that have Power
to elect a King, have power also to depute some in their name to set the Crown
upon his head.

Answ. 2. As the Authority of the Pastor, and other Elders, is not from the
Church, but from Christ; so neither is their Office and Authority from the
Bishop, nor from the Presbytery, nor from the Classis of Presbyteries; If
therefore that were a just impediment, why the Church should not lay hands upon
their elect Pastors or Elders, because neither their office, nor their
Authority, is from the Church, then neither may the Bishop, nor the
Presbytery, nor the Classis lay their hands upon them; because their office and
Authority is no more (nor so much) from them, as from the Church; nor by this
Argument might the Apostles themselves (if they were present) ordain Officers,
because neither the office nor the Authority is from the Apostles, but from
Christ only. Neither will it follow from hence (as some object) that if the
Elders received their ordination from the Church, then they should execute
their office in the Churches name, or that then they may be more or less
diligent in their office at the Churches appointment, or that then the Church
has a Lord-like power over them, or that then the Elders must receive their
errand from the Church, as an Ambassador does from him from whom he receives
his Commission; or that then the Church, in defect of all Officers, may
perform all duties of their Officers, (as to administer Sacraments, and the
like.)

None of all these things will follow; For 1. Most of these Objections do
strike as much against imposition of hands by Bishops or Presbyters. 2. Though
the Elders do receive the application of their office and of their power by
the Church, yet not from the Church; or if from the Church, ministerially
only, as instruments unto Christ. So that they cannot choose or ordain whom
they please, to what office they please, but whom they see the Lord Jesus has
prepared and fitted for them, and as it were, chosen and ordained to their
hands: nor may they enlarge or straiten the limits of his office whom they do
elect or ordain, but as the Lord has prescribed: nor can they give him any
errand, but only a Charge to look to the ministry which he has received
from the Lord; nor have they any more Lordly power over him, then he over them,
but both ministerial, as they have received from the Lord: neither may they
administer Sacraments, in defect of all Officers, because that by appointment
from Christ pertains only to such as are called by office to preach the
Gospel, Mat. 28.19, 20. As for mutual instruction and admission, election and
ordination of Officers, opening of the doors of the Church by admission of
members, and shutting the same by Church Censures; these things they may do
(if need be) without Officers; yea, and if all their Officers were found
culpable, either in heretical Doctrine, or scandalous crime, yet the Church
has lawful Authority to proceed to the censure of them all: For they that as
a Church might admonish Archippus, ( Col. 4.17.) might (in case he had not
hearkened to their admonition) have proceeded against him to Excommunication;
And they that might so proceed against one of their Officers, might in like
sort (upon like ground) proceed against them all, which they could not do if
the Church did receive the power of the keys not immediately from Christ, but
from the Presbyters: And yet in such cases our Churches are never wont to
proceed, but in the presence, and with the consent and approbation of other
Churches; as knowing that in such weighty cases, in the multitude of
Counselors there is safety: And as the Church does not choose any Elders, but
in the presence, and with the approbation of other Churches; so neither does it
proceed to the censure of them, but with the like grave and solemn assistance.

Object. 2. The Apostles received the power of the keys immediately from
Christ, Joh. 20.23. And therefore the Church received it from the Apostles, and
the Officers of the Churches from them also, and not from the Church.

Answ. It is true, the Apostles being extraordinary Officers, as they were
immediately called and chosen of Christ, not by the Church; so they were most
of them ordained by Christ, and not by the Church; And yet not all of them
neither: For Paul and Barnabas, though chosen to the Apostolical office
immediately from God, yet they were ordained to that office by the imposition
of hands, of some officers, or members of the Church, Act. 13.2, 3. But that
hinders not, but as the Apostles received their power immediately from
Christ, so did the Church receive their power immediately from Christ also; For
he that said to the Apostles, Whose sins ye retain, they are retained;
whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, (Joh. 20.23.) He also said to the
Church, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever
ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, Mat. 18.18. which is a
Commission of the same power, and to the same effect.

If then the Church have received, as well as the Apostles, the same Commission
of Church Power, (so far as it is of perpetual use) that though the Church
then presented their Officers chosen by them, to receive Ordination from the
Apostles, yet when the Apostles are ceased, and no other successors left in
their room, from whom their Officers might receive ordination, but from the
Presbytery of their own Church, then where such a Presbytery is yet wanting,
and their power is now to be executed, the Church has full power to give
ordination to them themselves, by the imposition of their hands.

SECT. VIII.
Object. When the Apostles ceased, Bishops were left as successors in their
room; As Timothy in Ephesus, and Titus in Crete, to ordain Elders in every
Church, Tit. 1.5.

Answ. Timothy and Titus were not left to ordain Elders as Bishops, but as
Evangelists, whose office was alike extraordinary in the Church, as that of
Apostles and Prophets, (Ephesians. 4.11.) Their work being to follow the Apostles,
and so set forward the work which the Apostles had begun, whereto the Apostles
called them forth, and directed them; And not to keep settled residence in any
one Church, as Elders do, or in any one Nation of Churches, as Bishops do:
Timothy is expressly commanded to do the work of an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.5. And
Titus was not ordained a Bishop at Crete, but left in Crete, as having
traveled up and down with Paul, Gal. 2.3. and coming to Crete was left to
direct the Cretian believers in their Church-affaires, after Paul's departure:
afterward he departed to Dalmatia, 2 Timothy 4.10. Sometimes Paul appointed him
to meet him at Nicopolis, Tit. 3.12. Sometimes he sent him to Corinth, 2 Cor.
12.18. And commends him (as his partner and fellow-helper) to the Church of
Corinth: And at Troas, Paul found no rest in his spirit, because he found not
Titus his Brother, 2 Cor. 2.13. And in Macedonia he found much comfort, because
he found Titus there, 2 Cor. 7.5, 6. Which argues his calling was not
Episcopal to rest in a certain charge, but to travel up and down with the
Apostles, or after them, or whither the Holy Ghost should lead them forth to
help forward the work of Christ, and the Apostles.

Object. But in the Subscriptions of the Epistles of Paul to them, Titus is
called the first ordained Bishop of all the Cretians: And Timothy the first
ordained Bishop of the Church of Ephesus.

Answ. The Subscriptions of Paul's Epistles, both those and the rest, are no
part of Canonical Scripture, but Apocrypha, not written by the Apostles
themselves, but by some Scribes that copied them out in after ages, as is
observed by many learned both Protestants and Papists: In particular this
Subscription in the Epistle to Titus contains an apparent mistake; for the
Subscription says, the Epistle was written from Nicopolis to Macedonia; as if
Paul had been at Nicopolis when he wrote this Epistle: which conceit in the
Scribe sprang from a mistake of Paul's words, Tit. 3.12. where Paul bids Titus
be diligent to come to me to Nicopolis, for I have determined there to winter;
but Paul does not say, I have determined here to winter, (as if he were there
already in Nicopolis) but I have determined there to winter, to wit, as
intending to go thither for to winter. The Subscription of the Epistle to
Timothy, stiling him the first ordained Bishop of the Ephesians, will not stand
with the Apostles charge to him in the same Epistle, (2 Timothy 4.5.) do the work
of an Evangelist. For a Bishop was to attend with personal residence upon his
charge, Act. 20.28. But an Evangelist was to travel up and down with the
Apostles, or after them; to come and go at their appointment: As Paul there
does command Timothy to be diligent to come to him, 2 Timothy 4.9.21. Again when
Paul addresseth himself to go to Rome (from whence this Subscription tells
us this Epistle was written) he intending to pass by Macedonia to Rome, (Act.
19.21.) besought Timothy to abide still at Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1.3. But if Timothy
had been the Bishop, ordained of the Ephesians, his duty would have bound him
to abide there, and should not have needed Paul's entreaty so to do.

Besides when Paul in that journey came to Miletus, he called for the Elders of
Ephesus, Act. 20.17. whom also he named Bishops; for so the Greek word is,
which is translated overseers, v. 28. and then Paul acknowledged no such
singular ordination of any to a transcendent Episcopacy, but what was common to
all the Elders of Ephesus: But that it may further appear, that it was not the
intent of Paul, or of the other Apostles, to direct the Churches to send the
Elders whom they have chosen, unto any Transcendent (or Diocesan) Bishop for
ordination, nor left any to like eminent place after Timothy and Titus to
perform that work; Let it be considered, that there is no direction at all in
the Epistles of Paul to Timothy and Titus, for the Churches election of any
Evangelist, or of any Bishop over many Churches.

For 1. The Bishop Paul speaks of in Timothy, of whose qualification he
gives direction 1 Timothy 3.2. to 7. he calls them all (when he comes to give
order for their maintenance) by the name of Elders; some Ruling Elders; some
Laboring in the Word and Doctrine: And in his Epistle to Titus, the Elders
which Paul left Titus to ordain in every City, he calls them Bishops, Tit.
1.5.7. Now of these he appoints many Elders, and many Bishops in one City,
or Church; not many Cities or Churches under one Bishop, Act. 14.23. Elders in
every City, Act. 20.17, 18. Many Elders and Bishops in the Church of Ephesus,
Phil. 1.11. Many Bishops as well as many Deacons, in one Church of Philippi,
and that a poor one too; for Philippi was a Church in Macedonia, Act. 16.12.
And all the Churches of Macedonia had trial of deep poverty, 2 Cor. 8.1, 2.

2. In the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, there is no difference at all put of
any one Bishop above his fellows, except only the difference of Ruling and
Teaching Elders, 1 Timothy 5.17. And those as they are not set over many Churches,
so neither are any of them set above his fellows; only the Preachers are
allowed more reverence and maintenance then the Rulers. If the Holy Ghost had
appointed some singular Bishops above the rest, of any transcendent and eminent
office, he would have appointed him also some eminent and transcendent proper
work of his office: But what shall that be? shall it be Ordination, as Hierome
says, (speaking of the Bishops in his time; Quid facit Episcopus excepta
ordinatione quod Presbyter non facit?) Why, that is a work of Rule; or shall it
be hearing accusations against Elders, and censuring them accordingly; as 1 Timothy 5.19, 20? Why, that is a work of Rule also. Now the Apostle acknowledges
no Acts of Rule, nor any Elders (or Bishops) that do Rule, as worthy of
greater honor then such Elders as labor in Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. It
is therefore apparently contradictory to the institutions given by Paul in the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, to set up any eminent or transcendent Bishop in
the Church, in respect of Rule, or exercise of office of more honor and power,
then pertains to all the Ministers of the Word. So that evident it is, that
neither Ordination, nor Jurisdiction, (which are both of them Acts of Rule) are
to be fetched from transcendent Bishops, but pertain indifferently to all the
Presbyters.

SECT. IX.
Object. BUt if no transcendent acts of Jurisdiction and rule be reserved unto
one Bishop alone above other Ministers, how comes it then to pass, that in
Rev. 2.3. each singular Angel in the Churches of Asia, is admonished, and
reproved alone for all the faults that are found in his Church, whereof he is
the Angel? Why should one Angel alone be charged with the guilt of all those
faults in the Church, if it were not in his hand alone to redress and punish
them?

Answ. It is an usual thing with John (and found also in other Scriptures) to
use the name of Angel not singularly for one person, but collectively for a
company, administering the same work: As the seven Angels that sounded the seven
Trumpets, and the seven Angels that powered out the seven Vialls, were not seven
singular persons, but seven companies, or sorts of persons, performing that
service. And when David says, the Angel of the Lord pitcheth his Tent about
them which fear him, Psalm. 34.7. He speaks not of one Angel alone, but of
many of them; For one alone cannot pitch his Tents about all them that fear
God. And that John in the second and third Chapters of the Revelation, did not
mean by the Angel of the Church one singular person, but the whole company of
the Ministers of the Church (the whole Presbytery of persons, more then one) it
is evident by his speech unto them, as unto many; The Devil (says he) shall
cast some of you into Prison, Rev. 2.10. Some of you, Gr. (...).
which implies more then one. And again in Rev. 2.24. speaking unto the Angel
of the Church of Thyatira, But unto you Gr. (...) you in the plural.
, I say, and unto the rest of Thiatira; which argues that the Angel
distinguished from the rest of the Church, was more then one person; For he
says unto you in the plural number.

Object. But now, say some; Let it be so then, if such eminent and transcendent
Bishops (that is, Diocesan Bishops) who claim a peerless power in Ordination
and Jurisdiction to themselves alone, have no foot-hold in the Scripture, then
let them neither have name, nor place, portion, right, nor memorial in the
Christian Churches of the new Testament. But yet nevertheless, the Apostle is
clear for a Presbytery, and acknowledges imposition of hands (even upon
Timothy, how much more upon other Elders) by the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14.

Answ. We willingly also acknowledge the same, where God has furnished any
Church with a Presbytery. To them it pertains to ordain by imposition of
hands, any Elders or Deacons that shall be chosen by office, by the Church
committed to them; But if the Church want a Presbytery; for want of Elders,
they want a warrant to repair to the Presbytery of another Church, to impose
hands upon their elect Elders.

Our Reasons be;

no Church has Power over another, but all of them stand in Brotherly
equality one toward another; so the Presbytery of one Church, has no Power
over the Elders of another. As the Apostles having all of them received the
same Commission ( Joh. 20.23.) had none of them power over another; so the
Churches having received all of them the same power of the keys, (as has been
showed above) they none of them have power over another, and therefore no power
of ordination of one another Officers.

equally received the same power of the keys, so ought they to maintain and
stand fast in the same; The power of the keys as it is a privilege and
liberty purchased to the Church by the blood of the Lord Jesus; so at a less
rate it may not be alienated from the Church. Christ by his death and
resurrection has obtained all power, both in heaven and in earth, Mat. 28.18.
Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. And look where he has communicated the same by his
Testament, ratified in his blood, there it ought to remain and not to be
removed out of their hands, by the hand of man or Angel. Whence it appears
unlawful for any Church of Christ to put over that power which they have
received of Christ, out of their own hands, into the hands of the Presbyters of
other Churches. The Apostles having received all of them equal power from
Christ, it was not lawful for them by common consent, to have conferred upon
Peter and Paul, James and John, a transcendent government over them all. If
some of the Apostles seem to be pillars, as is said of Peter, James and John,
Gal. 2.9. and so more eminent in gifts then all their brethren, it may put upon
their brethren an expediency, and sometimes a necessity to call upon them for
more counsel, but not to call them to more Authority. In like sort, if a
Church in a City, and the Officers thereof, be of more eminent gifts and
graces, then a Church in a village, it is a just occasion for the Church in the
village, to listen the more after the counsel of the Church in the City, but
not to submit the more unto their Authority in the way of subjection. And so
it is true, a Classis of the Presbyters of many Churches may excel (in more
variety of all abilities) then the Presbytery of any one Church, yet that
only reaches to make their counsel the more weighty and acceptable, but not
to invest them with more rule or more authority. Thirdly, If a Church shall
send to the Presbyters of another Church for ordination of their Elders, they
may as well repair and submit to them for censuring of their offenders; And
would not that be a manifest transgression of the royal law of
Church Government, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17, 18. If a Brother see his brother fallen
into a scandal, and after dealing with him first himself alone, and then with
the conviction of two or three witnesses, find him to give no satisfaction at
all, whither shall the offended brother repair? If to the Church whereof the
brother offending is a member, that is indeed according to the rule, but what
need is there then, or what ground of repairing to the Presbyters of other
Churches? by what Authority shall they proceed to censure the offender that is
a member of another Church?

Indeed if a Brother offended shall complain to the Church whereof the
offending brother is a member, and the Church neglect to do their duty,
through prejudice, or partiality, or other remissness, it may then be lawful
to make use of the brotherly love and brotherly communion, which one Church
owes and bears to another. The brother offended, and not satisfied with the
proceedings of his own Church against the offense, may then repair to the
Elders of other Churches, and crave their judgment and counsel in the case in
hand; and if they do not approve upon good inquiry the proceedings of their
sister-Church, they may admonish the Elders of that Church touching what they
judge amiss. But if the Elders hearken not unto them, the Elders who admonish
them, being unsatisfied, may acquaint their own Church with the offense of
their neighbor Church, and then in the name of the Lord, and of their own
Church, they may admonish them thereof, by Letters and Messengers sent to them
to that purpose. If yet the Church admonished, hearken not unto them, the
Church offended may and ought to acquaint their neighbor Churches
therewithal, who may join with them, either in convincing the offending
Church of their sin, and so prevail with them unto reformation, or else (if
they persist in obstinacy) they may from thenceforth withdraw all continuance
of brotherly communion with them, till they acknowledge their transgression;
which is as far as Churches may go in a Church Way, in case of obstinacy of
a neighbour-Church in any offense, and so far they may go according to the
proportion of the rule, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. Look what rule a brother is to
attend unto in seeking to heal the offense of a brother, the same rule may and
ought a sister-Church to attend unto in seeking to heal an offending
sister-Church. And look as Paul who had received the same equal power of the
keys, with Peter, reproved Peter openly when he was to be blamed, Gal. 2.11. so
one Church, who has received the same equal power of the keys with another,
may reprove another Church openly when they are to be blamed. And look by what
power they may reprove them, by the same they may proceed to withdraw from
them, if they hearken not to their reproof according to God. But all this
notwithstanding, they will not allow a brother offended to complain to the
Presbyters of another Church, till he see no hope of removal of the offense by
his own Church at home.

CHAP. III. Of the Addition of Members to the Church.
SECT. I.
THe Church being thus gathered and furnished with such Officers, in such
manner as the Lord has appointed; look as in the first Primitive Church the
Lord added to them daily such as should be saved, Acts 2.47. so do we admit
and receive from the Lord such as he sends and adds to us. The first and
lowest number of a Church, to which the other members are added, is not
expressly limited in the Word, only it is not so low as some have conceived, to
consist only of two or three, it is a mistake of that place, Mat. 18.20. where
a promise of Christ's presence is made to two or three, to conceive it made to
the lowest number of a Church-body; for those two or three, are not considered
there as a Church-body, but as a sufficient number of witnesses, to join with
a brother offended, in convincing and admonishing the brother that gave the
offense; against whom, if he do not hearken to them, they are then further to
proceed, and to tell the Church. Which argues that they themselves are not a
Church, but a smaller company agreeing in a duty of brotherly love, either to
heal an offending brother by their own admonition, or to witness against him
before the Church; and yet they have a special promise of Christ's presence
with them in the duty, lest they might think such a labor of love undertaken
in vain.

But the Church must needs be a greater number then two or three, seeing these
two or three are to refer the person and the cause to a greater body then
themselves; for though there might be a domestical Church in Adam and Eve at
the beginning, yet such a Church which Christ has instituted in the new
Testament, consists of a greater number. The very Officers of a Church,
completely furnished, are no less then four (a Pastor, a Teacher, an Elder, a
Deacon,) and therefore the body of the Church had need to be of a greater
number then so. And though the essence of a Church may consist without the
integrity of all his members (as a lame man that wants some of his members
may have the essence of a man,) yet under seven, a Church can hardly consist of
so many members as do perform any part of a Church-body.

To such a body, how many members may be added, is not limited expressly in the
Word, only it is provided in the Word, that they be no more then that all may
meet in one Congregation, that all may hear, and all may be edified. For (as
has been noted above) the Apostle so describes the whole Church as meeting in
one place, 1 Cor. 14.23. But if all cannot hear, all cannot be edified.
Besides the Apostle requires, that when the Church meets together for the
celebrating of the Lords Supper, they shall tarry one for another, 1 Cor.
11.33. Which argues the Church endued with only ordinary Officers, should
consist of no greater number then that all might partake together of the Lords
Supper in one Congregation, and therefore such Parishes as consist of 15000.
though they were all fit materials for Church Fellowship, yet ought to be
divided into many Churches, as too large for one. When the hive is too full,
Bees swarm into a new hive; so should such excessive numbers of Christians
issue forth into more Churches. Whence it appears to be an error, to say
there is no limitation or distinction of Parishes, meaning of Churches, (jure
divino) for though a precise quotient, a number of hundreds and thousands be
not limited to every Church, yet such a number is limited as falls not below
seven, nor rises above the bulk of one Congregation, and such a Congregation
wherein all may meet, and all may hear, and all may partake, and all may be
edified together.

SECT. II.
THey that desire to be added and joined to such a body, they first make known
their desires to the Elders of the Church, who take trial of their knowledge
in the principles of religion, and of their experience in the ways of grace,
and of their godly conversation amongst men; that if any of them be found
ignorant, and graceless, or scandalous, he may not be presently presented to
the Church, till these evils were removed. The stones that were to be laid in
Solomon's Temple, were squared and made ready before they were laid in the
building; neither iron, nor ax, nor any iron tool was heard in the house while
it was a building, 1 King. 6.7. And wherefore so, if not to hold forth that no
members were to be received into the Church of Christ, but such as were
rough-hewen, and squared, and fitted to lie close and level to Christ and to
his members?

But when such as offer themselves are approved of the Elders, they are
propounded by one of the Ruling Elders to the Church, with a motion to the
brethren to make inquiry after them, and if they shall hear of any just
exceptions against them, to give notice of it to one of the Elders.

But if no exception be heard of, they are called forth before the Church,
after other holy duties are performed, and each one makes confession of his
sins, and profession of his faith. In confession of his sins (that it may
appear to be a penitent confession) he declares also the grace of God to his
soul, drawing him out of his sinful estate into fellowship with Christ. In
the profession of his faith, he declares not only his good knowledge of the
principles of Religion, but also his professed subjection to the Gospel of
Christ, with his desire of walking therein, with the fellowship of that Church.
Now before or after such his profession or confession, those of the brethren of
the Church who are of his acquaintance do give some good testimony (if need
be) of his life and conversation; either according to their own knowledge of
him, or according to the credible reports or letters which they have received
concerning him: which done, the Ruling Elder, or one of the Preaching Elders
propounds it to the Church, whether from all that they have heard and seen,
they find any just exception against him? if so, it is cleared and removed
before any further proceedings; if no just exception appear, the Ruling Elder
then moves the Church to express their acceptance of him into fellowship with
them, by lifting up their hands. Which done (and the like course taken with two
or three more, as the time will permit) the Elder propounds to them the heads
of the Covenant which the Lord has made with his Church, what promises of
grace he has made to them; as also what duties of faith and obedience he does
require of them; As to take the Lord Jesus for their only Priest and
Atonement, their only Prophet and guide, their only King and Lawgiver, and
to walk in professed subjection unto all his holy Ordinances; as also to walk
in brotherly love with the brethren of this Church, unto mutual edification
and succor, according to the rule of the Gospel. And the new received members
acknowledging this to be their duty, and professing their consent unto it in
the name of Christ; the Elder does further acquaint them with what duties of
holy watchfulness over them they may expect from the Church; and so shuts
up his work with some short prayer unto the Lord, who keeps covenant and
mercy with thousands of his people, to make us all faithful to him, and one to
another, according to the rules of his holy Gospel in Christ Jesus, the
Mediator, and surety of his Covenant, between the Lord and his people.

SECT. III.
NOw what offense is there in all this? or what scruple may arise in a godly
mind against these things? Two or three things seem herein offensive, but are
not.

First, That we require gracious qualifications in such as we receive to
Church Fellowship: whereas the visible Church is said to consist of all sorts,
good and bad, and to be a garner containing chafe and wheat, as a field
wherein wheat and tares grow up together.

Secondly, That we receive such into the Church by a covenant.

Thirdly, That we communicate too much power unto the people, and do not
rather refer all power (in this case) into the hands of the Elders. To give
therefore some account of these, as the Lord shall assist.

For the first, though we willingly admit all comers to the hearing of the
Word with us (as the Corinthians admitted Infidels, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.) yet we
receive none as members into the Church, but such as (according to the
judgment of charitable Christians) may be conceived to be received of God into
fellowship with Christ, the head of the Church.

Our Reasons be;

First, From the near relation between Christ Jesus, and the Church; as also
between the Church and the other persons in the Trinity: the Lord Jesus is the
head of the Church, even of the visible Church; and the visible Church is the
body of Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 12.27. The visible Church is said to be the
habitation of God by the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. to be the Temple of the holy Ghost,
and the Spirit of God to dwell in them, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. to be Espoused to
Christ as a chaste Virgin, 2 Cor. 11.2. The members of the visible Church are
said to be the sons and daughters of the Lord God Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. and
are exhorted to be followers of him as dear children, Ephesians. 4.1. Now how can
the visible Church be the members of the body, or the Spouse of Christ, or the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, or the sons and daughters of the heavenly Father,
except the members in charitable discretion be (as indeed the holy Ghost
describes them to be) Saints by calling, (1 Cor. 1.2.) and faithful brethren,
Gal. 1.2. and that not only by external profession, for these are too high
styles for hypocrites, but in some measure of sincerity and truth.

Secondly, We read Act. 2.47. that the Lord added to the Church daily such as
should be saved; and how then shall we add to the Church such as God adds
not? such as have no show of any saving work upon them to any spiritual
discerning? ought not the Lords Stewards to be faithful in Gods house, and to
do nothing therein, but as they see the Lord go before them? receiving whom
he receives, and refusing whom he refuses, casting out whom he casts out.
Does not the Apostle Paul upon this ground direct the Romans to receive a weak
believer, because the Lord has received him? Romans 14.1, 2, 3.

Thirdly, The Lord Jesus makes the profession of the faith of his name, and
such a profession as flesh and blood has not revealed to a man, but his
heavenly Father; to be the rock on which his visible Church is built; for he
speaks of such a Church whereunto he commits the keys of his kingdom, and
that is the visible Church, Mat. 16.16. to 19. Now if such a profession be the
rock and foundation of a visible Church, then we shall build a Church without
a foundation, if we receive such members into the Church as do not hold forth
such a profession, but either through ignorance make no profession at all, or
such a verbal profession as savoureth not of any blessed work of the Father
by his Spirit upon their hearts. And does not the lord expostulate with such a
guest as comes into the fellowship of his Church, even unto his Table, not
having a wedding garment, Mat. 22.12? And does not expostulation intimate a
Taxation also of them, by whose connivence he came in, where he says, how
come thou in hither? And does not Christ in the parable impute it to the
sleepiness (that is, to the remissness and negligence) of his servants, that
tares were sown in his field amongst the wheat, Mat. 13.25.38.39.

Fourthly, Such as have only a form of godliness, and deny the power of it,
we are forbidden to join with, and commanded to turn from them, 2 Timothy 3.5.

Fifthly, Can any man judge such persons fit materials for the constituting and
edifying of a Church, who are more fit for the ruin and destruction of the
Church; such as leave their first love (as all hypocrites will at length?) They
procure the removal of the candlestick, Rev. 2.4. We pass by the types of
the old Testament, which yet are not without their due weight; it was touched
above, that rough stones were not laid in the building of Solomon's Temple, till
they were hewn and prepared before, 1 King. 6.7. and behold a greater then
Solomon is here, and a greater Temple then that of Solomon's; the attendance and
watchfulness of the porters suffering none to enter into the Temple that were
unclean in any thing, 2 Chro. 23.19. does it not evidently type forth the
watchfulness of the Officers of the Church of Christ, to suffer none unclean
(unclean in estate or course of life) to enter into the fellowship of the
Church, which ought to be a Communion of Saints?

Well then, if all the members of the Church ought to be Saints by calling, and
faithful brethren, it cannot be thought an unseasonable curiosity, but rather
held a due and faithful watchfulness in the Officers and body of every Church
of Christ, to take a due trial of men by a confession of sins, as John
Baptist did, Mat. 3.6. and by a profession of their faith, as Philip did, Act.
8.37. before they receive them into the church as members of the body of the
Lord Jesus; neither was it an excessive austeritie in John, but an holy
faithfulness and godly zeal, not only to repulse the Scribes and Pharisees,
Mat. 3.7. but the profane people also from his Baptism, Luke 3.7. as those
who were a generation of vipers, and had not yet brought forth fruit meet for
repentance, ver. 7, 8. and therefore themselves were not meet for his
Baptism, which was a baptism of repentance, Luke 2.3. Nevertheless, in this
trial, we do not exact eminent measure, either of knowledge, or holiness,
but do willingly stretch out our hands to receive the weak in faith, such in
whose spirits we can discern the least measure of breathing and panting after
Christ, in their sensible feeling of a lost estate;
for we had rather 99. hypocrites should perish through presumption, then one
humble soul belonging to Christ, should sink under discouragement or
despair; and by reason of these hypocrites received into the Church, it is
that the Church is said to have in it good and bad, wheat and tares; for
tares, (as Hierome says) are like to wheat.

SECT. IV.
COme we now to give account of the second point, why we receive such into
the Church by way of Covenant.

1. Meet it is that as the whole Church was received as one body unto Christ
by professing their entrance into covenant with God, as has been showed above
in the third Proposition of the fifth part, so every member of the Church should
be received into the same fellowship, by profession of their taking hold of the
same Covenant; Eadem estratio partium and totius, there is the same reason of
the whole and of the parts, in such things as concern the common nature of
both; And as all relatives do, they mutually argue one another. Hence it is
that when godly strangers (who had joined themselves to the Lord, to wit, by
faith, to serve him, to love his name, and keep his Sabbath) were to be brought
into the fellowship of the Lords house, they added this duty over and above
the former, they took hold of the Covenant of the Lord, Isa. 56.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Surely not by faith only, for their personal salvation, (for so they took
hold of the covenant before when they joined themselves to the Lord, ver. 3.)
but by their profession of their acceptance of the Covenant, and subjection to
it, which the Lord makes with his Church and people, whom he causes to pass
into the bond of the Covenant, Ezekiel. 20.37.

Object. It is objected first, that the place in Isaiah speaks of such
strangers as were proselytes, who in joining themselves to the Lord, were
therein also joined unto the Church, for so joining to the Lord, implies
joining to the Church, Jer. 50.5. Zech. 2.11.

Ans. 1. They that joined to the Lord in those Texts of Jeremie and Zachary,
did indeed in so doing join in a Church-body also; for they who are there
spoken of were a multitude, concurring and consenting in the same Covenant, to
join to the Lord, and to become his people; but here in Isaiah, the Eunuch and
strangers are said to be joined to the Lord, who yet were not joined to the
Church, but ready to complain that the Lord had utterly deprived them of that
liberty of joining to the Church, and had utterly separated them from his
people, ver. 3. As indeed he had by express Law separated them, that is,
prohibited them from entering into the Congregation of the Lord for ever, Deuteronomy.
23.1, 2, 3. Against which Law the Lord comfort them with this promise of the
Gospel, that in the new Testament, neither their Eunuchicall estate, nor the
alienation or strangernesse of any Nation, shall be an impediment unto their
entrance into the Lords house, which is the Church.

The joining (there spoken of) is not their joining to the Lord and his people
as Proselytes of the Church; for though they were joined to the Lord, yet they
complained of their disjoyning and separating from the Lords people, but the
Lord comfort them with this promise, that such as are joined to the Lord, he
will hereafter bring them to his house; no bodily infirmity, (as that of the
Eunuch) nor national pollution (as that of some strangers) should hinder their
admittance into his Church, only this the Lord requires both of the Eunuchs,
ver. 4. and of the strangers, ver. 6. who had joined themselves to the Lord
before, that they do also take hold of his Covenant (as antecedent to their
entrance into Church Fellowship,) to wit, take hold of it by solemn profession
of their acceptance of it, and of their subjection to it.

Object. 2. It is not credible that the Lord would ever separate or debar
such from Church Fellowship as were joined to himself by faith, who can think
it? what reason can you give for it?

Answ. The text is plain, that Eunuchs, Moabites, and Ammonites, were
separated from the Church or Congregation of Israel for ever, without exception
of godliness or ungodliness. Some indeed make a doubt whether the Law against
Moabites and Ammonites reached to the women of those Nations; but against men
the Law is clear. But if the Law had excluded them only upon point of their
own ungodliness, that was no singular curse to them. No Nation under heaven
could expect admission into the Church of Israel, unless they believed in the
God of Israel. What reason God might have for excluding the Eunuchs, we leave
to his sovereign wisdom. But yet himself gives a plain reason for it
against the Moabites and Ammonites, taken from their malignant enmity against
Gods people, Deuteronomy. 23.4, 5, 6. Against the Eunuchs he gives no express
reason; the authority of the Lawgiver is reason sufficient; who can tell
whether God would not thereby type out the debarring of barren Christians from
Church Fellowship?

Object. 3. The word separation, implies they had been sometime of the Church;
for it cannot be said in common sense, that any can be separated from that
society of which they never were.

Answ. Why not? What is separated but severed? May not England be severed from
Scotland by the river of Tweed? and from France and Germany and Holland, by the
Sea? though they were never joined to any of those Nations? Did not God make
the Stars to separate between the day and the night? (for it is the same word
in the Original, Genesis 1.14.) and yet day and night were never joined in one
society.

So that from the place in Isaiah, we have two passages of our practices in
admitting Church Members, witnessed unto and confirmed by the Lord.

1. That those whom the Lord joyneth to the Church in the new Testament, are
such as have been joined to himself, to love him, and to serve him, and keep
his Sabbaths. 2. That they do also take hold of his Covenant with his Church,
before he bring them into his holy Mountain which is his Church.
Both which are the more to be observed in this place, because the place is a
prophecy of what the Lord will do in the days of the new Testament, to wit,
when his house shall be called an house of prayer unto all Nations, ver. 9.
which is proper to the times of the Gospel.

Object. 4. But the Covenant here spoken of, has nothing to do with the
Church Covenant, for the Covenant is the Lords between him and his people, but
the Church Covenant is between the members of the Church one toward another.

Answ. This objection was prevented before in the first point; for when the
Lord enters into covenant with his people, that is, with his Church, his
Church either expressly, or by silent consent covenanteth with him, and also one
with another, to yield professed subjection to him, as has been showed above.

But though this place prophesying of the days of the new Testament, speak
expressly of taking hold of the Covenant before entering into the Church, yet let
no man wonder why there is so little express mention of the poeples taking
hold of the Covenant in the new Testament, when this promise comes to be
accomplished. In the old Testament, where the Church and Commonwealth grew up
together in divine institution and administration, there is express mention of
this Covenant, and the Church being national, and all the Magistrates being
members of the Church from the first plantation of it, the Covenant of the Lord
with his Church was not at all suspicious to them, (who were parties to it
themselves) but very acceptable; but in the days of the new Testament, the
Magistrates and Princes of the earth being Aliens and enemies to the Church,
the Apostles thought it meet to speak of this Covenant not plainly, but as it
were in Parables and similitudes, as knowing the name of Covenants and
Covenanters might breed no small jealousies in Civil States, as seeming most
dangerous to civil peace, but yet in apt similitudes they so describe the
estate of Churches as does necessarily imply a joint Covenant, both between the
Lord, and them me with another: which may serve for a second argument to prove
the point in hand, the receiving of Members by way of Covenant; for 1. they so
describe every Church of God, as a City of God, as the new Jerusalem, as the
Church of the Jews at their first conversion is styled, Rev. 21.4. and the
Church of the Jews, though it may be a more glorious Church then any of the
Churches of the Gentiles, yet it partaketh in the common nature of them all,
every true Church is as well a City of God, as the Church of the Jews; and
hence the Members of the Church of Ephesus are called fellow-Citizens with the
Saints, as being of the household, or Church of God, Ephesians. 2.19. Now every City
is founded in some confederacy by oath, or such like bond, and every Citizen is
received into the same City, by taking the same oath, or entering into the same
bond, wherein the whole City stands engaged; which holds forth to an
intelligent heart, that if every Church of the new Testament be a City, and
the Members thereof fellow-Citizens, then as the whole Church is planted and
founded in some Covenant or Confederacy; so every Member of the Church is
implanted and received into the same body, by taking hold of the same Covenant,
and professing subjection thereunto.

Again, when the Apostle speaks of the planting of the Church of Corinth,
calls it espousing of it as a chaste Virgin unto Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. It
implies plainly, that he drew them all as one body to profess their
acceptance of Christ as an husband to them all, and of one another, as member
of the same body: if he had spoken of his conversion of their particular souls
unto Christ, he would not have spoken of them as one virgin, but so many souls
so many virgins; but now speaking of them all as one virgin, it plainly argues
he joined them all as one virgin into one body, and that one body into a
Covenant of Espousalls with Christ Jesus; for there are no Espousalls without a
covenant; and therefore they that will take hold of their Espousage, must take
hold of their covenant.

3. The mutual relation wherein all the members in the Church stand one to
another, members to members, and all of them to their Officers, and their
Officers to them, together with their mutual interest one in another, and
mutual power one over another, do all of them necessarily imply a mutual
confederacy one with another; and that whosoever will partake herein, must
partake in their confederacy. Suppose a godly Christian come over into these
parts, (as every year some or other do) there is not any Minister of any of
our Churches can usurp Pastoral authority over him, unless that Christian
call him thereunto, or profess his subjection to his Ministration, according
to God. Nor can such a man expect any Ministers watchfulness over him as his
Minister, unless the Minister see just cause to accept such a charge, and
profess so much. No Church in the Country, nor all the members of any Church,
can take upon them to Censure any stranger, though an inhabitant amongst them,
unless he give up himself to them, and profess his subjection to the Gospel
of Christ amongst them. Nor can he challenge such watchfulness from them,
unless he have given them a just call to take upon them that care over him.
That Christian liberty which the Lord Jesus by his blood has purchased for
his Church, and for all his children, gives them all liberty to choose their
own Officers, and their own Fellow Members, unto whom to commit the care of
their souls according to the rules of the Gospel. We speak not of Infants, who
make choice in their parents, but of such who know their liberty, and are
called to stand fast in it: till then that a man tender and offer himself to
the Church, (to the Officers and Members of it) they have no power to receive
him; For the Churches receiving a believer (which is the Apostles word, Romans
14.1.) implies and presupposes his offering and giving up of himself unto
them, in a professed subjection to the Lord, and unto them, according to the
will of God; and their receiving of him, implies and holds forth no less
then their professed acceptance of him unto all those holy liberties with them,
and performance of all such spiritual duties to him, which belong to all the
fellow members of the same body; and let men call this expression of mutual
agreement by what name they please, this is no other then what we call
Church Covenant.

SECT. V.
LEt us proceed then to give account of the third point, why we communicate so
much power to the people, as to propound receiving of Members, unto their
approbation and consent: our reasons are these:

1. From the like power given unto them by Christ, for the casting out of
scandalous and corrupt members, Matthew. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.5. if the Church must be
told of every member that is to be cast out, and when he is to be cast out,
they are to deliver him to Satan: then the Church must be told of every member
that is received, and when he is to be received, they are to receive him into
the fellowship of the Lord, and of his Church; but the former is clear from
those Scriptures, and consequently the latter. It is a received Maxim, Ejusdem
est potestatis aperire and claudere, instituere and destituere (as they call
it,) they that have power to shut the doors of the Church by Excommunication,
they have power to open the doors of the Church by admitting to Communion.

2. From the Example of the Church at Jerusalem, Act. 9.26. who when Paul
assayeth to join himself unto them, did not at first receive him, because the
Disciples were not satisfied in his spiritual good estate, until Barnabas by
his testimony of him had removed their scruple: which argues the private
brethren in a Church as well as public Officers, must be satisfied in him who
is to be received into Communion with them.

3. From the Churches power in Electing and calling Ministers to office. It
has been showed above, that it belongs to the people, the body of the
Church, to choose and call their own Officers, according to the speech of
Cyprian, Lib. 1. Epist. 41. Plebs maxim potestatem habet, vel sacerdotes
dignos eligendi, velindignos recusandi. And if they have such power of choosing
worthy Ministers, and refusing the unworthy, how much more of receiving worthy
Christians, and refusing of unworthy. Yea, in the Epistle going before, he
speaks expressly, he had much ado to persuade the people to receive some,
whose repentance was not so clear to them; which argues evidently their power
in receiving Members.

CHAP. IV. Concerning our order and form in administration of Gods public
Worship.
SECT. I.
THe Church being gathered and furnished with able helps, Officers and
Brethren, they proceed to the administration of all the public Ordinances in
public Assemblies, especially on every Lords day; wherein our principal care
and desire is to administer and partake in all, and no more then all, the
ordinances of Christ himself, and in all those (so far as the Lord has lent
us light) in their native purity and simplicity, without any dressing or
painting of humane inventions. For as the first Commandment requires us to
worship him with his own only true worship, as he has appointed in his Word,
without adding ought thereto, or taking ought therefrom, Isa. 29.13. Deuteronomy.
12.32. So we believe it to be unlawful for any Church to take upon them to
observe, much less for the Officers of their own or other Churches to impose
upon them any institutions of their own (whether in doctrine, or worship, or
government, but what the Lord has appointed in his Word.

Our reason hereof (one in stead of many) is taken from the extent of the
Commission of the Lord Jesus given to his Apostles, which is as large as ever
was given to any Church Governors, and yet reaches no further then to teach
the people to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, Mat. 28.20.
If the Apostles themselves teach the Churches to observe more then he has
commanded them, they go beyond the bounds of their Commission. The Apostles in
the Synod in Jerusalem, laid upon the Churches no other burden then necessary
things, Acts 15.29. Necessary they were, some of them in their own nature,
others for the present estate of things to avoid offense, and when they ceased
to be offensive, the prohibition of them ceased to bind.

Object. If any shall say, the Apostles Commission reaches only to matters of
substance, not circumstances, of worship and forms of necessity, not
indifferency.

We answer, let them show us another Commission to authorize them to put laws
upon the Churches for matters of circumstance (of forms and of indifferency)
and we shall submit, but the Scripture holds forth no such Commission given to
any of the sons of men since the world began.

That much urged place, 1 Cor. 14.40. does not authorize the Church, nor any
Church Governors, to make laws for the observation of such things as they
shall account decent and orderly; but only provideth that all the ordinances
of God, whether prayer, or prophecy, or singing of Psalms, or tongues, or
interpretations, be all of them done decently, without uncomelinesse, and
orderly, without confusion; and that this place reaches no further, appears
evidently from hence, that if this place should give unto the Church, or unto
Church Governors, authority to prescribe and command decent and orderly
things at their own discretion, a man could not transgress the Commandment
of the Church, but he should also transgress the Commandment of the Apostle;
but the contrary is evident. For suppose the Church or Church Governors should
make an order, that Ministers should always preach in a gown, the thing is
decent enough, but nevertheless if a man shall preach in a cloak, he shall
transgress the order of the Church, but not of the Apostle; for he that
preaches in a cloak, preaches decently also; which plainly argues, that
such a commandment of the Church, is not grounded upon the commandment of the
Apostle.

SECT. II.
FIrst then when we come together in the Church, according to the Apostles
direction, 1 Timothy 2.1. we make prayers and intercessions and thanksgivings for
our selves and for all men, not in any prescribed form of prayer, or studied
Liturgy, but in such a manner, as the Spirit of grace and of prayer (who
teaches all the people of God, what and how to pray, Romans 8.26, 27.) helps
our infirmities, we having respect therein to the necessities of the people,
the estate of the times, and the work of Christ in our hands.

After prayer, either the Pastor or Teacher, reads a Chapter in the Bible,
and expounds it, giving the sense, to cause the people to understand the
reading, according to Neh. 8.8. And in sundry Churches the other (whether
Pastor or Teacher) who expounds not, he preaches the Word, and in the
afternoon the other who preached in the morning does usually (if there be
time) read and preach, and he that expounded in the morning preaches after
him.

Before Sermon, and many times after, we sing a Psalm, and because the former
translation of the Psalms, does in many things vary from the original, and
many times paraphraseth rather then translateth; besides diverse other defects
(which we cover in silence) we have endeavored a new translation of the
Psalms into English meetre, as near the original as we could express it in
our English tongue, so far as for the present the Lord has been pleased to
help us, and those Psalms we sing, both in our public Churches, and in
private.

The seals of the Covenant (to wit, the Sacrament of Baptism and the Lords
Supper) are administered, either by the Pastor or by the Teacher; and though
with some godly learned Divines, it be a question whether the Teacher may
dispense the seals, yet the question does rather concern Schoole-Doctors,
then the Teachers of a particular Church, but we who have only the Teachers
of particular Churches, do believe that they to whom the preaching or
dispensing of the Gospel (or Covenant of grace) unto the Church is committed,
to them is committed also the dispensing of the seals of the Covenant; but to
the Teacher as well as to the Pastor, is committed the dispensing of the Gospel
(the Covenant of grace) unto the Church, and therefore to him (as well as to
the other) is committed the dispensing of the seals of the Covenant.

Both the Sacraments we dispense, according to the first institution, Baptism
to Disciples, and (who are included in them) their seed. The Lords Supper to
such as neither want knowledge nor grace to examine and judge themselves before
the Lord. Such as lie under any offense publicly known, do first remove the
offense, before they present themselves to the Lords Table; according to Mat.
5.23, 24. The members of any Church, if any be present, who bring Letters
testimonial with them to our Churches, we admit them to the Lords Table with
us, and their children also (if occasionally in their travel they be borne
with us) upon like recommendation we admit to Baptism. The prayers we use at
the administration of the seals, are not any set forms prescribed to us, but
conceived by the Minister, according to the present occasion, and the nature of
the duty in hand. Ceremonies we use none, but are careful to administer all
things according to the primitive institutions. The Father presents his own
child to baptism, as being baptized by the right of his Covenant, and not of
the Covenant unto Godfathers and godmothers, (for there is no such covenant
of God unto them and their god-sonnes) and therefore we have no use of them,
but omit them in Baptism; as the Apostle cast out love feasts from the Lords
Supper, being both of them alike superadditions to the Lords institutions, 1
Cor. 11.23, 24. The Lords Supper we administer for the time, once a month at
least, and for the gesture, to the people sitting; according as Christ
administered it to his Disciples sitting, ( Mat. 26.20.26.) who also made a
Symbolicall use of it, to teach the Church their majoritie over their Ministers
in some cases, and their judicial authority, as co-sessors with him at the
last Judgment, ( Luke 22.27. to 30.) which makes us look at kneeling at the
Lords Supper, not only as an adoration devised by man, but also as a violation
by man of the institution of Christ, diminishing part of the Counsel of God,
and of the honor and comfort of the Church held forth in it.

In time of solemnization of the Supper, the Minister having taken, blessed,
and broken the bread, and commanded all the people to take and eat it, as the
body of Christ broken for them, he takes it himself, and gives it to all
that sit at Table with him, and from the Table it is reached by the Deacons to
the people sitting in the next seats about them, the Minister sitting in his
place at the Table.

After they have all partaked in the bread, he takes the cup in like manner,
and gives thanks a new, (blesses it) according to the example of Christ in
the Evangelist, who describes the institution Mat. 26.27. Mark. 14.23. Luke
22.17. All of them in such a way as sets forth the Elements, not blessed
together, but either of them apart; the bread first by it self, and afterward
the wine by it self; for what reason the Lord himself best knows, and we
cannot be ignorant, that a received solemn blessing, expressly performed by
himself, does apparently call upon the whole assembly to look again for a
supernatural and special blessing in the same Element also as well as in the
former; for which the Lord will be again sought to do it for us.

After the celebration of the Supper, a Psalm of thanksgiving is sung,
(according to Mat. 26.30.) and the Church dismissed with a blessing.

SECT. III.
IN the afternoon after public prayer offered up to God, either by the Pastor
or Teacher, and the Word read and expounded by them who preached in the morning
(if there be time) and preached by the other, and the Sacrament of Baptism
administered, (if any of the Church do offer their children thereunto) the
Deacons (who sit in a seat under the Elders, yet in sundry Churches lifted up
higher then the other pewes) do call upon the people, that as God has
prospered them, and has made their hearts willing, there is now time left for
contribution: presently the people from the highest to the lowest in sundry
Churches do arise, the first pew first, the next next, and so the rest in
order, and present before the Lord their holy offerings. For in the old
Testament at their solemn feasts none was to appear before the Lord empty,
Deuteronomy. 16.16. And the Lords day is only unto Christians the ordinary solemn
feast of the Lord: in the new Testament the Christians laid down their
oblations at the Apostles feet, ( Acts 4.35.) into whose place, for that
service, Deacons were substituted, Acts 6.3.

And to that purpose the Apostle gave order unto the Churches, that upon the
first day of the week every one should lay by him, into the treasury (as the
word signifies) for the supply of the Saints, as God had prospened them, 1
Cor. 1.2. Which ordinance Justin Martyr speaks of in his time, that the abler
sort on the Lords day did contribute to the necessities of the brethren, in the
end of the second Apology. And Cyprian rebukes a wealthy rich widow for
believing she could celebrate the Lords day (as holy) and yet neglect to
contribute to the Lords treasury, in his first Sermon de Eleemosyna. Locuples
and dives Dominicum celebrare te credis, quae Corbonam omnino non respicis?

After the contribution ended, the time left is taken up in sundry Churches in
the public trial and admission of such as are to be received Members into the
Church, in such manner as has been before declared; and so after a Psalm of
praise to God, with thanksgiving, and prayer to God for a blessing upon all the
ordinances administered that day, and a blessing pronounced upon the people, the
Assembly is dismissed.

Besides the celebration of the Lords day, every week we sometimes upon
extraordinary occasions, either of notable judgments, do set a part a day of
humiliation, or upon special mercies we set apart a day of thankesgiving. The
grounds whereof we conceive are generally known and approved amongst
Christians. Moreover, every week in most of our Churches, Lectures are kept on
some or other of the week days; so that such whose hearts God makes willing,
and his hand does not detain by bodily infirmity, or other necessary
employments, (if they dwell in the heart of the Bay) may have opportunity to
hear the Word almost every day of the week in one Church or other, not far
distant from them.

SECT. IV.
IN all these administrations, only two or three things may seem to require
clearing from the Word of God; as

1. Why in our public prayers, we forbear to use set forms of prescript
Liturgies.

2. Why in our Sacraments we do not admit the members of the Church of
England to the fellowship of the Lords Table, and their children to Baptism,
as was said before, we did receive the Members of other Churches in this
Country.

For the former, the reasons usually given may suffice.

1. From the pattern of all the Churches, both in the old and new Testament,
God never gave leave to any ordinary Officers of his Church, neither did any of
them take leave to impose any forms of Liturgy upon any Church. And yet if
ever there had been place for prescribing set forms to any, it had been most
seasonable in the Jewish Synagogues, whose members being as children under age,
( Gal. 4.2, 3.) might stand in most need of such a help. It is easily
acknowledged, Moses prescribed a form of blessing, Nunb. 6.23. to 26. and
David sundry Psalms of praise and prayers; and the Lord Jesus taught his
Disciples not only to pray after this manner, but thus, or these words, Luke
11.2. But neither were these ordinary Officers of the Churches, neither did
they prescribe any use but arbitrary and occasional of these forms; as they
might suite our occasions. God by immediate revelation, and by the hand of his
extraordinary Messengers, may prescribe this or that form to his Church, but
will not warrant ordinary Officers (who have only received a common measure of
the Spirit) to do the like. God who forbad his people to make to themselves
Images or imaginations, inventions, and forms of worship, has not restrained
himself to set up what images or forms himself sees good.

Object. These forms of prayer or praise, though as they be parts of holy
Scripture they are of God, yet as they are applied without special
commandment to be the matter or form of a prayer or thanksgiving at this
time, so they are the device of man, etc.

Answ. They are not applied to be matter and form of prayer or thanksgiving
without commandment, or at least without such directions as amount to a
lawful warrant from God; for Moses expressly says, On this wise shall ye
bless the Children of Israel, and say unto them, (Numb. 6.23.) The 102. Psalm
is expressed in the title, not only to be a prayer of one that was afflicted,
but of any in like estate. And the Apostles exhortation is general concerning
all the Psalms and hymns and spiritual songs of David, (as well as of
others) that we should sing them with holy melody unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19.
and Christ's words, Luke 11.2. When ye pray say our Father, etc.

A second reason why we forbear a set form of prescript Liturgies, is taken
from the meaning of the second Commandment, which we conceive prohibiteth
such prescript Liturgies.

It is a rule generally known in the exposition of the Commandments, that all
sins forbidden in the Word of God, are reduced to the ten Commandments, and
fall under the prohibition of one of them or other, for there is no sin but
is a transgression of some or other commandment of the law, 1 John 3.4. and
upon the two Tables of the Law hang all the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 22.40.
Now it is plain, that all sins are not contained in the letter of the ten
Commandments, and therefore there is no judicious Expositor of them, but
opens the letter of the Commandments by Synecdoches and Metonymies;
Synecdoches to comprehend all sins of the like kind, and all the degrees
thereof, and Metonymies to comprehend all causes and means and occasions
thereof; so that for opening the second Commandment, which forbids both making
and the worshipping of any image or similitude, it is requisite to consider in
what sense or respects Images or similitudes are forbidden: Images or
similitudes are forbidden in the second Commandment, not as objects of
worship, for all false objects of worship are the false gods forbidden in the
first Commandment; Images then and similitudes are forbidden in the second
Commandment, not as false objects of worship, wherein the worship is
terminated and fastened, but as false means of worshipping the true God. For so
are the Images considered that are forbidden in the Word. The golden calfe was
not considered as the God of Israel, that brought them up out of the Land of
Egypt, but as an Image of that Jehovah which did bring them up out of the Land
of Egypt. Whence it is said, that Aaron proclaimed a feast, not to the calfe,
but to Jehovah, whereof the calfe was but an Image. To morrow, says he, is a
solemnity (or feast) to Jehovah, Exodus 32.5. The Calfe therefore was not the
god, but the Image of the god which they worshipped, as that which resembled
him, and put them in mind of him, helped their hearts nearer to him, or his
presence nearer to them: As it is written in the Psalm, that they turned their
glory into the similitude of an ox that eats grass, Psalm. 106.20. And in
this ox or calfe they looked at Jehovah as near unto them, and as going with
them, and before them, Exodus 32.1. Furthermore, the Image forbidden in the
second Commandment, is not only a false means of worship, devised by man,
but a false manner of worship also; and therefore when the Samaritane-strangers
knew not the manner of worshipping God in the Calves of Jeroboam, it is said,
they knew not the manner of the god of the Country (2 Kings 17.26.) and one of
the Priests of the high places was sent to teach them the manner of the fear
(or worship) of Jehovah, ver. 28. and so they feared Jehovah after the former
manner, ver. 34. and that was in serving him in the graven Images of their own
devising, ver. 41.

So that under this one kind of false worship of God in graven Images, is
forbidden by a Synecdoche, not only all worship of God in carved or molten or
painted Images, (all bodily representations of God) but all spiritual Images
also, which are the imaginations and inventions of men, whether they be
ordained for worship, as the high places erected to the true God, 2 Chronicles.
33.17. and the devised feast of the eighth month, 2 King. 12.33. or whether
they be brought in and used for helps and means of worship, as the strange
fire of Nadab, Levit. 10.1, 2. and David's new Cart to carry the Arc, 2 Samuel
6.3. with 1 Samuel 15.13. or whether they be used for manner and form of
worship, as preaching in the wisdom of man's words, (or in carnal Eloquence)
which is but a painted Image of preaching (1 Cor. 2.4.) and so forbidden in
this second Commandment. In like sort, Women's praying in public bare-headed,
and men covered, 1 Cor. 11.4, 5. Men's praying or prophesying in strange
tongues, and many of them at once, 1 Cor. 14.22.26. the celebrating of
love feasts in holy Assemblies, together with the Lords Supper, (1 Cor.
11.21.23.34.) are all of them Images or imaginations of men, forms or manners
of worship devised and used by man, but not ordained by God, and so forbidden
in this second Commandment.

The reason whereof is taken from the perfection of the wisdom of God revealed
in Scripture, to make the man of God perfect to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.17.
No wisdom of man's device, as any other worship, or any other helps or means
of worship, or any forms or manners of worship, acceptable to God, but what
the wisdom of God has directed us in his Word. Besides, the Church is
complete in Christ, ( Colos. 2.10.) so as we need no other Priest to make
atonement but him, nor other spiritual King but him to rule our consciences,
no other Prophet to teach us but himself, and such as he has appointed to
that end; thus the sum and substance both of Law and Gospel, lead us to rest in
the ordinances of God, and not to help our selves by the inventions of men,
for the administration of the worship of God. To apply this then to set-formes
of prayer, devised by man, and prescribed to be read out of a brook, and so
taken up by one Church from another, as the forms of their worship, and as the
means and help of their devotion, we find no command or pattern for them
in the Word, nor any promise of their acceptance. They are enjoined for means
and helps of Gods worship, which he has not sanctified, and for forms of
worship which God has not acknowledged. What difference is there between the
carrying of the Arc upon a Cart, and our prayers upon a Book? whereas both
should be carried, the one upon the shoulders of the Levites, the other upon
the gifts of the Ministers.

Object. 1. God has in general commanded us to worship him in public with
all manner of prayers and supplication, (1 Timothy 2.1.) but prayers upon a book,
stinted Liturgies, are some manner of prayers.

Answ. God that in general commands all manner of prayers, commands also
in special the several kinds of prayers, whether supplications,
intercessions, thanksgivings, or the like. He that commands the Genus,
commands the distribution of it into all its species, but he that commands
the subject, does not always command the distribution of it into all its
adjuncts; he that commands prayer in general, allows every kind of
prayer, but not every form of prayer; for then God should allow prayer in a
strange tongue, prayer before Images, prayer in the corners of the streets, and
the like.

Object. 2. If set-formes of prescript prayers be unlawful, then set-formes of
confession of faith, set-formes of Catechism were unlawful also.

Answ. 1. It follows not; for the Apostle commands us to keep a form of
sound words in faith and love, that is, in the principles of Religion, (2 Timothy
1.13.) but he no where commands us to keep a form of sound prayer, unless
it be a form of directions and instructions, how to pray, and that is included
in the former, and we dislike it not.

Answ. 2. The Apostle did not command Timothy to devise himself a form of
sound words, and to prescribe the same to the Churches, without suffering ought
to be added to it, or taken from it, but what he must commend to others, were
the things that he heard of Paul among many witnesses, which he was to commit
to faithful men, who might be able to teach others also, 2 Timothy 2.2.

Thirdly, For a third reason why we do not take up set-formes of prescript
Liturgies, is taken from the like proportion of set-formes, both of prescript
Liturgies, and of prescript Sermons and Homilies. Prayer and preaching are both
of them public duties of the ministerial office. The Apostles tell the Church
they will lay down the Deacons employment, that they may give themselves to the
ministry of the word and prayer, Act. 6. In the one, they are the mouth of God
to the people; in the other, they are the mouth of the people unto God. If we
prescribe to one another set-formes of prayer, why not set-formes of Homilies?
and then neither the Apostles, nor their successors needed to have left off
their employment in ministering to Tables, to attend the ministry of the Word
and prayer, ( Acts 6.4.) for both are prepared to their hands, by the
prescriptions of others. Whence also it will follow, that Ministers shall
little need to edify the Church by their own gifts received of Christ to that
end, but may edify them by the gifts of others. Yea, Ministers, though
destitute of ministerial gifts, may be fit for the public discharge of their
duties by the help of other men's gifts, both in prayer and preaching; and so
indeed a prescript Liturgy is properly a maintenance to all Idol dumb
Ministers. And in this forbearance of prescript prayers, as we follow the
example of the Church of Israel, and of the Apostolical Churches, so we are
not destitute of patterns in this case of those that succeeded them. Justin
Martyr in his second Apology for Christians, a hundred and fifty years after
Christ, speaks of the ruler of the Church, sending up prayers and praises to
God, without mentioning any prescript form, according to his power (or
faculty) of prayer, or thanksgiving, left him by the Apostles or others. And
Tertullian about 203. years after Christ, in his Apology for Christians,
says, they prayed sine monitore, quia de pectore, without a prompter, because
they prayed from their heart, Tertull. Apolog. 30. that is, (as Zeph. on the
place expounds it) they prayed not according to the dictate of the Saints, to
wit, in any form of words prescribed by them. And indeed, if in those bloody
times of persecution, the Church had any set-forme of Liturgy, wherein they
had been enjoined a form of solemn prayers for their Emperor, it had been an
unskilful and sinful neglect, both in Justin and Tertullian, to omit such
public evidences of their professed loyalty and devotion to the State.

SECT. V.
England, either themselves to the Lords Supper, or their children to Baptism,
as we receive the Members of other Churches in this Country.

Answ. Let it first be known what we do, and then consider upon what ground
we do it.

1. We do not admit the members of other Churches in this Country, unless
they bring with them Letters of recommendation from the Churches whence they
came; or at least unless those Churches have made known to us their desire,
that their Members coming occasionally amongst us, may be received to the Lords
Table, with our own, by virtue of communion of Churches.

2. We do not admit the Members of other Churches to fellowship of the Lords
Table, if either the persons themselves, or the Churches from whence they came,
lie under any offense before the Church.

Now the grounds upon which we thus walk, are these.

1. From the power requisite to the administration of the Sacraments, viz. to
administer a Sacrament, is not an act of Christian liberty, that every
Christian may dispense to whom he please, but an act of power, which Christ
has given to them who are called to be Ministers of the Word, and by them to
be dispensed unto the Church, whereof the Holy Ghost has made them overseers.
They then over whom we have no ministerial power, unto them we may not
dispense an act of power; but they who are Members of no Church, we have no
ministerial power over them; and they who are Members of other Churches (not
of our own) we have no power over them, further then they are recommended to
us from their own Churches, either by Letters, or by word of mouth, and such
are all the members of the Churches in this Country, whom we do admit to
communion with us at the Lords Table.

But now for our Brethren, who come out of England, many of them are altogether
unknown to us; and those who are well known, (and it may be also well
approved) yet they bring no Letters of recommendations to us from those
Churches who had interest in them, and power over them. And besides, we know
that those who have been members of any parish Church in England, when once
they remove their dwelling out of that Parish, they are accounted as no longer
members of that Church; so that they come over to us as members of no
particular Church at all, either in old England or in new; and so they are
under the power of no Church, either there or here; how then can we dispense
an act of power to them, over whom we have no power at all, either commended
to us by themselves, or by the Churches from whence they came? Would it be
thought reasonable, in case that any of our Countrymen coming over to us,
should fall into drunkenness, or whoredom, or other scandalous crimes, if the
Church where he sojourneth amongst, should proceed to excommunicate him for the
same? were it not an act, Coram non judice? might he not demand justly, by what
authority we cast him out of our Communion, who was never yet entered into our
Communion? This may therefore yield us a just defense.

They over whom we have no power to censure, (in any case by Excommunication)
to them we have no power to dispense the Communion; but so it is, we have no
power to censure any of our Congregation (though never so scandalous) by
excommunicating, unless they first commend themselves to our fellowship.

Therefore neither have we power till then to receive them into our communion.

2. A second ground of their practice we take from the nature of the
Sacraments, which though they be seals of the righteousness of faith, ( Romans
4.11.) yet not to all the faithful, as such, but as they are confederate and
joined together in some particular visible Church. None may ordinarily dispense
a Sacrament of the new Testament, but a Minister of a visible Church, nor may
he dispense it to any, but to the members of a visible Church. In the old
Testament, none were partakers, either of the Passover, or of Circumcision,
unless they were either Israelites borne, or Proselytes to the Church of
Israel. Job and his three friends, and Elihu with them, though all of them
righteous by faith, and all of the stock and kindred of Abraham, yet we read
of none of them to be circumcised; nor is it credible they were; for had they
been Circumcised, they would not have kept so deep silence of it throughout all
their conference with Job, as they do; especially having so often occasion to
urge the pollution of nature from the birth; whereof Circumcision had been a
most pertinent and pregnant evidence to convince the same. And wherefore were
they not all circumcised, being all of them righteous by faith, but only
because they had not opportunity to join themselves to the house of Israel,
to whom only the Church, and the Covenant of grace, unto them and their seed,
and the seals of the Covenant were granted.

Object. If it be objected, that all that were circumcised amongst the people
of Israel, might come and keep the Passover amongst them: but we here
withhold the Lords Supper from them that are baptized.

Answ. Our answer is, they that were circumcised amongst the Israelites, might
rightly keep the Passover amongst them, because the whole Nation of Israel
made but one Church, and the Officers or Ministers of any one Synagogue (the
Priests and Levites) were Ministers in common to the whole house of Israel. In
proportion whereunto they that are baptized in any particular Church, may in
like sort require the Lords Supper in the same particular church where they are
baptized, if there be no other impediment in regard of their unfitness to
examine themselves, which is a thing requisite to the receiving of the Lords
Supper, more then was required to the receiving of the Passover. But now
because the Churches of the new Testament are of another constitution, none of
them national, as the Church of Israel was, but all of them congregationall;
Baptism in one Church does not give a man right to the Lords Supper in
another, unless the Officers of one Church were the Officers of all, (as in
Israel they were) or unless that one Church and the Officers thereof did
recommend their right and power to another.

3. A third ground of our practice in this point is taken from the case of
public offense, which we conceive ought to be removed from all such as are to
partake together at the Lords Table; so we deal with the members of our own
Church, and so we deal with the members of neighbor Churches in this
Country: None of them are received unto the Lords Table with us, whilst they
lie under the guilt of any public scandal before the face of the Church: For
it is our Saviors direction, that if a man bring his gift to the Altar, and
there remembers that his brother has ought against him, he should there leave
his gift, and go first to be reconciled to his brother, and then come and
offer his gift, Mat. 5.23, 24. If this be a rule for a man's own private
direction, in case of private offenses, it will be a rule also for a whole
Church to direct an offending brother to do the like in case of a public
offense: We do therefore direct both the brethren of our own Church, and of
any other Church in this Country, that if they present themselves to communion
with us at the Lords Table, they should first remove such public offense, as
either themselves or the Church from whence they come, do lie under, before
the Lord, and us;
that according to the figure in the law of the Passover, no leaven must be
found amongst us when we come to sit down at the Lords Table together.

Now though we rather choose to cover in silence, and to mourn in secret, for
any corruptions found in other Churches, especially in these so dear and near
unto us, as the Churches of England be; yet in this case, faithfulness to God
and them, and the necessary defense of our own due proceedings here,
constrains us to confess sundry public offenses, under which our English
parish Churches lie, and wherein our selves also were defiled, whilst we lived
in them, and our Countrymen are defiled that come over to us from them.

1. It is a public offense, that they come over not as members of any
particular visible Church, (for they leave that relation where they left their
habitation) but of a National Church, whereof Christ has given us no pattern
in the new Testament; and in which he has appointed no national Churches, nor
any national worship to be performed by them.

2. It is a public offense, that though they were baptized in some parish
Church in England, upon some Covenant, or stipulation of their parents, or of
some in their stead, whom they call godfathers, which also was without
warrant, yet generally they have come to the Lords Table without any public
profession of their own faith, or repentance, or promise of performance of
those Christian duties, which their parents, or others in their stead, made for
them; which is an offense, not only contrary to the order of their own
Church, expressed in the Rubric before the Common Catechism, but also
contrary to the word of God, which receives none to the fellowship of the
seals of the Covenant, but such as profess their taking hold of the Covenant,
as has been showed before.

3. It is a public offense, that in their parish Communion, (which not
communion of spirit, but co-habitation begets) they partake with all
ignorant and scandalous persons, not excluding drunkards, whoremongers,
profane swearers, covetous worldlings, Atheists, Papists, and the like;
whereby it comes to pass, that not a little leaven, but a great mass of
leaven has deeply leavened the whole lump.

4. It is a public offense, that they have worshipped God according to the
precepts and inventions of men, both in prescript forms of Liturgy, and
Letanies, and in such ceremonies, as which though they be not ordained of God,
yet are publicly enjoined, as neither dark, nor dull, but apt to stir up
the dull mind of man to the remembrance of duty to God by some notable and
special signification, by which he may be edified.

5. It is a public offense, that they have yielded voluntary subjection and
obedience to such a form of government in the Church, as the Lord Jesus has
not appointed in his Word, and have approved the same, whether by subscription,
or by oath of Canonical obedience, or by conformity to their usurpations and
injunctions.

These, or such like public offenses, as we have bewailed in our selves, (so
far as we had any fellowship with them) so we have thought it needful,
that our brethren also who came over to us, should profess their repentance of
the same, at least in a positive acknowledgement, of the contrary sincere ways
of the Gospel, before they be received to Communion with us.

SECT. VI.
IF these grounds may suffice to justify our non-admittance of all the
Countrymen promiscuously, that come over to us to the fellowship of the Lords
Table, without further satisfaction, the same also (or some of them at least)
may suffice to justify our non-admittance of their infants unto Baptism.
Infants cannot claim right unto Baptism, but in the right of one of their
parents, or both: where neither of the Parents can claim right to the Lords
Supper, there their infants cannot claim right to Baptism. And they cannot
claim right to the Lords Supper, if it be so that we have not lawful
liberty to administer the Lords Supper to the Parents, or to one of them at
least, either for our want of due power over them, or through their want of
Communion with the Church, (whereof the Sacrament is a seal) or by reason of
some public offense which they lie under; (as has been already opened).
Surely though this third reason reach not Infants, yet the two former do, and
prevent as their Parents of just claim of the Lords Supper, so them of due
right of Baptism with us. For neither have we power over them, neither have
they communion with any particular Church, being dismissed from the Church
where they were baptized, and recommended to none.

Against this sundry things are objected, and such (as seem) of much weight; as

1. That the Sacrament of Baptism has been administered to some who were no
members of any visible Church, and therefore why not to the Children of
non-members? as Philip baptized the Eunuch, Acts 8.37, 38. and Peter baptized
Cornelius and his household, Acts 10.47, 48. Paul baptized Lydia and her
household, the Jailer and his household, Acts 16.15.33. To which we answer three
things.

*
First, The Apostles had an unlimited power, and might baptize believers
professing the faith, and their seed, wheresoever they came, but the power of
Pastors and Teachers is limited to their own particular visible Church, which
has called them to minister unto them.

*
Secondly, It cannot be proved, that the Apostles or Evangelists baptized any
but such as either were members of some visible Church before they preached to
them, or else they gathered them into a visible Church estate, before they
baptized them. *
The Eunuch in Acts 8. was a Proselyte to the Church of Jerusalem, for the Text
says, he came up to Jerusalem for to worship, Acts 8.27. Neither let any man
object, that his membership at Jerusalem would not entitle him to Baptism,
seeing Baptism is a Sacrament of the Christian Church, not of the Jewish; *
for whatsoever member of the Jewish Church, as believed in Christ as the
Messiah, and professed that faith, he was capable of Baptism; for such they
were whom John baptized, Mat. 3.6. and Christ's Disciples, Joh. 4.2. yea all the
Israelites were baptized in the cloud and in the Sea, in the days of Moses, 1
Cor. 10.2. *
As for Lydia, and the Jailer, and both their families, they lived together in
the same City of Philippi, Act. 16.12. where was a company also of other
brethren, ver. 4. and from the beginning of the Gospel (which doubtless was
when he preached to them, Acts 16.) he speaks of them as a Church; Know ye
Philippians (says he) that in the beginning of the Gospel, no Church
communicated with me, as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only, Phil.
4.15. Which evidently holds them forth as a Church at that time, and that
Paul did first gather the brethren there into a Church, when he baptized Lydia,
and the Jailer, and others there. And indeed the Commission which Christ gave
his Apostles, holds it forth, that they were by preaching to make Disciples,
before they baptized them and their children, Mat. 28.19. Now a Disciple (as
the meaning of the word implies) is a Scholar in Christ's school, and
therefore when the Apostles were directed to make Disciples before they did
baptize them, they were not only to convert them to the faith, but also to
gather them as Disciples or Scholars into a School of Christ; and the School
of Christ is every particular visible Christian Church, wherein some are
teachers, some are Disciples or Scholars, and his Discipline is exercised
amongst them. Neither is it credible, that the Apostles would baptize any, that
is, apply to them the seal of the Covenant given unto the Church, before they
had taught them the Covenant it self, and entered them into it, in which regard
we cannot easily think, that when Peter baptized Cornelius and his family, he
did only perceive they had received the holy Ghost, and evidently professed
the same in new tongues, ( Acts 10.45, 46, 47.) but that he did also gather
them into one body, directing them to the spiritual use of the newly received
gifts in the Communion of Saints, and baptized them into the fellowship of the
Lord Jesus, and of one another in his Name.

Thirdly, We answer, as the Apostles were transcendent Officers of the Church,
so they received transcendent power to administer their work. As the Father
sent Christ, so Christ sent them, Job. 20.21. to wit, Cum amplitudine and
plenitudine potestatis, with all fullness of power, so that any one Apostle
received both the gifts and power of all the Officers of the Church. Any
Apostle might do the work, not only of an Apostle, but of a Prophet, of an
Evangelist, of a Pastor, of a Teacher, of a Deacon. Rev. 1.1.
They do foretell (as Prophets) things to come, Acts 27.22. They traveled up
and down not only to plant Churches, but to water Churches, as Evangelists,
Acts 15.41. They as Pastors feed the flock of Christ with wholesome words of
exhortation, 1 Timothy 2.7.
Joh. 21.25. They as Teachers of the Gentiles, as Paul speaks of himself,
taught them in the mysteries of the kingdom of God. They (as Elders) ruled the
Church, not as Lords, but as examples to the flock, and as Deacons they
received the oblations of the Church, and distributed the same according to the
necessity of the Saints. Yea, Acts 4.35.
though when the Apostles came where Churches were planted, they did put forth
no act of transcendent authority, but did all with the consent of the Church;
yet in the absence of the Churches, they might do any act which any Church,
and all the Officers thereof might do together. As for ought we know they
might in such a case impose hands alone; so Paul might set apart Timothy to
some special office, 2 Timothy 1.6. they might alone deliver unto Satan, 1 Timothy
1.20. they alone might baptize, in as much as the presence, and the power, and
fellowship of any one of them, did comprehend as much as the presence and power
and fellowship of the whole Church together; *
their acts therefore in such transcendent cases, are not patterns, nor
presidents for us; but according to the measure of the gift of Christ, we are
to move in our own line, and to act only as the Ministers of Christ and his
Church, in the presence and fellowship of the Church.

2. It is objected again, that children of excommunicated persons, such as
being cast out, are not holden as members of the Church, have yet right unto
Baptism, and therefore it is not well done of us to deny the Baptism of the
children of such as are not Members.

That children of Excommunicated persons have right to Baptism, they prove by
sundry Arguments.

1. From the consideration of the diverse sorts of Members; some are members not
actually, but in the eternal Counsel of God, as Paul before his conversion.

2. Some are member only in show and appearance, as hypocrites, which are as
wooden legs fastened to the body.

3. Some are lively members, knit to Christ by faith, to the brethren by the
spirit of love.

4. Some are decayed members, which though they belong to Gods Election, and
are truly ingraffed into Christ Jesus, yet for the present have no lively sense
of the power and virtue of Christ: these are like to a leg or arm to a man
that has a dead palsy, which though it remain for a time without feeling and
nourishment, yet being joined to the body, it may be recovered by the virtue of
some strong medicine, and made whole as the other.

Of this sort are Excommunicated persons, for in regard of their ingraffing,
they are true members, and cannot be quite cut off from the body of Christ,
Joh. 10.18. And though they be holden as cut off from the holy Communion of the
faithful by the Churches censure; as also because Christ ratifieth in heaven,
what the Church has done on earth; and likewise because in themselves they
want the free passage of the life and virtue of the spirit of grace, till they
be touched with repentance; yet they are not wholly cut off from the society
of the faithful, because the seed of faith remains in them, and that
knitteth the bond of conjunction with Christ.

Answ. Those godly learned Divines, who do thus argue, we do so highly
esteem, and so deeply reverence in the Lord, that were the cause our own, and
not the Lords, we should rather let it fall, then defend it, by opposition to
the grave judgments of such holy Saints. But because we may not accept
persons in the things of Christ, we are forced to excuse our selves from
submitting to their judgments in this cause, which yet generally in others we
yield unto them; Our answer therefore is, that howsoever such excommunicate
persons as are truly faithful (notwithstanding the censure of excommunication)
because the seed of faith remains in them; yet to the society of the
faithful, joined in a particular visible Church, they are not knit, but wholly
cut off from their Communion: for it is not the seed of faith, nor faith it
self, that knitteth a man to this or that particular visible Church, but an
holy profession of the faith, and professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ
in their Communion. Which profession, when a faithful man has violated by
some notorious scandalous crime, or by wilful obstinacy, in standing out in
any offense against the rule of the Gospel, he is now delivered unto Satan, and
therefore wholly cut off from the Communion of the Church, and consequently
from the seals thereof: himself from the Lords table, his seed (which are his
members) from Baptism: he is not now as a dead palsy member, cut off from the
body; Ne pars sincera trahatur; the Lord Jesus may still lay hold upon him by
his Spirit, when yet he cannot in any lively manner for the time lay hold upon
Christ; and so he may still remain a member of the invisible Church of the
firstborn, when yet he has neither part, nor portion, nor fellowship in the
particular flock and visible Church of Christ Jesus, but is as an Heathen, or a
Publican.

Now because the Sacraments are not given to the invisible Church, nor to the
members thereof, as such, but to the visible particular Churches of Christ
Jesus, and to the members thereof; such therefore as are cut off from their
memberlike Communion with the visible Church, are cut off also from the seals
of that Communion, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. As therefore we do not
receive an Heathen to the fellowship of the Supper, nor their seed to Baptism,
so neither dare we receive an Excommunicate person (who is to us as an
Heathen) unto the Lords Supper, nor his children to Baptism.

Object. It is objected again in the behalf of the children of Excommunicate
persons, that it is not in the power of man to cut them off from Christ, though
they be excommunicate: the personal sin of the Parent, may not keep the
blessing from the child, and therefore not deprive it of the liberty of the
ordinance of God.

Answ. The same power of Christ that ratifieth the Censure of the Church
against the Excommunicate parent, though it do not, cut off the child from
Christ, (no more then the Father) yet it cuts him off from the outward fruition
of the Covenant of Christ with his Church, and from the seals thereof: For as
Christ gave the child no right unto Baptism, but by the Fathers right unto
the Coverant, and Communion of the Church; so if he takes away the Fathers
right from the Covenant and Communion of the Church, he takes away the
Childrens right also. The personal sin of the parent is not in this case a
mere private or personal sin, but the sin of a public person of his
family. For as the profession of his faith at his receiving into the Church was
as the profession of a public person, for receiving him and his children (who
could make no profession, but by his mouth) into the Church: So his violation
of his profession by a scandalous crime, was as a public violation thereof,
for himself and his seed, who stand and fall before the Church in his name and
person.

Object. It is yet further objected, We must always put a difference between
persons Excommunicate, which do not make separation from the Church, (though
they be grievous offenders) and open Apostates (which join themselves with the
enemies of the Church, to the ruin and overthrow of the Gospel,) and between
Turks and Infidels, that are forth of the Covenant, and never belonged to
Christ.

Answ. We willingly put a difference between the Excommunicate persons and
Apostates, and Turks; to wit, in such things wherein they differ.
Excommunicate persons are nearer to help and means of conversion then Turks;
For Excommunication it self is a means of salvation, 1 Cor. 5.5. and Turks
are nearer then Apostates; For better it were never to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn away from the holy
Commandment given unto them, 2 Pet. 2.21. But yet in this they all agree, they
are all of them as Heathens, Mat. 18.17. And therefore neither the Parents to
be admitted to the Lords Table, nor their children to Baptism.

Object. Moreover, it is still further objected in behalf of Infants, mercy of
God enlarge it self to thousands, why should men question whether such Infants
belong to the Covenant, and so keep them from the Sacrament of Baptism, which
is due to them by the right of their Ancestors?

Answ. 1. If the extension of Gods mercy to thousands, be a sufficient ground
to extend Baptism to the children of Excommunicate persons, in the right of
their Ancestors; it may suffice as well to extend it to the children of Turks
and Infidels, and Apostates, and so the difference of the one from the other
(urged in the last Argument) will be taken away. For it is not above 66.
Generations from Noah to Christ, as is plain in the Genealogy, Luke 3.23. to
38. and there have not passed as many more generations from Christ's time to the
Turks and Infidels of this present age. And then if Gods mercy to a thousand
Generations may fetch in the Children of Excommunicate persons, the same
promise may fetch in all Turks and Infidels at this day; we dare not therefore
improve the large extension of Gods mercy so far as to give a thousand
Generations right and title to the Covenant of God with his Church, and to
encourage the Ministers of the Gospel to set the seals of the Covenant
thereunto.

The true meaning of the promise we take to be, That God out of his abundant
grace and rich mercy, may and does extend thoughts of redeeming and converting
grace and mercy unto thousand Generations; But he never allowed his Church any
warrant to receive into their Covenant, and Communion, the Children of godly
parents, who lived a thousand year ago, much less a thousand Generations.
Nay rather the Text is plain, that the holiness of the children, depends
upon the faith of the next immediate parents, (or of one of them at least) 1
Cor. 7.14. to wit, such faith as denominateth them Christian-beleevers, in
opposition to Pagan Infidels: and that holiness of the children to such
parents, is called Federall, which receives them into the Covenant, and to the
seals of it.

Object. Lastly, it is objected, that children borne in fornication, have right
to Baptism, and why not then the children of Excommunicate parents? The
wickedness of parents ought not to prejudice the children in things that
pertain to their salvation.

Answ. The wickedness of the Parent does not prejudice the Election, or
Redemption, or the faith of the child: Jephta, a bastard, is yet reckoned up
in the Catalogue of Believers, Heb. 11.32. But yet in the old Testament, a
Bastard was not admitted to come into the Congregation of the Lord, to his
tenth Generation, Deuteronomy. 23.2. and that could not but prejudice all the
base-borne children of Israel, and that in the things which pertain to their
salvation. And though God shows greater grace to them in the days of the
Gospel, yet greater grace cannot (by proportion of any rules of the Gospel) be
expected for them from the Church, then this, that notwithstanding the sin of
their parents, they may be received into the Congregation of the Lord, and so
unto Baptism, either when their parents repent and acknowledge their sin
before the Lord and his Church, or when themselves are able to make a better
profession of better things in their own persons.

It is generally known, that our best Divines do not allow the Baptism of
Bastards, sine sponsoribus; But whether they consider Sponsores, as witnesses,
as some do who fetch allowance of witnesses from Isa. 8.2, 3, 4. or whether
they consider them as Sureties, the holy Scripture gives no warrant for either
in such a case. The place in Isaiah gives no foothold for Witnesses in
Baptism. The Prophet called not Vriah for a witness of the Circumcision of
his child; but of the conception of a man-child yet unbegotten, and of the
Prophecy of such events as were to fall out during the infancy of the child;
nor was it meet the Prophet should honor so wicked a time-server as Vriah was,
to be a witness of the Circumcision of his child; though the more profane
and idolatrous he was, the more fit and faithful a witness of a miraculous
prediction, to the conviction of an incredulous King, and people: And as for
Sureties, the Covenant is not intayled to Sureties, to such as for whom they
undertake, but to faithful parents, pertaining to the family of the Church,
and to their seed. It is true indeed, there is a large promise to Abraham,
stretching the Covenant to his seed, not only to the children of his own
body, and to his proselyte servants, but also to all that were borne in his
house, or bought with money, Genesis 17.12, 13. which happily may grant so much
liberty to a Christian Sponsor, that if a stranger or wicked man should give
him his child from his infancy to be brought up as his own, it may be
baptized as his own; But that is the utmost bounds of liberty in this case.
And very doubtful it is, whether the promise pertain only to the children of
Proselytes, either strangers or borne in the house. But we know not any ground
at all to allow a faithful man liberty to entitle another man's child to
Baptism, only upon a pretense of his own promise to have an eye to his
education, unless the child be either borne in his house, or resigned to him
to be brought up as his own.

CHAP. V. Touching the Dispensation of the Censures of the Church.
SECT. I.
WE proceed not to Censure, but in case of known offense, and such offense as
cannot be healed without Censure. Two sorts of offenses there be, some private
between Brother and Brother; some public and notorious, being known to the
whole Church; or at least to many. And of them, some are more gross and
heinous, some less.

If the offense be private between Brother and Brother, the Brother offended is
to follow the Rule of Christ, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. That is, first to go and
tell him of his fault, or (as the word signifies) Convince him of his fault,
and to admonish him of it privately; So that the plaster may be no broader
then the sore; private admonition is most suitable to a private fault, and
expresses both the wisdom and love of the Brother, who in so doing, both
heals and covers the offense at once: If the offender take the admonition
in good part, (as taking part with the admonition against his own sin) the
Brother has won and gained him both to God and himself: to God by
repentance; to himself by this experiment of his brotherly love: But if the
offender hear not his Brother, but takes part with his sin against the
admonition, he then takes one or two more with him, (such as in wisdom he
thinks to be most fit to prevail with him) that so by the mouth of two or
three, his word of admonition may be established; or if the offender hear them
not, his word of accusation to the Church may be established: And they coming
to the offender and acquaint him with the cause of their coming to bring him to
the sight of his sin, which they understand is committed by him; they first
call upon the name of Christ to be present with them in this duty according to
his promise, Mat. 18.19, 20. where he has said he will be present with any two
or three that are met together in his name, to ask of him, (for it is upon
this occasion, and this chiefly upon which the promise is made.) And the
brother offended lays open the offense before them, and declares how ill the
labor of his love was accepted before, and desires their help to assist him
in the conviction of the offender. If they can prevail with him to acknowledge
his offense, and to be humbled for it, the soul of the offender is healed,
thanks are given to God, and mutual love renewed and increased amongst
themselves. But if the offender deny the fact, and there is none to prove it
but the Brother that brought them, they can proceed no farther, because the
testimony of one against one, will not stand in Judgment, Deuteronomy. 19.15. If he
acknowledge the fact, but do not acknowledge the sinfulness of it, but stand
stiffly to justify it, then the Brother first offended tells the Church of
it, to wit, in Gods way. He tells the Elders, who are the mouth of the
Church, that by them it may be presented before the Church, and the cause heard
and examined, and judged by them. Then one of the Elders, either by himself,
or calling forth the Brother offended, declares the offense given to him by
such a Brother, and what course he took with him (according to the Rule of
Christ) to heal his Brother. First by private admonition, but so he prevailed
not to bring him to a sight and sense of his sin; then how he took a Brother
or two more to assist him in the work, but neither so could he or they
prevail with him; which they being present, do openly testify before the
Lord and his Church: And so by the mouth of two or three, the word of his
accusation is established before the Church.

The Church being thus informed of the estate and carriage of the offense, the
Elders do labor in public with the offender to convince him, both of his
sin and impenitencie under it, notwithstanding all the faithfulness, and
love of his Brethren, in seeking to heal his spirit in private. It is free
also for any of the Brethren (leave and liberty being first desired and
obtained of the Elders) to help forward the conviction by any words of wisdom
and zeal which God shall put into their mouths; wherein if the convictions and
persuasions of the Church do prevail to any kindly humiliation of the
offender in the acknowledgement of his sin before the Lord and his Church;
the offender is gained, the sin is subdued, others discouraged from the like
offense, and the Church is satisfied.

But if on the contrary the offender stand out in defense of his sin, as well
against the whole Church, as he did before against the Brethren, who dealt with
him in private, the Church then enters into consideration of the Nature and
Quality of the offense, whether it be gross and heinous, such as is condemned
by the light of nature, (like those cast out by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.11.) or
whether it be such as (through some mist of ignorance, or strength of present
passion) he does not clearly discern the sinfulness of it: if it be of the
former sort, they proceed then to excommunication, both in respect of the
nature of the crime (whereof more hereafter) as also in respect of his
contumacy to the Church. If it be of the later sort, the Church proceeds not
forthwith to excommunication of the offender, but after once or twice
admonition; For in this case it is with the offender as with an Heretic, who
may err at first, and stand in his error, for want of clear light, and is
therefore once and again (according to the rule of the Apostle, Tit. 3.10) to
be admonished before he be rejected: when therefore an admonition is judged
seasonable, one of the Elders, with the consent of the whole Church, does
recollect the offense, and all the arguments of weight, which have been
publicly or privately used to convince the offender of his sin, and
discovers to him also, that invalidity and shallowness of all his answers
and evasions; and thereupon does solemnly, in the name of the Lord, admonish
and charge him to see the danger of such a sin, and distemper of his soul, in
maintaining of it; that so (if it be the will of God) he may be recovered out
of the snare of the Tempter. Whilst the Brother is thus cast, and lies under
the censure of admonition, he stands in the judgment of the whole Church, as
a convinced public offender; and therefore, till he be reconciled to the
Church by the penitent and public acknowledgement of his sin before them, he
does abstain from the Lords Table; according to the direction of our Savior,
who would not have an offender present himself nor his gift before the altar,
whilst the guilt of the offense of his brother lay upon him, Mat. 5.23, 24.
or, as the Priests in the Law did forbear to eat of the holy bread, whilst
they lay in uncleanness, Lev. 22.3, 4. or, as one who lying in his
uncleanness, did rather pollute the holy Ordinance of God by partaking of it,
then receive any holiness from it, Hag. 2.12, 13.

The offender then by this public admonition being debarred of his wonted
fellowship in the Lords Table, and withal being solicited, and urged by his
brethren and friends, to consider his great distemper of spirit, in standing
out so long in that which is evil; If hereupon (by the grace of Christ) he
come to himself, and see his sin, and desire to reconcile himself to the Lord,
and his brethern, he then acquainting one of the Elders with his desire, is
called forth in the face of the Church, to make public confession of his sin,
and to judge himself for it; wherein, if the Lord help him to hold forth an
ingenuous and humble loathing of his sin and of himself for it; they bless God
for his blessing upon his ordinance, and readily receive him into wonted
favor, and brotherly fellowship with them, in all the liberties of Gods house;
but if on the contrary the spirit of the brother grow more and more hardened in
his sin, and stand out against all means (public and private) of his
reformation, the Church having waited a convenient time, and yet finding their
brother wax worse and worse, (as is commonly seen in such cases, wherein men
are not humbled under such means) then, according to the rule of Christ, Matthew.
18.17. one of the Elders propounding the case, first to the whole Church, and
they giving their consents (as before for his admission, so now for his
expulsion) he sets his sin in order again before him, with all the
circumstances and aggravations of it, especially how he has taken in vain,
and made unprofitable all other means for his recovery; and therefore now, in
the name, and with the power of the Lord Jesus, and with the consent of the
whole Church, he pronounces him unto Satan, as an Heathen or a Publican, for
the destruction of the flesh, that his soul may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus; and all this according to the direction of the Holy Ghost; Matthew. 18.17.
2 Cor. 5.4, 5.

SECT. II.
ANd thus the Church proceeds, in case the offense be private at first, and
and less scandalous; but if the offense be be public, and heinous and grossly
scandalous, such as is condemned even amongst the Heathens, by the light of
nature; as those mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.11. Fornication, Adultery,
Incest, Murder, Railing, Extortion, and the like; or such as are generally
accounted damnable and detestable amongst Christians, as Idolatry, Blasphemy,
Profaneness, etc. We take our selves bound to proceed more roundly against
such; for in such cases the Apostle does not direct us to such graduall
proceedings by private admonitions, but if any Brother (says he) be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, with such a one no not to eat: For it does not stand with the
glory of God, or honor of his Church to accept an acknowledgement of such
gross and scandalous crimes without further censure; but it becomes the
Church, (being a communion of Saints) rather to free themselves from the guilt
and fellowship of such notorious wickedness, by expression of their zeal and
just indignation against such sins by casting out the committers thereof from
fellowship amongst them; for though the blood of Christ, and the repentance of
an offender do remove any offense, though never so heinous in the sight of God
and man, yet God being jealous of his own glory, and of the honor of his
Church, is not wont ordinarily to grant repentance unto such notorious sinners,
until the censure of the Church have passed upon them.

Whilst the offender lies under the censure of excommunication, though he be
excluded from the communion of the Church, and so from the Lord Table, and from
all other liberties of Church Fellowship (as voting in elections, admission of
members, censures, etc.) yet we do not debar him from entrance into the
assembly of the Church in time of preaching the Word, or Prayer, or such other
worship of God, as is not peculiar to the Church; for this liberty we do not
forbid to Heathens and Indians; and persons excommunicate are but as Heathens,
in respect of worship, although worse then Heathens (even as Publicans) in
respect of familiar private communion; for though we might eat with an
Heathen, (1 Cor. 10.27.) yet with a Publican the Jews would not eat, Mat. 9.11.
no more may we with excommunicate persons, 2 Cor. 5.11. But we do not read that
an Heathen was forbidden to hear the Word in the Synagogues, though they were
not permitted to enter into the Temple (which was to them of a Sacramental
nature) Act. 21.28, 29. nor might they enter as members into the Congregation,
Deuteronomy. 13.13. to 8. But suppose Heathens were forbidden to hear the Word, even
in the Synagogues, yet seeing that wall of partition between Jews and Heathens
is now broken down, as in other respects, so in this, that it is not now
unlawful for an Infidel or Heathen to come into the assembly of the Church (1
Cor. 14.23, 24, 25.) As therefore we do not deny the like liberty, either to
Indians or Negars; so not to excommunicate persons: Moreover, this further
compassion and succor we afford to an excommunicate person, that though we
have cast him out of our liberties and privileges peculiar to
Church Fellowship, yet we have not cast him out also of our hearts, nor out of
our prayers, nor out of our care to recover such a lost sheep into Christ's fold
again; and therefore still, though we forbear all familiar fellowship with him,
and countenance toward him, that he may be ashamed; yet we account him not as
an enemy, but still take opportunity to admonish him as a Brother, 2 These.
3.14, 15. And if we find by the blessing of God and Christ upon the censure, or
by the rebukes of many ministered unto him, that the soul of the excommunicate
person be humbled (as it was the case of the incestuous Corinthian, 2 Cor.
2.6.) the Elders discovering the same, do call him forth before the Church,
where he giving glory to God, and confessing his sin, and the justice of God
against him, and holding forth a repenting frame of spirit, to the satisfaction
of the Church, they do with common consent forgive him and comfort him, and
confirm their love to him, by receiving him again into communion with the
Church, and into all the liberties of Gods House, as before.

SECT. III.
IN all these transactions of Church proceedings, when we say we do this or
that with common consent, our meaning is, we do not carry on matters, either
by the overruling power of the Presbytery, or by the consent of the major part
of the Church, but by the general and joint consent of all the members of the
Church; for we read in the Acts of the Apostles, the Primitive Church (which is
a pattern for succeeding ages) carried all their administrations, (...), that
is, with one accord, Acts 2.46. as becomes the Church of God; which ought to
be of one heart, and one soul, of one mind, and one judgment, and all to speak
the same thing, Act. 4.32. 1 Cor. 1.10. Phil. 2.2, 3. But if it so fall out,
that any difference do arise, (as sometime there does, through the remaining
darkness of our minds, seeing we all know but in part) then such as do
dissent from their Brethren, are required to propound the grounds of their
dissent; which if they be weighty, and held forth from the light of the Word,
all the rest do submit, and yield thereunto, not as to the voice of their
Brethren only, but as to the voice of Christ; whose voice alone must rule in
the Church, and all the sheep of Christ will hear it; and all the upright in
heart will follow it; thus Paphnutius is said to turn about the whole general
Council of Nice, in the point of Ministers marriage. But if the grounds of
such as do dissent, do upon due consideration appear to have little or no
weight in them, the officers of the Church, or some other of the Brethren, do
declare unto them the invalidity thereof: If they be satisfied, the matter in
hand does then proceed with the common consent of all; if they be not satisfied
yet, it is either through want of light, (and so through weakness of
judgment) or through strength of pride, and so through stiffnesse of will. If
the former be the let, they take further pains, lovingly to inform them, and
patiently bear with them, till matters be further cleared; so that at length,
they come either to consent, to go along with their Brethren, or at least to be
content to refer the matter to the judgments of their Brethren; and for their
part to sit still, and to make no further dealings with the Churches
proceedings; but if through partialty or prejudice, their dissent do appear to
spring from stiffnesse of will, or from a spirit of contradiction, (which yet
falls out very rarely) in so much, that they will not be brought (by loving
and brotherly information) to give way to the better judgments of their
Brethren, the Church does proceed with common consent to admonish them of their
pride, and self-willednesse, and so leave them under the censure of admonition;
whereby the liberty of their voice is taken from them, till they have removed
this offense from the spirits of their Brethren; but if it do appear that the
dissent, whether of one or more Brethren, do arise from such darkness and
intricacie of the matter in hand, as that the officers and members of the
Church do find themselves either unable to clear the matter fully, or at least
unfit, in regard of some prejudice which may be conceived against them, (which
sometimes does fall out, though very seldom) in such a case, when the matter
is weighty, and the doubt great on both sides, then (with common consent) we
call in for light from other Churches; and entreat them to send over to us such
of their Elders, or Brethren, as may be fit to judge in such a cause; upon
their coming, the Church meeting together in the Name of Christ, the whole
cause, and all the proceedings in it, are laid open to them; who by the help of
Christ, pondering and studying all things according to the rule of the Word,
the truth is cleared, a right way of peace and concord discovered and advised,
and the spirits of the Brethren on all parts comfortably satisfied.

SECT. IV.
IN these transactions we know not what might be subject to exception, or
controversy; but only that we allow to the people so much power in the
censures of the Church, both in binding an offender to admonition and
excommunication, and in loosing of penitents from the same. But the Reasons
that prevail with us to take this course, seems to us to have evident ground
from Scripture Light; and therefore may excuse us from following the pattern of
such Churches as rather consult with humane wisdom then divine institution in
this case.

Our first Reason is taken from the royal rule of Love and Wisdom, in healing
offenses, given by our Savior, Matthew. 18.17. where he directs a Brother
offended, for the healing of the spirit of an offender, finally to refer the
matter to the Church. Tell (says he) the Church. Now we cannot find
throughout the new Testament, that ever the word Church is taken any otherwise
then for the Society and Congregation of the faithful; unless it be once,
where it is taken for a civil Assembly, Act. 19.41. But never for one Bishop,
or Counselor, or Archdeacon; for neither does the Scripture acknowledge any of
these offices in the Church at all, (as has been showed above) taking a
Bishop, as now they stand; nor can the Church, which is a word of multitude,
hold forth a Bishop or his Commissary, who is but one person: For, though one
person may represent a whole Church when he is sent forth in the Churches name,
with instructions from the Church; yet such is not the case here: The Bishop
comes in his own name, and the Commissary in the Bishops name, but neither of
them in the Churches name, nor with instructions from the Church; but rather
with destructions, or at least with disturbances to the Church. Neither is the
word Church taken throughout the new Testament for an Assembly of Presbyters:
the Consistory is a word unheard of there. Nor are any complaints directed
thither, unless it be to prepare them for the hearing and judgment of the
Church; As all the Elders are said to be assembled in the house of James, to
prepare and instruct Paul for the carriage of his matter before the Church. Nor
are any Censures of the Church committed to the Presbyters alone, to be
administered by them; though they be to be administered by them in the presence,
and with the consent of the Church. And therefore when the Angels of the
Churches in Asia are blamed for neglect of proceeding against offenders,
(whether Balaam, or Jezabel, or the Nicholaitans) the charge is given not to
the Angels of the Churches only, but to the Churches also themselves; Let him
that has an ear hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, Rev. 2.17.29.
And though the word Congregation, which is all one with Church, be sometimes
put in the old Testament for Elders or Judges of the Congregation; yet

1. It is far more frequently put for the Elders and body of the people met
together, as he that observes the several places shall find it.

2. When it is put for the Elders and Judges of the Congregation, as Numb.
35.12.24, 25. it is never understood of them sitting in a Consistory by
themselves apart from the people, but in the presence of the public Assembly
of the people, who also had liberty in such cases to rescue an innocent from
unjust punishment. 1 Samuel 14.45.

Object. In Mat. 18.17. when Christ directs the Brother offended to tell the
Church, he speaks of such a Church to whom we may orderly, and ordinarily
complain; now this we cannot do to the whole multitude.

Answ. We willingly grant, it will be orderly to tell any offense to the
Elders of the Church, before it be presented to the multitude of the Church,
both because they are the mouths and guides of the Church: and also meet it is
all things be prepared by them for the Churches cognizance, that so the Church
be not cumbered, (as sometimes it might) with unnecessary and frivolous
agitations. But though the Elders in such a case have power to direct and
persuade what were best to be done, yet not power to judge and determine
public Cases, without the consent of the Church; unless the Brother offended
be satisfied in their advise.

Answ. 2. When a whole multitude is assembled in a body, any offense may be
orderly and ordinarily told unto them, by a complainant; especially in case any
Officer amongst them shall call him forth to tell his complaint: As the Levite
orderly told his complaint to the whole multitude of the Congregation of Israel
assembled at Mispah, Judge. 20.3, 4, etc.

Object. 2. The Church Christ directs unto, he presupposes to be the
ordinary Executioners of all Discipline and Censures, which the multitude is
not: And the reason ratifying the Censure of the Church, does show the number
of them to be small, Mat. 18.20. where two or three, etc.

Answ. The multitude of the Church does ordinarily execute all Discipline and
Censures by the Presbyters, and the Presbyters by their Consent. The promise
made to two or three ( ver. 20.) respects not the Judges of the cause when it
is brought to the Church; but the two or three Brethren who dealt in the Cause
before it came to the Church: As in like sort, the promise of binding in
heaven, what the Church binds in earth, (ver. 19.) pertains to the
ratifying of the Censure of the whole Church, mentioned in the verse before, to
wit, in verse. 17.

A second Reason why we allow such power to the people in Church Censures, is
taken from the practice of the Church of Corinth, in the case of the incestuous
person, and that according to the Apostles direction; For in the 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.
he directs the whole Church of Corinth, (to whom he writes) That they in the
name of the Lord Jesus, when (says he) ye are gathered together, and my
Spirit, with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one unto
Satan. Where Paul saying in the verse foregoing, that he had judged already
that so it should be done, does not argue that now the Church was at hand, he
took the power of judging the Cause wholly unto himself, and the publication
and declaration of it only in the Church, but that he had seen already
evident cause, to judge the party worthy to be cast out: but directed them to
do it with all the power that is requisite to that action:

As 1. In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom the principal power of
all Church Censures rests.

2. When they (that is, the whole Church) are gathered together: not the
Bishops, nor the Presbyters alone.

3. And Paul's spirit with them, to wit, so much of Apostolical Authority
being committed to the Church, and present with it in such cases.

4. He speaks of the power of the Lord Jesus with them in this action, which
holds forth their Authority.

5. When the Excommunicate person was humbled under this Censure, Paul
beseeches them to forgive him, to comfort him, to confirm their love unto
him, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8. Now they who have power of forgiving an offender, have
power also of binding him under wrath: Ejusdem potestatis, etc. ligare, etc.
and solvere.

Object. 1. All this argues no more, but that some in the Church had this
power, to wit, the Presbytery of the Church, but not the whole body of the
people.

Answ. 1. There is no word in the Text that attributes any power to the
Presbytery apart, or singularly above the rest: But as the reproof is directed
to them all, for not mourning and taking the offense to heart, that the
offender might be taken away from amongst them, ( ver. 1.2.) so is Commandment
directed to them all, when they are gathered together, to proceed unto the
casting of him out: In like sort, in the end of the Chapter, he exhorts them
all again, Put away therefore (says he) from amongst you that wicked person,
ver. 13. and that by a judicial power, (to wit, as under Christ) do not ye
judge them that are within, ver. 12. And lest this Judgment should be
restrained to the Presbyters only, he magnifieth the judgments of the Saints,
taking occasion from hence to stretch their Judicature, in some cases, even to
Civil matters also; Know ye not (says he) that the Saints shall judge the
world? yea the Angels, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. And thereupon he incourageth them to
betrust the deciding of any Civil Cause depending between Brethren, to the
Judicature of the meanest Brother in the Church, ( ver. 4.) rather then to fly
suddenly unto Civil Magistrates, especially amongst the Heathen.

Object. 2. But if the power of Judicature be committed to the whole Church,
together with the Presbytery, then all the multitude shall be made Governors,
and who then shall be governed?

Answ. The multitude of Brethren are governed by the Elders, so long as they
rule aright, to wit, whilst they hold forth the Word and voice of Christ,
which the sheep of Christ are wont to hear, Joh. 10.4. But in case the
officers do err, and commit offense, they shall be governed by the whole body
of the Brethren; though otherwise the Brethren are bound to obey and submit to
them in the Lord, Heb. 13.17.

Object. 3. A democraticall government might do well in Athens, a city
fruitful of pregnant wits, but will soon degenerate to an Anarchie (a popular
tumult) amongst rude common people.

Answ. 1. It is unworthy the spirit of so godly learned a man as makes this
objection, to prefer Athens before Jerusalem, pregnant wits before sanctified
hearts.

Answ. 2. Though the government were democraticall (as it is not) yet there is
no tumultuous disorder, where not the will of each man bears the sway, but
the voice of Christ alone is heard, who is the Head and wise Monarch of the
Church.

Object. If it be said, tumult, and disturbance, and confusion cannot be
avoided where the multitude have all of them, not only leave, but power to
speak, and one will be ready to take the word out of the others mouth, and one
of them to thwart and contradict one another; and will not this make the Church
of Christ a confluence of Cyclops?

Answ. All such disorder is easily and timely prevented by the Elders, who have
power from Christ to restrain any man's speech, whilst another is speaking; and
to cut off any means speech that grows either impertinent or intemperate: the
Elders having received in special manner the power of the keys, they have
power to open and shut the doors of speech and silence, in which respect the
government of the Church is not merely democraticall, but (as the best
governments be) of a mixed temper; in respect of Christ (whose voice only must
be heard, and his rule kept) it is a Monarchy; in respect of the peoples power
in choosing officers, and joint power with the officers in admitting members,
in censuring offenders, it is a Democracy; in respect of the officers
instruction and reproof of the people in the public ministry, and in ordering
of all things in the Assembly, it is an Aristocracy; what is found good in any
civil government, is in Church Government; and what is found evil is by the
wisdom of Christ safely avoided and prevented.

But that we may more distinctly declare our selves wherein lies the
difference of their mutual authority, both of the Church over the Elders, and
the Elders over the Church, we conceive the Church exercises several acts of
authority over their Elders, to wit, in three cases:

1. In calling and electing them to office, and in ordaining them also
thereunto in defect of their Presbytery.

2. In sending them forth upon the public service of Christ, as the whole
Church at Jerusalem sent forth chosen Ministers with letters of instruction to
Antioch, and other Churches, Acts 15.22. Now the Ambassador is not greater then
he that sent him, but usually inferior, Job. 13.16.

3. In case of offense given by any Elder, or by the whole Eldership together,
the Church has authority to require satisfaction of them, and if they do not
give due satisfaction, to proceed to censure according to the quality of the
offense. For we see when some of the Church of Jerusalem took offense against
Peter, for communicating with the Gentiles, and contended with him about it;
Peter condescended to give ample and due account of his actions to the
fatisfaction of them all, Acts 11.2. to 8.

If admonition, and (in some cases) excommunication be ordinances of God
sanctified for the healing of the souls of Gods people gone astray; it were a
sacrilegious injury to the Elders, to deprive them of the benefit of such
wholesome medicines, when the estate of their souls should come to stand in
need thereof: and it being a ruled case, Cujus est instituere ejus est
destituere; If Plebs obsequens praeceptis Dominicis and ipsa (as Cyprian says,
lib. 1. Ep. 4.) maxim potestatem habet dignos Sacerdotes eligendi, then, as
he says there also, potestatem etiam babet Sacerdotes indignos recusandi, and
abdicandi.

On the other side, the Elders have rule over the Church, and do express it in
sundry acts of authority: as,

1. In calling the Church togethr upon any weighty occasion, Acts 6.2.

2. In opening the doors of speech and silence to any of the Assembly, Acts
13.15. unless it be where the Elders themselves lie under offense, or
suspicion of offense; and the offended parties may begin with them, Acts 11.2.
yet with due reverence observed, as to their years, so to their place, 1 Timothy
5.1.

3. In preaching the Word, the Elders have power to teach and exhort, to
charge, command, to reprove, and rebuke, with all authority, 1 Timothy 5.7. and
6.17. 2 These. 3.6. Tit. 2.15.

4. In dispensing all the censures of the Church (unless it be in their own
cause:) for though they take the consent of the Church, in dispensing a
censure, yet they set it on with great authority, in the Name of the Lord; yea,
it is no small power they put forth in directing the Church what censure is
due, according to the Word; as in our native country, though the Judge
dispense no sentence but according to the verdict of the Jury, yet his
authority is great, both in directing the Jury to give in their verdict,
according to the law, and in pronouncing sentence with power and terror
according to the law, and their verdict. The like do the Elders, in dispensing
Church Censures.

5. The Elders have power to dismiss the Church, and that with a blessing,
Numb. 6.23. to 26. which is an act of superiority, Heb. 7.7.

6. In case of the Apostasy of the Church, or of other notorious scandal
committed by them, and their obstinacy therein, the Elders have power to
denounce the Judgment of God against the Church, and to withdraw themselves
from it. As upon the Idolatry of the Israelites, Moses took the Tabernacle, and
pitched it without the camp, Exodus 33.7. and Paul with Barnabas, rejected the
Jews for their blaspemy, and turned to the Gentiles, Act. 13.45, 46.

CHAPTER VI.
SECT. I.
WE come now to that last part of our order, which stands in our communion
with other Churches amongst our selves; though one Church claim no power,
either of Ordination or Jurisdiction, over another, (for we know of none such
given us by Christ) yet we maintain Brotherly communion one with another, so
far as we may also help forward our mutual communion with the Lord Jesus. The
communion of Saints is accounted an Article of the Creed; and communion of
Churches is but a branch thereof. Seven ways there be, wherein we exercise
holy communion one with another; which for distinction and memories sake, we
may sum up in so many short names: First, by way of Participation: secondly,
of Recommendation: thirdly, of Consultation: fourthly, of Congregation:
fifthly, of Contribution: sixthly, of Admonition: seventhly, of Propagation, or
multiplication of Churches.

1. For Participation, we have occasionally spoken of it before; it is allowed
by the consent of our Churches; that when the members of any other Church are
occasioned to rest with us on the Lords day, when the Supper comes to be
administered, (and neither the persons themselves, nor the Churches they come
from, lie under any public offense) we do admit them to the participation of
the Lords Table with us: For we look at the Lords Supper, not only as a seal
of our communion with the Lord Jesus, but also of our communion with his
members; and that not only with the members of our own Church, but of all the
Churches of the Saints.

SECT. II.
BY way of Recommendation, we communicate one with another in this wise; When
any of our members by occasion of business is called to reside and continue
for any time in another Town, we give him Letters of recommendation unto the
Church in that place, giving testimony of him as of a Brother approved, and
entreating them to receive him in the Lord, (as becomes Saints) unto holy
Communion with them, and to watch over him in Brotherly love, to his building
up in fellowship with the Lord Jesus: The pattern whereof we take from Paul's
recommendation of Phebe (a Deaconesse of the Church of Cenchrea) unto the
Church of Rome, Romans 16.1, 2. Of which Letters he makes mention also to the
Church of Corinth, though not as needful for himself, but for others, 2 Cor.
3.1. But if a Brother have necessary occasion to remove himself and his family
for all together unto another Church, and there to take up his settled
habitation, for the necessary employment of his calling, or for other just
ends, he acquainteth the Elders of the Church, and some of his intimate friends
and brethren, and it may be (if convenience permit) the whole Church with the
grounds of his removal; which if they do appear to them to be just and
weighty, they then write more ample Letters of recommendation unto that Church
in his behalf; wherein they do recommend him wholly to their charge; now not
as one of themselves, but as one of theirs, to whom they do resign him, and
entreat them to receive him as a Brother, beloved in the Lord, unto all those
Christian liberties, and holy duties, wherein they are wont to Communicate with
their own members, unto all spiritual growth in Christ Jesus. Which Letters,
because they do so fully recommend a Brother unto another Church, are to
dismiss him from his own; we therefore for distinction sake, call them
Letters of dismission; which indeed do not differ from the other, but that the
former recommendeth him to another Church for a time, these for ever.

The Brother thus dismissed to another Church, brings his Letters to the
Elder of that Church, who reading them before the Church, demands the
Churches consent for his acceptance. If he be well known and approved of them,
they express their consent, either by lifting up of hands, or by silence: but
if the man be wholly unknown, and doubted of by them, though they reserve due
honor to the testimony of the Church which sent them, yet for as much as
Churches may err sometimes, as well in judgment of persons, as of doctrines;
(Hanc veniam perimusque damusque vicissim) we take liberty to take some
trial of his spirit and gifts, and then either upon his just approbation of
him, we receive him, or if we see just occasion of offense in him, we
return him with the cause back again to his own Church, who receives him
again into her own fellowship, and takes care for his healing; for we look at
our Church Covenant, as an everlasting Covenant, Jer. 50.51. And therefore
though it may be translated or resigned from one Church to another, as Gods
hand shall direct, yet it is not to be rejected or violated by us, but only by
the members cutting off himself from the fellowship of the Church by such
demerit, as exposes him to the just censure of Excommunication. But if a
member be importunately desirous to remove wholly from the Church where he is
unto another, and yet the grounds of his removal favor of nothing, but
levitie, or covetousness, or schism, or the like, according to their Covenant
of brotherly love, and faithfulness; the brethren of his own Church labor to
convince him of his sinful weakness, herein to dissuade him from his purpose,
to which counsel, God usually toweth his heart to stoop and submit: But if
after all their disswasions, they shall see the bent of his spirit unremovably
set upon removal; in such a case, if his sin be not apparent, and his danger
imminent, they use indulgence toward him, as not willing to make the Church of
God a prison to any man. But when men thus depart, God usually follows them
with a bitter curse: either taking away their lives from them, or blasting them
with poverty, or exposing them to scandal where they come, or in entertaining
them with such restless agitations, that they are driven to repent of their
former rashness, and many times to desire to return to the Church, from which
they had broken away.

SECT. III.
OUr third way of communion with other Churches, is by way of Consultation,
whereof we have given some touch before; as 1. In time of the gathering of a
Church, the Brethren who desire to enter into Church Estate, do give notice to
all the Churches about them, and desire the presence of their Elders, and of
such other Brethren as they shall see meet to send to help them with their
counsel, in discovering the spirits and competent gifts of such members, as
should join with them in that work; And further, to give counsel, and
direction, in the ordering of that day; as has been showed above.

2. In the choice and ordination of Officers, one Church is wont to send to all
the rest about them, for such Elders, and Brethren, as may give counsel and
direction to their proceedings, and approbation of the same, as the matter
shall require; as has been formerly delivered.

3. In case of difference of judgment amongst the Brethren of a Church, in the
administration of Church-Censure, and the like, to prevent all suspicion of
partiality or prejudice, the Church is sometimes occasioned to send to the
neighbour-Churches (one or more) for the assistance of some of their Elders,
and Brethren, to help them with their counsel, in discovering and judging of
the causes depending amongst them, who giving advice according to the Word, do
by the blessings of Christ heal jealousies, and compose differences, and
settle peace and love amongst them; and this also has been mentioned before.

4. In doubtful cases arising in the Church, whether of judgment or practice;
where yet no difference has risen, but all or most are uncertain, what were
fit to be done; as whether a child may be baptized by right of his
Grandfathers Covenant, or the like; the Church does sometimes send Letters or
Messengers, to crave the counsel of other Churches; who deliberate by
considering and arguing the matter, and agree upon what they conceive most
agreeable to the Word; each Church sends their judgments, and their reasons,
either by Elders, or by Messengers, to the Church that sent to them.

SECT. IV.
A Fourth way of our communion with other Churches, is by way of Congregation,
or gathering together many Churches, or the messengers of many Churches to
examine and discuss, either some corrupt opinions, or suspicious practices,
which being scattered, and found in many Churches at once, cannot well be
healed in any one alone. In which case the Elders of the Churches, desirous to
maintain verity, and unity of judgment in matters of doctrine, and integrity
of life throughout all the Churches; do both acquaint our Magistrates, being
nursing fathers to the Church, with the necessary occasions and ends of a
general and a solemn assembly, and do also solicit the Churches to send some
fit persons, at such a time, to such a Church (where the assembly be most
seasonably held) to consider and discern of the matter in question and
agitation.

The assembly being met in the name of Christ, and his presence called for by
humble and earnest prayer, the matters to be discussed and cleared, are
propounded by some or other of the Elders of that Church, where we meet, or by
some other appointed by them, and consented to by the assembly.

When the matters are propounded, the Elders do declare their judgments of the
points in order, one after another, together with their reasons from the Word,
at which time it is free for any man present (and all may be present, if they
will) as well the Messengers of the Churches as others, (after leave orderly
craved or obtained) to propound their doubts, without offense) whence
disputation does arise (as in Act. 15.7.) till all parties be either satisfied
or convinced, and so the matters in controversy are cleared; and this course
is taken for the clearing of all the points remaining, which may seem to some
not so fully cleared, and agreed upon, and the nature of them such as may admit
further discussion; yea, and difference of apprehension, without disunion of
affection, or disturbance of the Churches peace; yet for satisfaction of Gods
people the mean while, in such things each man is left to his Christian
liberty: So far as they are all come, they judge and mind one thing; If any
be otherwise minded, who in simplicity of heart seeks the truth, and in
meekness of wisdom and love holds forth the same, we hope God will in time
reveal the same unto him: in the mean time, all agreeing in this one, not to
condemn, nor to despise one another in differences of weakness, according to
the Apostles rule, Romans 14.2, 3, 4.

SECT. V.
A Fifth way of communion with other Churches, is by contribution, or
communication in yielding supply to one another wants: for (according to the
ancient president, in the Primitive Churches) if any of our Brethren should
fall into such decay as not to be able to supply their onw necessities, in
outward things amongst themselves, we should take it our bounden duty, to
minister to their wants, according to our abilities, Act. 11.29, 30. Romans
15.25, 26. Hitherto the Lord has been pleased, out of his all-sufficient
goodness, so to supply us all, (each Church within it self) as that we have
had scarce (any occasion never but once) to exercise our mutual love and
liberality to one another in this kind; but if need should require, we consider
aforehand, what mutual help God requires of us from one toward another in
such a case.

Also, if any of our Churches do want some fit members to employ in some
public office amongst them, and shall make known their want to some other
Church, who may abound in such blessings, (as sometimes the Church at Antioch
had four or five Prophets among them, Act. 13.1. when others wanted) the Church
that abounds in such helps, is ready to send and commend such of their
members as their selves may spare, and are fit for office, (but not called to
office amongst themselves) to supply the necessities of their Brethren.

SECT. VI.
A Sixth way of communion amongst our Churches, is by way of admonition: as it
one Church should be credibly given to understand, of some scandal arising in
another Church, whether by corruption in doctrine, or in manners, and upon
diligent search and inquiry, the report is found true; the Church hearing
thereof, sends Letters, or Messengers, or both, unto the Elders of that
Church, where such offense is found, and exhorts them to take a speedy and
diligent course for the redress thereof; but if the Elders of that Church
should be remiss therein (or be faulty themselves) they then certify the
whole Church thereof, to call upon their officers, as Paul sent to the Church
of Coloss to call upon Archippus, to take diligent heed to the fullfilling of
that work of the Ministry, which he had received of the Lord ( Col. 4.17.) If
the Church hear them, the scandal is removed; if it hear them not, the
Church offended herewith, takes in the help of two or three Churches more to
join with them in their exhortation, or admonition.

It still the Church where the offense lies persisteth in the neglect of their
duty, and of the counsel of their Brethren; either the matter would be
referred to a Congregation of many, or all the Churches together; (if need
should require) or else, if the offense be evident and weighty, and of ill,
though not general consequence, the Churches offended with them would (as
justly they might) withdraw themselves from the right hand of fellowship, and
so forbear all such exercises of mutual brotherly communion with them, which
all the Churches of Christ are wont to walk in one toward another.

We have never yet been put to the utmost extent of this duty toward any of
our Churches: The Lord hitherto so far preventing with his grace, that no
Church has stood out so long in maintaining any offense found amongst them:
But if it should so fall out, (which God forbid) we look at it as our duty to
be faithful, one Church to another, in like sort as the Brethren of the same
Church are called to be faithful one toward another; Do not Churches enjoy
brotherly Communion one with another, as well as brethren of the same Church?
The Church in the Canticles took care, not only for her own members, but for
her little sister, which had no breasts, Cant. 8.8. And would she have taken
no care of having her breasts healed, if her breasts had been distempered, and
given corrupt milk? The Apostles had a public care (by virtue of their
office) of all the Churches, 2 Cor. 11.28. And is the public spirit of grace
and love dead with them? ought not all the Churches of Christ, to have a care
and watchful eye over the public good of one another? Though not virtute
officii, yet intuitu charitatis.

SECT. VII.
THe seventh and last way of the Communion of our Churches, is by way of
propagation, or multiplication of Churches; Though this was a peculiar eminency
of the Apostolic calling for them in their life-times to travel into all
Nations, to preach the Gospel, to beget Disciples, to gather them into
Church Estate, and so to plant Churches wheresoever they came: yet that which
they did by virtue of their office, is reserved unto the Churches of Christ, to
prosecute and carry along (according to their measure) throughout all
generations, and in all Nations, for the enlargement of the kingdom of Christ,
unto the end of the world.

The power of the keys, which was immediately given by Christ unto his
Apostles, is also given by Christ unto all the Churches, in that fullness of
measure, which the establishment and enlargement of Christ's kingdom does
require.

If then any particular Church of Christ shall come in process of time to be
so far multiplied, as that like Bees when the hive is too full they are
necessarily occasioned to swarm forth (as it is indeed the case when the voice
of their Ministers cannot reach to all) in such, or in the like case, the
Church surcharged with multitude, may send forth sundry of their members, fit
for the purpose, to enter into a Church Estate amongst themselves; or if a
number of godly Christians shall come over into a Country, where they find
the Churches so full, that they cannot with convenience join with them, the
Church may comfortably encourage them, to enter into holy Covenant amongst
themselves. They may also commend both unto the one Company, and unto the
other, such able gifted men, whom they may fitly choose, to be Ministers and
Officers to them, and both then when they enter into Covenant, and gather into
Church Estate, (as has been showed in the beginning) as also when they go
about to choose and ordain Church Officers amongst themselves, the Churches
already established ought to be ready to help them, with their presence,
counsel, and assistance, so far as shall be found requisite for the
propagation and enlargement of the kingdom of Christ, in the multiplication of
Churches according to the order of the Gospel.

Thus have we given unto all our holy Brethren, throughout the Churches of our
Lord Jesus, a just and true account of all our proceedings in Church-affaires;
so far as concerns our way and order amongst our selves. If we fall short
of the Rule, in some thing or other go astray, it is our humble and earnest
request unto all our godly learned Brethren, that they will be pleased, Erranti
comiter monstrare viam; but if the way we walk in be found, upon serious and
mature consideration, to be agreeable to the rules of the Gospel (as we
verily believe it is) let all the upright in heart be entreated, in the name of
the Lord Jesus, not to judge or speak evil of the ways of Christ before his
people; But rather seek how to address themselves, and to call on others to
walk in the straight steps of the Lord Jesus, in the kingdom of his grace,
till we shall all come to meet him in the kingdom of his glory.

CHAP. VII. Of the way of reformation in the Congregations in England.
SECT. I.
WE take not upon us as (...), to prescribe unto our Brethren in England, (men
of their Churches, and eminent lights in the world) what course to take in
pursuing and perfecting the great work of Reformation in England; Nay, we
know our own Tenuity, the store of business enough, which we have to attend
unto near home: Nevertheless, as we cannot cease to pray for, and seek their
good as our own; so we cannot but rejoice with them to behold that open door
which God has set before them, and with that all their hearts were so far
enlarged toward the Lord, and to his waves, as we hear his hand is enlarged
toward them. Only being absent in body, but present in spirit, we crave
leave to bear witness to them, and with them; That if the Lord be pleased to
prosper his work amongst them, it is possible to reduce the estate of the
Congregations in England, to such a reformation, as is suitable to the pattern
revealed in the Gospel, according to the way of Primitive simplicity,
described above.

Four things we observe in the estate of the Churches in England, which make
way for Reformations amongst them.

First, The efficient instruments of their first plantation, which were either
Apostles, or Apostolical men, whether Philip, or Joseph of Arimathea, or Simon
Zelotes, as any of our Countrymen may read in Mr. Foxes book of Acts and
Monuments, in the beginning of it, next after the story of the ten Primitive
Persecutions, out of Gildas, Tertullian, Origin, Beda, Nicephorus. Which being
so, we cannot but conceive the Churches in England were rightly gathered, and
planted according to the Rule of the Gospel; and all the corruptions found in
them since, have sprung from Popish Apostasy in succeeding ages, and from want
of through and perfect purging out of that leaven in the late times of
Reformation in the days of our Fathers. So that all the work now is, not to
make them Churches, which were none before, but to reduce and restore them to
their Primitive Institution.

Secondly, The public Service-booke acknowledges, That in the Primitive
Church, there was a godly Discipline; That notorious sinners were put to open
penance, and punished in this world; that both their souls might be saved in
the day of the Lord, and others admonished by their example, might be the more
afraid to offend. Which godly Discipline, is a thing (says the Book) much to
be desired, that it might be restored again. See the beginning of the
Comminations against sinners. It is therefore acknowledged by the very state of
the Churches of England, that the present estate of Church discipline, is not
perfect, but defective, and swerving from the Primitive godly discipline.

Thirdly, In the public Rubric before the Catechism, it is ordered, That
when children come to years of discretion, and have learned what others
promised for them in Baptism, they should then themselves with their own
mouth, and with their own consent, openly before the Church ratify and
confirm the same: And also promise, that by the grace of God, they will
evermore endeavor themselves, faithfully to observe and keep such things as by
their own mouth and confession they have assented to. Which course the Book in
a few words after acknowledges to be agreeable with the usage of the Church of
times past, That children coming to perfect age, having been instructed in
Christian Religion, should openly profess their own faith, and promise to be
obedient to the will of God. Which direction (if it were as duly observed, as
it is expressly ordered) does plainly hold forth, that the Church of England (as
they call it) does not acknowledge any to be confirmed members of the Church,
and so unfit to partake of the Lords Supper, till they have expressly confessed
their faith openly before the Church, and promised obedience to the will of
God. Which if it be seriously done, and not perfunctorily, is somewhat of like
nature with our receiving of members into the Church, and joining them by
Covenant.

Fourthly, In the Exhortation before the Communion, the Minister is directed to
denounce unto the people, That if any of them be a blasphemer of God, an
hinderer or slanderer of his Word, an adulterer, or be in malice, or envy, or
in any other grievous crime, they should bewail their sins, and not come to
that holy Table, lest after the taking of that Sacrament, the Devil enter into
them, as he entered into Judas, etc. Which plainly argues, they would allow no
scandalous person to partake in the Communion of the Lords Table: All these
things presupposed, really performed, and seriously attended to, might open a
door to sundry passages of a more full and perfect Reformation.

SECT. II. Tendering certain Propositions tending to the Reformation of the
Churches in England.
Propos. 1. WHere godly Ministers be already planted in any Congregations, let
them (with due encouragement from the State) call the people to solemn
humiliation before the Lord for their own sins, and those of their fathers they
have imitated. So did Ezra, and Nehemiah, with the Levites and Priests, and
upon the like occasions, Nehem. 9.2.2, 3, 4. and Ezra 10.1, 2.9, 10. For though
the Parliament, and the whole Kingdom have protested, and Covenanted
Reformation for the time to come, yet they have cause also to be humbled, and
that thoroughly for the time past.

2. Let such of the people, as are of good knowledge in the ways of God, and
of approved conversation, take up that course which the Service Book (as has
been said) gives an hint of; Renew their Covenant formerly made in Baptism,
professing their faith and repentance, and promising Reformation of life, not
only in their private conversation, but also in their public Communion in the
Church of God, yielding professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ in the
fellowship of all his holy Ordinances.

3. Let no Minister, that loves the Lord Jesus better then his own belly, stand
upon his advocation from his Patron, but rather expect his vocation from his
people.

4. For this end let every Patron restore his jus patronatus to the Church. Or
if it seem too hard a thing for them to part so freely with their freehold,
(though they ought freely to give unto Christ, who have received freely from
him) the Parliament may be pleased to give them a competent part of the
revenues of the Benefice, (as they call it) and annex it to their own private
inheritance, reserving so much to the use of the Church, as may strengthen
their hands in a sufficient maintenance of their Ministry; for though things
dedicated to sacred use, cannot be alienated, or diverted to private use
without sacrilege, yet that holds in such things as are so dedicated to
sacred use, as that the Lord accepts as sacred to himself: But God no where
in the new Testament, has expressed his acceptance, or allowance of lands,
dedicated to the ministry, but only to the service of the whole Church, and
then for the Churches service they may be disposed of by their consent; as
sometimes the Kings and Princes of Israel gave away the treasures of the
Temple, to save themselves from captivity, 2 King. 18.15, 16.

5. The people having called or chosen their Minister (one or more) unto office
in a day of humiliation, let them in the presence of the Ministers of other
Churches depute some of the gravest and godly members of the Church, to lay
their hands upon him, with prayer over him in the name of the Lord, setting him
apart to that office. The whole Congregation are said to anoint Zadok to the
office of an high Priest, as well as Solomon to be King, 1 Chronicles. 29.22. Which
is a sacred right, as Imposition of hands; and this the whole body of them
could not do, but by deputing some eminent persons amongst them to the
performance thereof: But after they be furnished with Elders, (a Presbytery of
their own) let Imposition of hands be given by them (according to 1 Timothy
4.14.) to such as for the future shall be ordained.

6. For the making up of a Presbytery, in stead of Parson and Vicar (wherewith
some Congregations are endowed) let them choose Pastors and Teachers; and
Ruling Elders, in stead of those who crept into their room, viz. the
Churchwardens, and Sidesmen. But let them choose and ordain them in a day of
humiliation (according to Acts 14.23.) and not for a year only, but during
life; and let the Presbyteries of all neighbor Churches, take all
opportunities to make use one of another, for brotherly consultation, but not
for Jurisdiction, and Authority one over another. And in stead of Collectors
or Overseers for the poor (who crept into the room of Deacons) let Deacons be
chosen as has been showed above; but not as members of the Presbytery.

7. For set forms of prayer, or prescript Liturgies, let them not be enjoined
unto the Ministers of the Churches; but let the Ministers as well give up
themselves wholly unto prayer, as to the Ministry of the Word, Act. 6.4.

8. Baptism may orderly be administered to the children of such parents, as
have professed their faith and repentance before the Church, as above. Or where
either of the parents have made such profession; or it may be considered also
whether the children may not be baptized, where either the grandfather or
grandmother have made such profession, and are still living to undertake for
the Christian education of the child; for it may be conceived where there is a
stipulation of the Covenant on Gods part, and a restistipulation on man's part,
there may be an obligation of the Covenant on both parts, Genesis 17.7. Or if
these fail, what hinders, but that if the parents will resign their infant
to be educated in the house of any godly member of the Church, the child may
be lawfully baptized in the right of its household Governor, according to the
proportion of the law, Genesis 17.12, 13.

9. Let the Lords Supper be administered only to such, as have so professed
their faith and repentance publicly, and are received and approved members of
the Church, endued with sufficient knowledge, to examine themselves, and to
discern the Lords body: free from scandal, and of good conversation.

10. Let Officers in the Church be redressed, and removed, not by presentiments
to Officers of other Churches, but according to the order of the Gospel,
described above, Chap. 5. sect. 1, 2, 3.

11. Where the Ministers of the Congregation are ignorant or scandalous, meet
it is that they were removed, and better chosen in their room by the people;
according to the counsel and direction of the godly Ministers and brethren of
neighbor Churches, Hos. 4.6.

12. Where the people in a Congregation are generally ignorant and profane, it
were necessary godly Preachers were sent forth with countenance from the King
and State, to preach unto them, till they were brought on to knowledge, and to
some measure of gracious reformation. Thus Jehosaphat sent forth Priests and
Levites, to teach in the Cities of Judah, and certain Princes and Nobles with
them, to countenance the good work in their hands, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9.

13. Till the people be in some sort duly prepared, and grown up to some
measure of knowledge, and grace, it were neither meet to receive them to a
renewing of their Covenant formerly made at their Baptism, or to the seals of
it. But after they have been wrought upon by the Ministry of the Word, to
lament after the Lord; as the Israelites did when the Arc had been long absent
from them, 1 Samuel 7.29. then let them proceed as other godly Christians were
directed to do, Propos. 2, 3, etc. for renewing of their Covenant, for choice
of their Ministers, and Officers, and for Communication in all the liberties of
the Church of God.

14. For the help of the Universities (of the whole Kingdom, and of all the
Churches in it) it were necessary, that some experienced godly learned Nobles
and Ministers were deputed, to visit and reform the Universities; That
subscriptions to Ceremonies and prescript Liturgies were removed; That degrees
in Divinity were not abused unto qualifications for pluralities, and
non-residency, nor allowed in the Ministers of Churches, to put a difference
between brethren of the same calling, whence Christ has removed it, Mat. 23.8,
9, 10. The (...) there mentioned, is not to be translated Master; for it is a
Title common to all Ministers, but Doctors; and the Academicall title of
Doctors, is fitter for Masters of Colleges, and Readers in the Schools, then
for Church Officers. Here also special care would be taken for setting up of
such Preachers in both the Universities, as whose spirit, and gift, and
Ministry, might be examplary patterns to young Students.

15. For the effectual and orderly expedition and transaction of all these
things, it were requisite, that as King Jehosaphat did, so the King and State
should depute some choice persons to do the same, to wit, to go throughout
all the Kingdom, to see the people returned, and all the Churches restored to
a true state and course of Reformation, 2 Chronicles. 19.4.

All which things are humbly presented by us, not as if we would undertake to
give Counsel to them that are wiser then our selves, much less, Injunctions;
But as Subjects who desire to approve our faithful service to the Lord, and
our King and Country, hold them forth as true Consectaries from the Rules of
the Gospel, which should rule us all.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table containing the principal things handled in this
Treatise.
A
OF Addition of members to the Church, page 52. chap. 3. Sect. 1. Sect. 2. Of
communion of Churches by way of Admonition, page 108. Sect. 6. The Antiquity of
the Church way intimated in the Bishops Common Prayer book. p. 12 Of
disclaiming Advocations by Patrons to livings. p. 113. Sect. 2.
B
Whether all Baptized are fit for Church Fellowship? p. 9 Why by the same
reason that believers children circumcised, were admitted to the Passover, now
they are baptized, may not be admitted to the Lords Supper? p. 9 All Baptized
by virtue thereof are not members of a particular visible Church. p. 9. No
place in Scripture for succession of Diocesan Bishops after the Apostles, p.
46. Sect. 8. p. 49. Sect. 9. Whether unbeleevers giving up their infant to be
educated in the house of a godly member of a Church, it may not according to
Genesis 17.12, 13. be Baptized in the right of that household? p. 115
C.
The part of all true Christians to join themselves into some particular
visible Church. p. 2. Joining into a particular visible Church, cannot be but
by Covenant. p. 2. 3. 4, etc. Particular visible Churches to be gathered, must
have the concurrence of other Churches gathered, p. 4. Propos. 5. The manner
how. p. 6. Sect. 2. How the Church is the subject of power, p. 43. Sect. 7. The
Church not to consist of good and bad, as far as they can decern, p. 56.
Sect. 3. The necessity and grounds of Church Covenant. p. 59. Sect. 4. The
first and second Commandments excellently opened, p. 71. last line, and p. 72,
73. Of dispensation of Censures, p. 89. chap. 5. Sect. 1. What Common consent
is requisite in Church proceedings, p. 94. Sect. 3. Of the peoples power in
Church Censures, p. 96. Sect. 4. Of the sevenfold Communion between several
Churches, p. 102. Chap. 6. Sect. 1. Of Communion of Consultation between
Churches p. 105. Sect. 3. Sect. 4. Of Contribution, p. 107. Sect. 5. Of
Reformation of Congregations in old England. p. 111. chap. 7. Sect. 1. There
are many things in the Common Prayer book, which intimate the antiquity of the
Church Way. p. 112
D.
Of the office of Deacons, p. 38 Election, not ordaining of Deacons, p. 42.
Sect. 5.
E
Why the members of Old England are not presently and immediately admitted, they
to the Communion, their children to baptism in New England p. 76. Sect. 5. Of
Elders who to be elected and ordained, p. 10. chap. 2. Sect. 1. That Ruling
Elders are jure divino, p. 13. Sect. 2. How all Elders are to be elected and
ordained, p. 39. Sect. 4. Ruling Elders are not mere Lay Elders, p. 26. The
Fathers mention Ruling Elders, p. 30, etc.
F.
Against set Forms of Liturgies, p. 70. Sect. 4.
G.
Whether the faith and profession of the believing Grandfather or Grandmother
may entitle the Grandchild (the parent being an unbeleever) to the ordinance
of baptism, p. 115
H.
What is to be done with Heathens and unveleevers, yet not fit to be in
Church Fellowship. p. 9 The believing Household entitles an unbeleevers child
given up to their education, to baptism, p. 115
I.
No Injunctions of forms of worship to be allowed by Churches, p. 115 What
should be done with Ignorant people not fit for Church Fellowship, p. 11^ Of
Imposition of hands by those of the same Church on their own Officers, p. 43.
50 No Jurisdiction transcendent now reserved to any one man or Bishop, p. 49.
Sect. 9
K.
As the Kings of Israel gave the Treasures of the Temple to save themselves
from captivity: so may Parsonages, etc. given to the whole Churches use, be by
them disposed of according to their discretion, for their best advantage, p.
114 (...) explained, p. 116 (...) interpreted p. 20, 21
L.
Against set forms of Liturgies, p. 70. Sect. 4.
M.
Of addition of Members to a Church, p. 52. Sect. 1. 2 Of the peoples power in
admitting Members, p. 64. Sect. 5 Whether Ministers of Churches may baptize the
infants of believers that are in no particular Church, p. 81. *.*.*. So the
Author, though yet we cannot come up to him in that. Of Multiplication of
Churches, p. 109. Sect. 7. Of Maintenance of Ministers in Old England, p. 114
N.
The lowest requisite Number to the being of a Church begun. p. 53 The greatest
Number a Church may increase to, p. 53. 54
O.
The Order of gathering dispersed Christians into a Church, p. 1 The Officers
of Churches to be chosen and ordained, p. 10, chap. 2. Sect. 1. The manner of
their election and Ordination, p. 39. Sect. 4 Of diversity of Officers, p. 92.
Sect. 2.
P.
What warrant the People have to choose their Officers, p. 42. Sect. 6. The
Church is not the first subject of Ecclesiastical power, p. 43. Sect. 1. The
office of a Pastor is immediately from Christ, p. 43. Sect. 7. The Peoples power
in receiving members into the Church, p. 46. Sect. 5. Of the Peoples power in
Church censure, p. 96. Sect. 4. Of Communion of Churches by way of propagation,
or multiplication of Churches, p. 109. Sect. 7. Certain Propositions tending to
the reformation of the Churches in Old England, p. 113. Sect. 2.
R.
Of Ruling Elders, p. 13. Sect. 2. Of Recommendation of members in their
travel, or final departure from one Church to another. p. 103. Sect. 2 The
way of Reformation of Congregations in Old England, p 111. cha. 7. Sect. 1.
Certain Propositions tending to that Reformation, p. 113. Sect. 2. Of our
Renewing our Covenant in Old England, p. 113. Sect. 2.
S.
Scandalous persons not to be admitted to the Communion by confession of the
Bishops Common Prayer Book, p. 113
T.
Timothy and Titus did not ordain as Bishops, p. 46. Sect. 8.
V.
What is to be done with Unbeleevers, in regard they are unfit for
Church Fellowship, p. 9 Who to be put in stead of Vicars and Parsons, p. 114
Of ordering of Universities, p. 116 Of Vestry men and Churchwardens, p. 34.
W.
Of Church- Widows, p. 39. Sect. 3. The ordering and form of administration
of Gods public Worship, p. 65. chap. 4. Sect. 1, 2, 3. Of Church- Wardens and
Vestry-men, p. 34
Z.
How Zadok is said to be anointed high Priest by the people, p. 114
FINIS.

