A SERMON PREACHED AT THE ORDINATOIN OF AN Elder and Deacons IN A Baptized
Congregation In LONDON.

By N. C.

Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. LONDON, Printed for Tho.
Fabian, at the Bible in Saint Paul's Churchyard, a corner Shop next
Cheap Side. 1681.

TITUS 1. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had
appointed thee.
THe general Design and Scope of these Words, is obvious to the observation of
every one that reads them; The great Apostle of the Gentiles had with good
success labored in preaching the Gospel to the Cretians; and being himself
removed from them, after he had as a wise Master Builder laid the Foundation of
many Churches of Christians in Crete, he left Titus among them to build
thereupon; And while he was resident there, Paul sends this Epistle to him, to
remind him of that Service for Christ in his Churches that he had left upon his
Hands; whereby he does not only quicken him to his Work, but also furnishes him
with full and clear Directions for the right management thereof.

In the Account that our Text gives of the Reason for which Paul left Titus in
Great; the Service which he was there to be employed in is set down.

1. In more general and comprehensive terms, That thou should set in order
the things which are wanting. 2. In a more particular Account of one special
Charge left upon him, And ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee.
That which we have do in the first Place, is briefly to open to you what needs
explication in the words.

The Greek word (...), which is rendered set in order, is no where else used in
the New Testament, nor in the Version of the Old by the Septuagint that I can
find: diverse learned Interpreters do here render it by Corrigas, that thou
should correct; And Erasmus in his Notes, frames a word more expressive of
its Emphasis, supercorrigas, which imports to correct with accuracy and
exactness; as one that goes over a Work again, that he may be sure to leave no
blemish upon it, or defect in it. Some understand this part of Titus his Charge
to respect the correction of the manners of the Cretians by reproof and sound
Doctrine, and with this sense the Arabic Version fully concurs, Vt res
vitiosas corrigas; That thou should correct the things that are faulty; And
it is evident in the sequel of the Epistle, That this was one part of his Work:
But I conceive this is not so immediately (...), q. d. Supercorrigo, quod plus
est quam Corrigo, and ea quae aliqua ex part correcta sunt ad limam, and
summam lineam perduco. Heins. in loc.
intended by this term, but rather, The settlement and disposing of things
relating to the Offices and Government in the House of God, and the Order of
their Communion in the Church who were Members of it, in a full and exact
agreement with the Rule of Christ's Appointment; which the Apostle had not time
to bring to perfection during his stay with them: And this sense very well
agrees with the use of a term of near affinity with this in our Text (viz.
(...)) in Heb. 9. 10. where the Days of the Gospel are called the Times of
Reformation; because in them the State of the Church is brought to its utmost
perfection here on Earth, and all that was wanting in the Law, is fully
supplied in the New Testament.

The Edification and Beauty of the Church is much concerned in her Order, not
such an Order as Superstition will dictate, or litigious Nicety contend for,
but such as we have already described; which sets her in a conformity with
Christ's Will; and particularly the filling up of the Offices which he has
appointed, with Persons duly qualified for the administration of them, and the
regular acting both of Officers and Members in their respective places.

The particular Charge given to Titus is, To ordain Elders in every City: This
is to be explained by conference with Act. 14. 23. where the practice of the
Apostles themselves is recorded, And having ordained them Elders in every
Church, etc. (...) and (...) is the same in these Texts: The Converts in every
City were not then so numerous but they might conveniently (...), Et cum
suftragiis creassent. Erasm. Vox orta ex more Graecorum qui porrectis manibus
suffragia ferebant. Bez.
come together in one place for the Worship of God; and so to ordain them
Elders in every City, was to do it in every Church. And though these first
Ordinations were by extraordinary Men, yet the People were not excluded from
the just right of choosing their own Ministers; for they were appointed to their
Charge, with the concurrent Vote and Suffrage of the People. Howbeit Titus was
to preside in the management of this Affair for their Guidance and Direction,
both with respect to the Office it self, and their choice of Persons duly
qualified for it.

In the next place (for the more full opening of the Text) it will be necessary
briefly to touch upon the Quality and Character of those Persons which we here
find concerned in the setting of things in order in the Churches. And,

1. The Person that employed Titus in this Service, viz. Paul bears the
Character, and had the Office and Authority of an Apostle of Jesus Christ.

The Apostles had an immediate and extraordinary Call to their Office, by God
and our Lord Jesus Christ: Hence our Apostle, when he would represent to the
Galatians the Dignity of his Office, that he might recover them to a stability
in that Doctrine which he had preached to them, tells them, Gal. 1. 1. that he
was an Apostle, not of Men, neither by Man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father. Ordinary Ministers, as Pastors or Elders, tho they were not of Men;
that is, receive not their Authority from Men, nor are of humane right and
appointment, yet are they by Men, so as to be brought to their Office by the
Call of the Church; But it was not so with the Apostles of Christ, they were
neither of Men nor by Men, but had their Call and Power immediately from
Christ, their Ministry being antecedent to the Church, as that by which it was
to be planted.

And as they had an extraordinary Call, so were they also qualified with
extraordinary Gifts and Abilities for the Work they were called to, and had the
infallible guidance of the Spirit in their Doctrine, which was but necessary,
seeing the Churches were to be founded and built thereupon, Ephesians. 2. 20. The
Apostles and Prophets of the New Testament are the Foundation, in respect of
their Doctrine, though Jesus Christ whom they preached, is the only Foundation of
the Church, in respect of Trust and Confidence. The Power of the Apostles
extended to all the Churches, and was equal in them all when they were planted,
and therefore Paul says, The care 2 Cor. 11. 28.
of all the Churches came upon him daily; And as a Fruit of this Care in the
discharge of his Office, he gives forth this Commission to Titus; and herein we
must consider him as acting by virtue of that Authority which himself had
received from Christ, who is the first Subject, and Head of all Ecclesiastical
Power and Jurisdiction; There is no such thing as Authority in or over the
Church, but what is derived from Christ, who has all Mat. 28. 19.
Power in Heaven and Earth committed to him.

2. The Person employed, viz. Titus, had the Character and Office of an
Evangelist. The Evangelists were also extraordinary Ministers, (though inferior
to the Apostles) and did usually attend the motion and direction of the
Apostles, as assistant to them in preaching the Gospel, and settling the
Churches in due order when first planted. And though Titus be not expressly called
an Evangelist, yet if we consider his Employment, and compare this Epistle to
him with those written to Timothy, who is particularly charged to do the Work
of an Evangelist, we shall have no reason 2 Timothy 4. 5.
to doubt their being both in the same capacity: And they acted not as Diocesan
Bishops in their particular Charge, but were sometimes employed in one part of
the World, and sometimes in another, as the Service of the Gospel required
their attendance. And since the ceasing of these extraordinary Officers, and
the completing of the Canon of the New Testament, all Church-Offices and
Affairs are to be regulated and guided by the ordinary and standing Rule of the
Scriptures: And every particular Congregation has not only right, but is in
duty bound to dispose her self in that Order, and under that Rule and
Government, which Christ has appointed in his Testament.

We shall now proceed to those things which our Text, and the present Occasion
calls for some further discourse of;

The first Instance that we have of settling Order in a Christian Church, by the
ordaining of ordinary Officers therein, is that of the appointment of Deacons
in the Church of Jerusalem, Acts 6. And this also I take to be included in the
general Commission here given to Titus, That he should set in order the things
that are wanting; for it appears that the Primitive Churches had both Bishops,
or Elders, and Deacons, ordained in them, when brought to that Settlement and
Order which they were to continue in, Phil. 1. 1. And the necessity of such an
Office, and Officers in the Church, when the number of her Members is
increased, will quickly appear, as it did in the Church at Jerusalem; for, When
the number of the Disciples Act. 6. v. 1.
was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the Grecians (or Hellenists)
against the Hebrews, because their Widows were neglected in the daily
Ministration. Judaei sie distinguebantur; Judaei Palestini, qui hic Hebraei;
(...); and (...), qui hic Hellenistae, sive Graecienses, qui peculiar^
utebantur dialecto, quam Heilenisticam vocant: Drus. vid. etiam Grot. and
Lights. in locum.
The Grecians here mentioned, were not Gentiles, or Greeks by Nation, but such
of the scattered Jews, who having their Education among the Greeks, and
speaking their Language, were called Hellenists, in distinction from those born
and bred up in Judea, that spoke the common Jewish Language, which was then a
kind of Chaldaeo-Syriack, and is called the Hebrew Tongue, Acts 22. 2. because
of its then common use among the Hebrews or Seed of Abraham in Judaea; and with
respect to this, Paul affirms of himself that he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews,
Phil. 3. 5.

Now upon this murmuring of the Hellenists, for the prevention of all disorder
or neglect of this kind for the future; The twelve called the V. 2, 3, 4.
multitude of the Disciples unto them, and told them, That it was unreasonable
for them to be taken off from the more weighty imploiment of preaching the
Gospel to give their attendance upon an Affair of this nature; and therefore
that they might be at liberty, to give themselves continually to Prayer, and
the Ministry of the Word, and yet the necessities of the poor and orderly
dispensing of the Churches Alms be provided for also, They commanded them to
look out from among themselves seven Men of honest Report, full of the Holy
Ghost and Wisdom whom they might appoint over this Business; which was
accordingly done. This is in V. 5, 6.
short the History of the first Ordination of Deacons; and because in this case
what was first in this kind, was to be the Rule and Standard of what should
afterward be done, we shall take a review of some Passages for our present
Instruction. And,

First; A Deacon being an ordinary Officer in the Church, appointed to minister
therein for the (...), etc. Non ipsi eligunt sed multitudini electionem
permittunt; qui etiam commodum erant ex illorum curatione and functione
percepturi; atque ipsi eligunt and producunt, and manibus imposi^is ordinant,
creant atque declarant. Theoph. in locum.
Relief of the Poor; The Election of these Officers of right belongs to that
Congregation where they are to serve in this Capacity; And the Holy Apostles,
though vested with an extraordinary Power, and peculiarly entrusted by Christ
with the appointment of such an Office and Officers, after they had informed
the Church thereabout, and given them a Rule to proceed by, left them to their
own voluntary and free choice.

Secondly; The Number here appointed, viz. Seven, was suited to the present
Necessity or Convenience of that numerous Congregation in which they were to
minister, and is not intended as a Rule, that neither more nor fewer may be
appointed in any Congregation after; but that is to be determined by a due
comparing of the End of the Office with the Circumstances of each particular
Congregation, who are to govern their Choice in point of Number as may best
answer the end, in a sufficient Provision for their present necessity and
comfort of their Poor.

Thirdly; The Rule of the Churches proceeding in her Election is laid before
her, in an account of those Qualifications which are requisite in Persons to be
employed in such a Trust; They must be Men of honest Report; Men whose Innocent
(...).
and Holy Life is well attested, Persons of known and approved Integrity, full
of the Holy Ghost, and Wisdom; And these general Terms are comprehensive of the
Particulars mentioned by our Apostle, in that Rule which he has given about
the same Matter, in 1 Timothy 3. 8, 9. Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not
double-tongued, not given to much Wine, not greedy of filthy Lucre, holding the
Mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience. And it is an examination and trial
of the Persons to be chosen by this Rule which the Apostle intends in the next
words, ver. 10. And let these also first be proved, then let them use the
Office of a Deacon, being found blameless. And this I the rather mention, that
I may rectify a Mistake which I think many have taken up from a
misunderstanding of this Text, wherein they suppose that the Apostle requires
that a Trial should be made of Elders and Deacons in the discharge of the
proper Work of their Office, before they are ordained to that Office; But this
way of Trial is as foreign from the Text, as the notion asserted is
inconsistent with it self; for observe, He does not say, Try whether they use
the Office of a Deacon well, (which how can they do before they have it?) and
then let them be ordained, if for some time they have acquitted themselves well
in it; But the Trial he requires, is antecedent to their using the Office of a
Deacon; and is no other than a diligent comparing of the Qualifications of the
Persons, with the Characters of one meet for such an Office which he had before
set down: This I take to be the plain sense of the words; And if this be not
admitted, we must suppose the Rule of one Apostle to contradict the practice of
others acting by the same infallible Guidance as he wrote, which is absurd: For
it is plain in this of the Acts, that they were directed to examine and look
into the Qualifications and fitness of the Persons to be chosen for Deacons,
before they made choice of them; and that the Apostles did by a solemn
Ordination vest them with their Office, before they acted in it, or used the
Office of a Deacon.

Fourthly; As to the Work of a Deacon, The Care of the Poor is their special
Charge. And in order hereunto, the Contributions and Alms of the Church are to
be deposited with them, and entrusted to their distribution, as particular
Cases may require.

I shall now draw to a close of this Point, and pass on to what remains, when I
have spoken a word or two.

1. To those who are this day ordained and appointed to the Office of Deacons.
2. To the Congregation that has called them to this Office.
First; To the Deacons; There are four things that I shall recommend to you as
necessary in the discharge of that Trust that is committed to you, viz.
Faithfulness, Compassion, Prudence, and Diligence.

1. Faithfulness; You have a Trust committed to you, viz. the Alms and
Contributions of the Church, which are indeed a kind of hallowed or dedicated
things, and this is a considerable Trust; yea the poor Members of Christ, which
are dear to him as the Apple of his Eye, are committed to your Care, so far as
conceres their Relief and Succor in outward things, and this is a greater
Trust; you are in these things Stewards for the Church, yea Stewards for
Christ; and it is required of a Steward, that he be found faithful; consider
therefore the Duty of your Places, and make Conscience of a faithful discharge
thereof, as knowing you must give an account to Christ, who has appointed you
to this Service, and with him there is no respect of Persons.

2. Compassion; Your Business and Employment is, to relieve the Necessities of
the poor Saints; and this you can never do with a right Spirit, unless you have
a fellow-feeling with them in their Necessities, and do by a gracious Sympathy,
as it were, put your selves in their stead; He that gives, must do it with
cheerfulness, and that he will never do, if Compassion have not first filled
his Heart; Remember that this Office in the Church, is a Fruit of Christ's Pity
and Compassion for the Poor; and it is your Duty to make your distributions in
that manner as may best represent the pity and tenderness of him whom you serve
in this Work.

3. Prudence; Your Pity must be guided by Discretion; And as it is required
that a Deacon should have a plentiful anointing of the good and benign Spirit,
that he may be kind and affectionately tender toward his Brethren, so it is no
less necessary that he be full of Wisdom also, that he may rightly discern of
the Case and Circumstances of those that are to be relieved by him; And that he
may carry an equal balance in his Ministration, between the encouraging of
Idleness on the one hand, and neglect of the real Distresses of any on the
other; both these are extremes to be avoided: And it is certain that there is
so great a difference in the temper of Persons, that there will be need of
diligent enquiry after the necessities of some, whose modesty would hide them
more than is meet, while the unreasonable importunity of others needs a prudent
check.

4. Diligence; It is a Service for Christ that you are employed in, and the
Work of the Lord must not be done negligently; your Heart must be in your Work,
and you must not do it tanquam aliud agens as by the By, with a slight and
indifferent Spirit: But as Hezekiah did the Work of God in his place, whose
Encomium is, That in 2 Chronicles. 31. ult.
every Work that he began in the Service of the House of God, and in the Law,
and Commandments to seek his God, he did it with all his Heart: And know, that
your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, for there is no Service (except
that which immediately respects the saving of Men's Souls) more acceptable to
Christ than that which you are engaged in.

Secondly; To the Congregation; It is your Duty to give respect to your
Deacons, as esteeming their Service in the Church useful and honorable, For he
that uses the Office of a Deacon well, 1 Timothy 3. 13.
purchases to himself a good degree, and great boldness in the Faith which is
in Christ Jesus; But especially your Duty is to encourage them in their Work by
a free and plentiful contribution to the Poor, that out of the abundance of
those that enjoy plenty, they may always have a sufficiency to provide for the
relief of those that suffer want. Many things might be urged for the opening of
your Hearts to so good a Work: But my present time will not admit of
enlargement on this Head.

I shall now proceed to the next thing that lies before us, viz. The ordaining
of Elders in every City or Church; which was particularly given in Charge unto
Titus.

Bishops or Elders are ordinary Officers in the Church, of Divine Right and
Appointment, and are to be continued therein to the end of the World; Their
Office is superior to that of Deacons, as more nearly concerning the Good and
Edification of the Church, by so much as the care and conduct of Men's Souls
does transcend the care of the outward Man, and supplies of temporal Life. The
care which the Apostles took for this Provision in the Church, we have seen
something of in the opening of the words, as also the method they observed in
the Calling and Ordaining of Persons to this Work; it was done, as Clemens
says, (...), the whole Church giving their consent and approbation: And by
their appointment it was, (...). Clem. Ep.
that when the Officers ordained by themselves were dead, other approved Men
should succeed in their room, unto whom the Administration of Holy Things in
the House of God was committed, and by whom the Instruction and Government of
the Church should be duly provided for. We have both the continuance of these
Officers, and the reason of it asserted, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. And he gave some
Apostles; and some Prophets; and some Evangelists; and some Pastors and
Teachers: For the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ: Till we all come in the Unity of the Faith,
and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ. These last words are manifestly extended
to the completing of the entire Mystical Body of Christ, and so to the period
of the dispensation of Grace in this World, till there shall no longer be a
Church on Earth. And although some of those Offices and Gifts mentioned in verse.
11. be now ceased, yet it is evident others of them must continue to the end,
until that whereunto a Gospel Ministry is designed, be perfectly accomplished:
And it very well agrees with the scope of the Apostle's discourse in this
place, to make a joint mention of extraordinary and ordinary Ministers, since
they are all given by Christ for one and the same end, viz. the perfecting of
his Mystical Body, which affords a good Argument for the Union of Christians in
their different measures of Attainment, which the Apostle is here pressing them
to. The Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, were of necessity to be employed
in the laying of the Foundation of Gospel-Churches, and the continuance of
Pastors and Teachers is no less necessary for the continuance and carrying on
of the Spiritual Building of the Church to the end of the World. And there is
no reason of concluding that all these Officers must always be in the Church,
because they are here mentioned together, no more than there is to affirm that
the power of working Miracles should never cease, because the promise of such a
Power to some Believers, is indefinitely given out with the Promise of
Salvation by Faith in Christ, which branch of the Promise is certainly extended
to all Believers in all Ages, Mark 16. 16, 17, 18.

Now as it is de facto evident, that Miracles were for the confirmation of the
Gospel, in the first promulgation of it, and are now ceased; so it is as plain,
That the Office and Gifts of Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, were for
the first planting of the Churches, and no longer to continue, than till their
Order was fully settled, and the Revelation of the Mind of God in the New
Testament perfected, and then the Wisdom of Christ saw it best to leave the
Churches to the Rule of his Written Word, and the guidance of their ordinary
Officers according thereto.

The Officers which we are now treating of, that are in our Text called Elders,
(...), are Adverte eundem Gradum, idemque Officium significari a Paulo, nomine
Presbyteri, and nomine Episcopi. -- Neutr^m siquidem horum est nom^n ordinis,
sed potius officii. Cajetan. in locum.
in the very next words stilled (...), Bishops or Overseers, (the like
application of both these terms to the same Persons and Office you may observe
in Act. 20.) and in the Ephesians. Pastors and Teachers. And it is evident the Holy
Ghost intends no distinction, or preeminence of Office among those that bear
these Characters, by any of these different Terms, but they are all suited to
the same Office in its different respects: These Ministers are sometimes called
Elders, because of their gravity, and precedence in the House of God, perhaps
with some respect to the Paternal Authority and Preeminence of the Heads of
Families, and Elders of the People amongst the Israelites of old; and at other
times Bishops or Overseers, because their Work is to take the oversight 2 Pet.
5. 2.
of the Flock, and to acquit themselves as faithful Watchmen, who watch for the
Souls of the People committed to their Trust, that they may give an account of
them to the great Shepherd with joy, and not with grief: And because it is
incumbent Heb. 13. 17.
on them to feed the Church with the Words of Eternal Act. 20. 28.
Life, and to open the Mind of God to them from the Scriptures, that they may
by their Ministry be instructed unto his Kingdom; they are also styled Pastors
and Teachers.

Our way being thus far prepared by this general Account of the Office of
Eldership, and the necessary continuance of it in the Church, many things do
readily offer themselves as proper to be discoursed of under this Head, but
(omitting others) I must at present confine my self to a brief enquiry after
these two that follow;

1. The Qualifications requisite in the Person that performs this Office. 2.
The Relative Duties of an Elder, and the People that he ministers to.
First; As to the necessary Qualifications of an Elder or Bishop, they are
particularly and fully described to us, in this of Tit. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. compared
with 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, verses. The first thing required in both
places is, That he be blameless, not absolutely without sin, for there are none
such in the World, but free from any notable blemish, or scandalous offense in
his Life, a Man whose general carriage and deportment is, to the adorning of
that Doctrine which he professes himself, and must teach to others: And then,
the Husband of one Wife; It is not required that he be a married Man, but
supposing him to be so, it is necessary that he have been the Husband but of
one Wife, viz. at one time; for though he had repented of his Polygamy, yet the
note of his former incontinency would stick upon him; for Polygamy had no good
hearing even amongst the civilized Heathens; and it was meet that a Bishop
should have a good Report of them that are without, lest he fall into reproach,
and the snare of the Devil: And this does also include such as had put away
their Wives and married others, which was a thing that both the Jews and
Gentiles used to do, and was utterly forbidden by Christ, except in the case of
Fornication. In like manner his Children (if he have any) and their course of
Life under his Family-discipline must be considered; they must be faithful, not
living still in Idolatry and Gentilism, but of a sober well-governed Life,
being in subjection to him with all gravity; for if it do not appear that he
rules his own House well, how shall he be esteemed fit to take care of the
Church of God? He must also be vigilant, careful and diligent in his Work and
Duty in the station wherein he has been, otherwise he will be very unmeet for
a Pastoral Charge, which requires perpetual watching; sober, and of a temperate
Life, adorned with Modesty and Moderation, and of a good behavior, full of
gravity, and humanity in all his Deportment, not self-willed, proud and heady,
no striker, nor soon angry, but a Man that has good Government of his
Passions, and whose meekness disposes him to instruct and exhort Men with all
Long-suffering and Doctrine: He must not 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. and 4. 2.
be given to much Wine, but set in himself an Example of Mortification to
sensual Delights, and utterly detest all unjust and sordid ways of heaping up,
or keeping Riches for himself, as not given to filthy Lucre, nor liable to just
suspicion that he undertakes his Charge, from a base covetousness of any
outward Emoluments belonging thereto, but of a ready Mind, and sincere Love to
Christ; and the Souls of Men; and he must be given to Hospitality, that so he
may go before others in all Offices of Kindness and Charity toward the Saints;
no brawler, litigious or contentious Man, but furnished both with Abilities and
a ready Mind to teach and instruct others; and therefore he must be well
furnished with the Knowledge of the Mysteries of God himself, and one that
holds fast the faithful Word as he has been taught, that he may be able by
sound Doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the Gainsayers. In a word, He
must be a Man Holy and Just himself, and a lover of all that are so; yea, one
whose virtues Time has proved and made conspicuous, a steady and well-setled
Man; Not a Novice, or new Convert, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall
into the condemnation of the Devil. This is the Rule of Trial that all Churches
are bound to have in their Eye, and diligently to attend to, in their Election
of Elders; and when they do so, Christ approves their choice, and the Holy
Ghost Act. 20. 28:
makes their Overseers; for both the Gifts, Grace, and Authority of a
Gospel-Minister are from him; and no Man or Society of Men under Heaven, can,
de jure, make him a Minister that Christ has not qualified for such a Service;
for the validity of all Church Acts depends upon, and is determined by, their
conformity to the Rule of Christ's Holy Will and Testament.

And as these Gifts, Graces, and Virtues, ought to be in some good degree
visible in him that is ordained to Eldership, before that Charge be committed
to him; so after his Ordination it behooves him perpetually to endeavor the
giving of a more abundant proof of them in himself, by a daily increase in
their Exercise.

But to proceed; Secondly; The Relative Duties of an Elder and the People are
to be considered;

The due handling of this would require a just Treatise, but it cannot be
expected that I should enlarge upon Particulars, nor indeed so much as touch
upon many things that do properly belong thereto; But all that I can do, is
briefly to speak to some things of a general and comprehensive nature, with
some inforcement of what may be especially seasonable at this time: And,

First; We shall speak to the Duty of an Elder in his place, which is either
more public, or more private; for in both these respects, he is under a bond
of Duty to Christ, and the Souls of the Members of that Church which he
ministers in.

We shall begin with those Duties which are more publicly to be discharged by
him: And they are;

1st. To stand in some respects, and to act in some things, as a middle Person
betwixt God and the People: Mistake me not, He is not to be a Mediator between
God and the Church, or in his own Interest to interpose himself betwixt God and
the People, for the procuring of their acceptance with him; such an Office and
Service for the Church no Man on Earth, nor Saint or Angel in Heaven is capable
of; The Glory of it is Christ's peculiar: As there is but one God, so 1 Timothy 2.
5.
in this regard, there is but one Mediator betwixt God and Men, the Man Christ
Jesus. But in two respects a Minister stands between God and the People;

1. As he is to be the Mouth of the People unto God, and to go before them, in
the Exercise of those Gifts and Graces which Christ has furnished him with, in
conceiving, and pouring out the public Prayers of the Church to the most High.
And by some this is taken to be the special import of that saying of the
Apostle's, in Act. 6. 4. But we will give our selves continually Assidui erimus
tum in praecundo plebi in precibus ad Deum, ^um in Plebe instituenda. Grot. in
locum.
to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word; They seem equally to respect in
both (viz. Prayer, and the Ministry of the Word) the public discharge of their
Office in the Church; and there is no doubt but what is here mentioned,
continues to be the Duty of ordinary Ministers in their Station, as much as it
was theirs. And the Scripture knows no other Provision for the orderly and
profitable performance of this Service in the Church, than what Christ has
made by enduing Persons with those Gifts, and such an anointing of his Holy
Spirit, as may enable them to go before their Brethren therein. It would be
very sad to have the Souls of Men committed to the care of such as are so
unacquainted with, or insensible of, their Spiritual Concerns, as not to be in
some good degree prepared for this part of their Work, to be the Mouth of the
People, in pouring out their solemn public Prayers unto God.

2. As he is to be the Mouth of God to the People, to deliver his Message from
God, and speak to them in his Name. It is eminently the Work and Business of a
Pastor, To preach the 2 Timothy 4. 2.
Word, to be instant in season and out of season, to reprove, rebuke, and
exhort with all Long-suffering and Doctrine; They are Ministers of the New
Testament, and God's Ambassadors unto Men, who are to dispense the Mysteries of
God to his Church, and they ought to exercise all diligence herein, Studying to
approve themselves Workmen 2 Timothy 2. 14, 15
that need not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth: And woe will
be to him that undertakes this Charge, and preaches not the Gospel; which is
the sincere Milk, and Spiritual Food that the Souls of his Flock ought
continually to be fed with.

This Duty is so earnestly pressed upon all Occasions Oportet Episcopum
praedicantem mori.
where these Things are treated of in the Scriptures, that there is no need of
any other Arguments to enforce it, but what are obvious to every one's Eye in
the reading of them; And he deserves not the Name of a Minister, Pastor, or
Bishop, that labors not herein.

It will not (I suppose) be expected that I should here lay down Rules for
Preaching, or enter into a Discourse about the Method of Theological Studies in
order thereunto: Only give me leave at present to recommend three things to
those that are under so strict and solemn a Charge to preach the Gospel.

1. Let your Care be, to deal with the Souls and Consciences of Men, as knowing
that it is the Salvation of Souls which you are to labor after, a Care of
Souls that is committed to you, and an account of them that you must make to
God: It is not your Business to gratify the itching Ears or wanton Fancies of
Men, Jerome complains of some in his Time; That, Id habent curae, non quomodo
Scripturarum medullas ebibant, sed quomodo aures Populi declamatorum flosculis
mulceant.
but to speak to their Hearts, and by manifestation of the Truth, to recommend
your selves to every Man's Conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. Lay out
your pains in a solid explaining of the Principles of Religion, and a judicious
accommodation of them to practice; that sincere Piety, and the power of
Godliness, may be promoted by your Ministry: Press the particular Duties of Men
in every Relation and Capacity upon them, warn them of the sleights of Satan;
rebuke their Errors and Disorders, that go astray; comfort the Afflicted and
broken in Heart; And in these things, let no Zeal, Diligence, Boldness,
Industry or Labor be wanting.

2. That this may be accomplished; Be sure that you speak as the Oracles of
God; and deliver that 1 Pet. 4. 11.
Doctrine to the People which is drawn from the pure Fountain of God's Word. It
is no less than the Evidence of Divine Authority, that will work upon the Soul;
and command the Conscience of a Man; whether it be by way of Comfort,
Exhortation, or Reproof, it is the stamp of Heaven upon the Things delivered by
you that renders them powerful; Let it therefore be your principal care in
Preaching, clearly, to open, and pertinently to apply the Scriptures, that your
Hearers may bear away this Conviction from your Sermons, That you have the Mind
of Christ. It is not enough that the things you speak be true, but you must
manifest them to be so by strong and convincing Proofs. Make Conscience of
giving, what in you lies, the very sense of the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures
that you speak to; and weaken not excellent Truths, by wringing them out of
such Texts as intend another thing: The word of God is Sacred, and must be
handled with all religious respect and reverence. Divine Things will admit of
no trifling.

3. Remember that the Duty of your Place is, Not to preach your selves but
Christ Jesus the 2 Cor. 4. 5.
Lord; His Glory must be the Mark aimed at by all your Labors, and his Grace
the principal Subject of all your Discourses; It is not a Philosophic Harangue
that will save the Souls of Men, but the preaching of Christ Crucified; His 1
Cor. 1. 23.
Gospel is the Power of God unto Salvation to them Romans 1. 16.
that believe; and his Holy Name is the Ointment that perfumes all Religious
Exercises; Therefore I will not only say, Let there be Aliquid Christi,
something of Christ in every Sermon, but let Christ be the beginning, middle,
and end of your Discourses; for in him are hid all the Treasures of Colos. 2. 3.
Wisdom and Knowledge; in him is the Fountain and Head-spring of all true
Comfort and Holiness. So much for the first Thing.

2dly. Unto the public Work and Charge of a Bishop or Elder, belongs also the
Administration of the Sacraments, or Ordinances of positive Institution in the
Church; as Baptism, and the Lord's Supper; This appertains to that Dispensation
of the Mysteries of God that is committed to him, and to that feeding of the
Sheep of Christ which is required of him. And then,

3dly. It is his Duty to take care of the due exercise of Discipline in the
Church, and the right ordering of all things pertaining to the Government
thereof; He is the Overseer of God's House, Heb. 13. 17.
and is to rule therein, not in a despotical or lordly Way, but by the
Testament of Christ, as becomes a Minister, and as one set over the Lord's
Heritage who are a voluntary People, and to be governed not with force and
rigor, but with their own consent. All the Brethren have an Interest in the
management of Church Affairs, in the admission, and ejection of Members; yet
this denies not a peculiar Concernment of the Elder in these things, and a
neglect of their due Administration will especially be charged upon him, if
guilty thereof. And in these things, great Prudence, Tenderness, Diligence, and
Impartiality is required of him. It is a Matter of great importance, that the
Gates of the Lord's House, the goings out and comings in thereof be well looked
to. If Members be not received with due caution, our Number may be increased,
but not our Joy, and if any be precipitantly, and without just grounds ejected,
the scandal and inconvenience will be as great.

And in all these things, an Elder must endeavor so to demean himself, that in
the whole course of his Ministry, there may be kept up a very lively
representation of the Love, Care, Wisdom, Compassion, Faithfulness, and
Patience of the Lord Jesus Christ whom he serves.

I shall say no more of those Duties that are incumbent on a Pastor in the
public Exercise of his Ministry: But in the next place;

Secondly; There are also Duties of great importance to the Souls of Men, which
an Elder is bound diligently to attend the discharge of in a more private and
particular way. He is obliged to a constant watchfulness for, and over his
People, and ought diligently to enquire and search into the state of his Flock;
That those who are in danger to err for want of counsel may be directed; the
unruly warned and rebuked; feeble and dejected Souls strengthened, comforted,
and encouraged; and those that are beset with Difficulties and Temptations,
succored and relieved. Unto an unwearied diligence in these things, Paul
excites the Elders of the Church at Ephesus, by his own Example; You know
(says he) how I kept Act. 20. 18, etc.
back nothing that was profitable for you, but have showed you, and have taught
you publicly, and from House to House. The like he does to those of
Thessalonioa, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Ye are Witnesses, and God also, how
holily, and justly, and unblameably, we behaved our selves among you that
believe: As you know how we exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of
you, (as a Father does his Children) That you would walk worthy of God, etc.
And again, Col. 1. 28, 29. Whom (viz. Christ) we preach, warning every Man, and
teaching every Man in all wisdom, (i. e. by a suitable applying of Things to
them according to their various Circumstances and Conditions) that we may
present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus; Whereunto I also labor, etc. And
all this pains must be enlivened by an Holy Example; for if a Minister does not
live over the Instructions he gives to others, and appear a burning and shining
Light in Life and Conversation, as well as in Doctrine, his ill Manners will do
more hurt, than all his Words can ever do good: Examples have the greatest
influence upon Men; Verba docent, Exempla trahunt; Therefore is that charge so
frequently repeated, That they should in all things be Ensamples to the Flock.

I will add but a word or two for the encouragement and quickening of a Pastor
to his Duty; and then pass on to what remains. What I intend at present, I
shall sum up under two Heads.

First; Consider whom you serve, and by whose Authority you are to act in your
place: You are a Minister of Christ, not a Creature of humane appointment; It
is by the Holy Ghost that you are made an Overseer, therefore take heed to your
self, and to the Flock of God. A like Argument or Motive is included in that of
Col. 4. 17. Say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry that thou have received
in the Lord, that thou fulfill it. To receive a Ministry in the Lord, is to be
employed in a Service for Christ, and by his Order and Authority. Now from
hence these things (and others like to them) may be inferred:

1. That there is a real dignity and worth in the Office which you are to
administer; He that desires the Office of a Bishop (says our Apostle) desires
a good Work: It is an Office that a Man must labor in, but his Labor is in a
good Work, viz. that which is honorable as well as useful, as the word (...)
signifies; and you know Difficilia quae pulchra, (...).
honorable Employments are not without their burden. Men may despise this
Function, but let not that discourage you; Christ has honored you, and let
the sense of Duty and Gratitude to him, bear you above all Discouragements to a
faithful discharge of your Trust, and that with holy boldness, and fortitude of
Mind.

2. If you have reeived your Office from Christ, you must be responsible to him
for the discharge of it; Stewards must one day give an account to their Lord;
and thrice happy he, to whom Christ shall say in the day of Account, Well done
thou good and faithful Servant; enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. There is
nothing tends more to engage us to all diligence and faithfulness in our
Places, than a deep and fixed thoughtfulness of that solemn Audit which we must
be brought to, at the Kingdom and Appearing of the great Shepherd.

3. Those that Christ imploys in his Work, may expect his gracious presence and
assistance in all the difficulties that do attend it; For this we have his word
passed; Lo, I am with you to the end of Mat. 28 ult.
the World; though you may be persecuted, you shall never be forsaken of me; and
though your Burden may sometimes press you with a great weight, yet my strength
shall be made perfect in your weakness, and my Grace shall always be sufficient
for you. It is the Grace and Assistance of Christ that a Minister must depend
upon, and expect the success of his Labors from; and having ground for such an
expectation, let him not faint from the apprehension of any hardship or
opposition that may lie in his way; for all Power in Heaven and Earth is in his
Hand, by whom he is employed.

4. Seeing he is engaged in Christ's Service, the Reward of Faithfulness
therein is sure; Christ will not fail to show himself a bountiful Lord and
Master to those that serve him: None ever were, or shall be losers by doing his
Work. This is the encouragement that Peter lays before the Elders of the
Church, and exhorts them to lift up their Hearts to; 1 Pet. 5. 4. And when the
chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not
away: And this will be a sufficient compensation of all your sorrow and travel
here. Look how much your labor has been more than others, God will cloth you
with the brighter Rays of Glory; your Converts shall then be your Crown and
your Joy, when they that have turned many to Righteousness, shall shine as the
Stars for ever and ever.

Secondly; Consider, That it is the Care and Charge of Souls that is committed
to you; not the Temporal Concerns of this Life, but the Affairs of Eternal Life
are the Business of your Stewardship: Now one Soul is of more worth than all
the World, because immortal, and made for an Eternal State: The Influence that
the Ministry of the Word has into the future state of Men, made Paul say, as
in an ecstasy, Who is sufficient for these Things! They are the Souls of Men
that God thought it worth the giving of his own Son to redeem, and Christ
thought not much to shed his precious Blood for; the Church is a Society of Men
which God has purchased to himself by his own Blood, and now committed to your
Care, and appointed you to watch for their Souls, therefore take heed to your
selves, and to your Flock; for if any of them perish in an evil way through your
neglect of Duty toward them, They die in their sins, but God will require
their Blood at your Hand.

We come now to the last thing that lies before us, viz. The Duty of the People
toward their Pastors.

Able and faithful Pastors are a great Blessing, and special Fruit of Christ's
Love to his Church, and he as well expects and requires her improvement of so
great a Talent, and the cheerful performance of her Duty toward her Ministers,
a^ he does strictly charge them to acquit themselves with all fidelity and
diligence in their places. I am under a necessity of bringing this part of my
Discourse into a narrow compass; and therefore shall recommend to you but these
four things:

1st. You owe to your Pastor great Love, Respect, and Honor, for his
Work-sake; And God requires that you make a due payment thereof: This our
Apostle often presses with great earnestness; for instance see 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12,
13. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know (that is, to acknowledge with due
respect) them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in love for their Work-sake. And
again; Let the Elders that Rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor,
especially those that labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 17. If you
have a true Friend in the World, it is he that watches for your Souls, tells
you the Truth, and travels night and day to present you perfect unto God: And
let not his faithfulness in admonishing you, cause an abatement of your love to
him; but if you love your own Salvation, let it rather raise your esteem of
him; No wise Man will hate his Physician for giving a bitter Potion when his
Life is saved by it, or a Surgeon, for performing an Operation painful to
him, when the restoring or preserving of a Member of his Body depends thereon.
He that brings to you the good Tidings of Salvation, and publishes Peace,
deserves to have his Feet esteemed beautiful, and to be received with the Love
and Respect that is due to so good a Message, and the bringer of it: Christ will
not bear the contempt of his Messengers, therefore take heed that you provoke
him not, by casting a scornful Eye upon them; nor rob your own Souls of the
benefit of their Ministry, by entertaining evil Surmises, or undue Prejudices
against them.

2dly. You owe Submission and Obedience to them in the discharge of their
Office, and in the exercise of that Rule and Oversight which Christ has
committed to them for your Edification; Obey them that have the Rule over you,
and submit your selves, Heb. 13. 17. It is not a blind Obedience that the
Apostle requires, nor such as shall suppose a Legislative Power in
Church Officers, but an orderly subjection to them acting in their Office
according to the Law and Testament of Jesus Christ; even a ready obedience to
the Word of God dispensed by them, and humble submission to their just Reproofs
and Ministerial Correction, when rendered necessary by any miscarriage; and this
either in the public or more private discharge of their Trust. God does not
require that Men should pull out their own Eyes, and mancipate themselves to
the conduct of Church Officers, without the exercise of their own Reason and
Judgment, as it is in the Papacy, where the blind lead the blind, till both
fall into the Ditch. But when the Law of Christ is observed, and a conformity
with that urged, by the evidence and demonstration of Truth from the Holy
Scriptures, herein the Obedience of the People is justly expected; and he that
thinks himself too good, or too wise, to receive Instruction, or submit to
Reproof from his Pastor, ill deserves a place in any Christian Congregation. My
Brethren, take heed of a proud factious Spirit; James 3. 1.
be not many Masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater Condemnation.

And as it is your Duty to receive the Doctrine of Christ dispensed by them
with meekness and fear, and with humility to submit to the Discipline which
they exercise, according to the Authority they have received from Christ; so
also ought you to propose their holy Example for your imitation; Heb. 13. 7.
Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken to you the Word of
God whose Faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation. Be followers
of them as they are of Christ; for if it be their Duty to be Ensamples to their
Brethren, in Word, in Conversation, 1 Timothy 4. 12.
in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity; it must be no less the Duty of
their Brethren to write after their Copy, and conform to their Example in all
these Things. For if the discharge of this Office be not improved by the Church
unto their Edification and real growth in Grace and Holiness, the end of it, as
to them, is utterly lost.

3dly. You are much concerned to continue instant in Prayer to God for them:
You know the Apostle Paul often recommends himself to the Prayers of the
Church; and if he thought them so necessary for his help, we have much more
reason to account them so for ours. The temptations of Ministers are many; they
have great Difficulties and Discouragements to conflict with; And their Work is
such, as they can never fill up their Places as they ought, but by the special
Aid and Assistance of the Holy Ghost; the success of all their Labors depends
upon a Divine Blessing, and the presence of God with them; and in these things
both the Glory of Christ, and the Comfort and Edification of your own Souls is
nearly concerned; which is a sufficient Reason for your making Conscience of
this Duty.

4thly. You are bound, according to your Ability, to provide a comfortable and
honorable Maintenance for them. Let him that is taught, communicate with him
that teaches IN ALL GOOD THINGS; Be not deceived, God is not mocked, Gal. 6.
6, 7. These words call not only for a Maintenance of Ministers, but for such a
plentiful Contribution as may make them partakers with you in all good Things:
If God bless the Congregation with a plentiful Portion of this World's Goods,
it is their Duty to make their Minister a Party with them in their flourishing
Condition; and considering the Place and Employment he is in; and the Service
he attends, it would be extremely unworthy to think you have done enough if his
pressing Necessities be answered, while you abound in Superfluities. If the
Congregation be Poor, their Minister must be content to be poor with them, yea,
rejoice to approve himself a Minister of Christ by hunger and nakedness, if the
Providence of God call him thereto: But while it is in the Power of your Hand
to provide better for him, God expects it from you; and, be not deceived, he is
not mocked, neither will he suffer his Commands to be slighted and evaded,
without rendering a just rebuke to the Offender; For whatsoever a Man sows,
that shall he also reap.

Now that you may the better understand how far you are concerned in this Duty,
before I proceed to the farther pressing of it, let me put you in remembrance;

1. That a Minister is bound to attend wholly and only upon his Calling in the
Ministry, and not to entangle himself in the Affairs of this Life, that he may
please him by whom he is called to this Spiritual Warfare; and nothing but real
Necessity may dispense with the contrary; his whole Time and Strength is little
enough to be employed in the Work he is called to; he must give himself to the
Ministry of the Word and Prayer, and continue in Reading, Meditation, etc. as a
Man wholly devoted unto Gospel-Service; and is therefore by his Call to the
Ministry, secluded from those Ways and Means of providing for his own
Subsistence, as the Trades and secular Employments of others furnish them with;
that his Mind, by the cares of worldly Business, may not be diverted from that
study of God's Word, and Care of Souls, which the duty of his Station engages
him to: And if he may not expose himself to the careful Thoughts that accompany
worldly Business, though tending to his profit: Certainly it is no way meet that
he should be left to conflict with the thorny Cares of a necessitous Condition,
while those he ministers to have Means to prevent it.

2. It is no less the Duty of a Minister, than of other Men, to provide for his
Family, and (what lies in him) to take care of his Wife and Children, 1 Timothy 5.
8.
that they may not be left exposed to a thousand Miseries and Temptations when
he is gone. I confess, of all Men in the World, a covetous raking Temper worst
becomes a Minister; but we greatly mistake, if we think he must divest himself
of the due Affection of an Husband toward his Wife, or of a Father toward his
Children; or that those Fruits thereof, which are justly esteemed commendable
in others, should be a fault in him.

3. An Elder or Bishop is under a special Charge to use Hospitality, and to set
in himself a pattern of Charity and compassionate Bounty to poor Souls: And if
it be his Duty to be hospitable and charitable in an eminent degree, then
without Controversy the People are concerned to endeavor that he may be
capable of giving proof of this Grace in him, by the exercise of it as there is
occasion.

These things being premised, I shall show you, that you lie under the
strongest Obligation imaginable to this Duty.

1. By the Eternal Law of Nature. 2. By the express Command and Appointment of
Christ. 3. On the account of the great and manifest Evil and Inconvenience that
follows the neglect thereof.
First; The Law and Light of Nature obliges you to it, as to the matter of
Equity and Justice. And from hence our Apostle takes his first Plea, in 1 Cor.
9. 7, etc. Who goes a Warfare any time at his own Charges? Who planteth a
Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? Or who feeds a Flock, and
eats not of the Milk of the Flock? The Ministry is a Warfare, undertaken at
the Command of Christ, for the Service of your Souls; and it is as reasonable
that the Minister should receive a supply of outward things from you, as it is
that a faithful Soldier should receive his Pay from his Captain at the charge
of the Commonwealth, for whose good he ^mlitates. Shall a Man feed a Flock (as
a Pastor does) and be denied to eat of the Milk of that Flock, which it is his
work to keep and feed? Or is it consistent with common Justice, to deprive a
Man of the Fruit of that Vineyard which is planted and manured by his own
Labor? Such is the case in respect of Maintenance between a Minister and the
People; It is not your Charity that I ask for him, but Justice and Debt that I
plead for; He is employed in your Service, and of right should live upon your
Charge. Nay, you have called him off from other Business, and therefore his
Maintenance is as due from you as is the Wages of your Servant; though I fear
some give more to the meanest Servant in their House, than they are willing to
do to their Minister. Certainly, if you choose as you ought, your Ministers are
not of the lowest of the People, but may be allowed to have a share of Parts,
common Prudence, and Ability for Business, with other Men; and could manage
Trades, or fall into other Employments, and get Estates as well as you, if they
were not devoted to a better Service; and must they needs be devoted to
Necessities and Misery in the same hour that they enter upon the Ministry? My
Brethren, this ought not to be; Let your Ministers have as good treatment at
least, as the Law provided for the Ox that trod out the Corn, who might not be
muzled: Neither was this written for the sake of Oxen; for, Does God take care
of Oxen? Or was there no higher end of this Law, than that the Bruit Creature
should not be abused? Certainly there was; and for our sakes, no doubt, was
this written, 1 Cor. 9. 8, 9, 10, 11.
That he that ploweth should plow in hope, and that he that thresheth in hope,
should be partaker of his hope. For, If we have sown unto you Spiritual Things,
is it a great thing if we shall reap your Carnal Things?

Secondly; The Lord has not left us to argue this only from general Principles
of Reason and common Equity, but, to put the Matter beyond dispute, has
superadded his express Command: Thus he provided for his Ministers in the Time
of the Law, which the Apostle urges in the next place, 1 Cor. 9. 13. Do ye not
know that they which minister about Holy Things, live of the Things of the
Temple? And they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? God did
no sooner separate the Levites to the Service of his Sanctuary, but he by Law
provided for their Subsistence: And though they were but one Tribe in twelve, yet
the Tenth of the Increase of the whole Land was given to them, besides the
First Fruits and Offerings, and diverse other Advantages; so that their Lot
might equal, yea, exceed that of their Brethren. This Law indeed is now
abrogated, and we pretend to no right of Tything your Estates; but the moral
Equity of it can never cease, neither has Christ left Gospel Ministers to the
wide World, but has made provision for them also, so far as the interest of
his Command will go with them that profess his Name; for so it follows, Verse.
14. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel. The Labourer is still worthy of his Hire, and not the less
worthy because he labors in the Gospel; Though indeed (if Men did fully come up
to their Duty, yet still) the Charge of Gospel Worship will appear very
inconsiderable when compared with that of the Law; for, were that my Business,
I think I could demonstrate that the fifth part of their Estates was yearly to
be spent in things relating to the Temple-Service. And if we are sensible of
the great Privilege and Blessing of the Gospel, on higher accounts than merely
the case of those Burdens, we shall never think much to defray the moderate
Charge of a Gospel Ministry, in such a manner as may give a Reputation to our
Profession.

Thirdly; That you may prevent the evil and inconvenience that follows the
neglect of this Duty, it concerns you cheerfully to practice it; I might have
said Evils and Inconveniences as of many; for many there are, and those of easy
observation to an unprejudiced Eye; but it is the discouragement of Study which
at present I chiefly aim at; That Study must needs be discouraged (I intend the
study of Theology) by the Peoples neglect to make a comfortable Provision for
their Ministers, is too evident to require a Proof; who will apply himself to
gather and lay up those Stores of solid Learning which are needful to a
Minister, when he can expect to purchase nothing to himself but Poverty and
Distress thereby? Or how shall a Minister be capable to furnish himself with
the universal knowledge of Things relating to his Work, that has no Means of
providing for his own Information, or no Time free from Cares and worldly
Business? And the disadvantage of this will at last fall to the share of the
People that he ministers to. He that considers that the Holy Scriptures are
originally written in Hebrew and Greek, must have a hard Forehead if he deny
the usefulness of Learning to a Minister; besides, many other things there are
that call for it, in reference to the opening of the Scriptures, which I cannot
now insist upon: And it is not without diligent and continual study, that the
deep Things of God can be searched out, and so proposed to you, as to enrich
your Minds with the clear and solid knowledge of them. I confess, a little
Learning, and less Study, may furnish a Man with such a Discourse as may please
some weak Persons, that judge of a Sermon by the loudness of the Voice, and
affectionate Sentences; or that can fancy themselves to be fed with the Ashes
of jingling Words, and Cadency of terms in a Discourse: But alas! the seeming
warmth of Affection that is stirred by such means, is as short-lived as a
Land-Flood that has no Spring to feed it. He that will do the Souls of his
People good, and approve himself a Pastor after Jer. 3. 15.
God's Heart, must feed them with Knowledge and Understanding; and endeavor to
maintain a constant Zeal and Affection in them, by well-informing their
Judgments, and such an opening of the Mind of God from the Scriptures, as may
command their Consciences: And this is not to be expected, but from him that
labors in his Study as well as in his Pulpit. Mistake me not! I know the
success, and Fruit of all the studies and labors of him that preaches the
Gospel, is from the Grace and Power of the Holy Ghost; but the assistance of
the Spirit is to be expected by us in the way of our Duty. These things might
be yet applied more home to my present purpose; but perhaps some will think
there is too much said already (though I heartily wish more were not needful) and
my Time calls me to put a period to this Exercise. And therefore I will only
add a word for the enforcement of this and the other Duties which I have laid
before you, by accommodating the same things to you, that were before touched,
for the encouragement and quickening of your Pastor in his Duty.

First; Remember that your Pastor is the Minister of Christ, one that
dispenses the Mysteries of God to you in his Name; and therefore (he acting in
his Place, according to his Duty) the Lord Jesus will account that done to
himself, that is done to his Minister; He that receives you Mat. 10. 40. with
Luke 10. 16.
(says he) receives me; and he that despises you, despises me, etc. If the
Name and Authority of Christ will beget an awe in you, or his matchless and
unspeakable Love influence you, there is no want of Motives to those Duties
that have been pressed upon you: If you acknowledge a religious Respect and
Reverence due to the Son of God, exercise it in humble obedience to his Word:
And if you love him, and value his Gospel, treat not his Ministers in an
unworthy manner; and forget not, That he who gave his Life a Ransom for you,
well deserves a return of the greatest love from you, and to be honored by
you, not only with good words, but with your Substance, and the Prove. 3. 9.
first Fruits of all your Increase.

Secondly; It Is the Business of your Salvation, and the Concern of your
precious and immortal Souls that a Minister is employed in; and therefore it is
much more your own Interest than his, that you should make Conscience of your
Duty; with this Argument the Apostle enforces his exhortation, Heb. 13. 17. For
they watch for your Souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do
it with Joy, and not with Grief; for that is unprofitable for you. The Ministry
can never be effectual to the saving of your Souls, if you be not sincere in
Obedience under it. And will you be less careful for your Souls, and their
eternal Welfare, than you are for your Bodies, and the Comforts of a Temporal
Life? Can you be content to lay out your Strength and Substance to provide for
these, and neglect the other? It is sad to consider how many there are among
Professors that live in this World, as if there were no truth in the Report of
that which is to come; and have the meanest esteem of the most necessary means
of Salvation, viz. the Word, and Ordinances of Christ, and a Gospel Ministry:
Many there are, that besides a Provision of Necessaries, can expend perhaps an
hundred pounds per annum, more or less, for the Convenience, Ornament, or
Delight of a frail Carcass, that will grudg half so much for the Poor, or the
support of Gospel Worship: If their Bodies be afflicted, it is not five, ten,
or twenty pounds that they think too much for a Physician, in recompense of his
skill and care about them; when it may be they can scarce afford half so much
to him that continually studies and travels to promote the Cure and Salvation
of their sick Souls: But when Men come to be thro'ly possessed, That Eternity is
no Fiction, and the Gospel is the only means of escaping the Wrath to come, and
inheriting Eternal Glory, they will take other measures about these things.

To conclude: We have seen something of those gracious Provisions that Christ
in his Wisdom and Faithfulness has made for his Church, in the appointment of
Deacons for the refreshing of the Bowels of the Poor, and Pastors for the
guidance and nourishment of your Souls unto Eternal Life: We have heard
something also of the Duty he expects both from the Officers and Members in his
Church to the end of the World: What now remains, But that we all in our places
make Conscience of living over his Commands, (for if we know these things,
happy are we if we do them) and practically acknowledge his Love and
Faithfulness, with a constant admiration of his Grace, and the return of hearty
Praises to him for all these Fruits of it: Which that you may do, The God of
Peace that brought again from Heb. 13. 20, 21.
the Dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of
the Everlasting Covenant, Make you perfect in every good Work, to do his Will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to
whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
These Books following are printed for Thomas Fabian, at the Sign of the Bible
in St. Paul 's Churchyard.
THe Works of Josephus with Cuts. Folio.

The Packet of Letters. Quarto.

The Gentleman's Recreation with Cuts. Octavo.

Drummond's History of Scotland; Containing the Lives and Reigns of James the
First, the 2 d, the 3 d, the 4th, the 5th; with several Memorials of State
during the Reigns of James the Sixth, and Charles the First, with their
Effigies. Octavo.

A Discourse of Friendship. Octavo.

Vincent's Discourse of Christ's certain and sudden appearance to Judgment.
Octavo.

Flavell's Navigation Spiritualized. Octavo.

Esop's Fables in English. 12 s.

The downfall of several Great Men, or Popish Plottings, not to be paralleled in
former Ages; being a Seasonable Warning for the Times. 12 s.

Robinson's Learning-Foundation; teaching to Spell and to Read English. 12 s.


