THE KEYS Of the Kingdom of HEAVEN, AND Power thereof, according to the WORD
of GOD. BY That Learned and Judicious Divine, Mr. JOHN COTTON, Teacher of the
Church at Boston in New England, Tending to reconcile some present differences
about DISCIPLINE.

Genesis 13.7, 8. And Abraham said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray
between thee, and me; for we be Brethren.

Genesis 45.24. And Joseph said to his Brethren (when they were going the third
time out of Egypt) See that ye fall not out by the way.

Acts 7.26. Sirs, ye be Brethren, why do ye wrong one to another?

Ephesians. 4.15. (...), etc.

Published By THO. GOODWIN. PHILIP NIGH.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his
Shop entering into Pope's Head Alley, out of Lumbard-street, 1644.

TO THE READER.
THE greatest commotions in Kingdoms have for the most part been raised and
maintained for and about Power, and Liberties, of the Rulers and the Ruled,
together with the due bounds and limits of either: And the like has fallen out
in Churches, and is continued to this day in the sharpest contentions (though
now the seat of the war is changed) who should be the first adequate, and
complete subject of that Church Power, which Christ has left on earth; how
bounded, and to whom committed. This controversy is in a special manner the
lot of these present times: And now that most parties (that can pretend any
thing toward it) have in several ages had their turns and vicissitudes of so
long a pessession of it, and their pleas for their several pretenses, have
been so much and so long heard, it may well be hoped it is near determining;
and that Christ will shortly settle this power upon the right heirs to whom he
primitively did bequeath it.

In those former darker times, this golden Ball was thrown up by the Clergy
(so called) alone to run for among themselves: And as they quietly possessed
the name (...), The Clergy, and of the Church, appropriated to themselves; so
answerably all manner of interest in power or cognizance of matters of the
Church, was wholly left and quitted to them: whilst the People that then knew
not the Law, having given up their souls to an implicit faith in what was to
be believed, did much more suffer themselves to be deprived of all Liberties in
Church affairs. this royal donation bestowed by Christ upon his Church, was
taken up and And placed in so high thrones of Bishops, Popes, General
Council, etc. not only far above these things on earth, the people; but
things in Heaven also, we mean the Angels and Ministers of the Churches
themselves; in so great a remoteness from the people, that the least right or
interest therein, was not so much as suspected to belong to them. But toward
these latter times, after many removalls of it down again, and this as the
issue of many suits again and again renewed and removed, and upon the sentence
(even of whole States) as often reversed. It has now in these our days been
brought so near unto the people, that they also have begun to plead and sue
for a portion, and legacy bequeathed them in it. The Saints (in these knowing
times) finding that the Key of knowledge has so far opened their hearts,
that they see with their own eyes into the substantialls of Godliness, and
that through the instruction and guidance of their teachers, they are enabled
to understand for themselves such other things as they are to join in the
practice of. They do therefore further (many of them) begin more then to
suspect, that some share in the Key of power should likewise appertain unto
them.

It was the unhappiness of those, who first in these latter times revived this
plea of the peoples right, to err on the other extreme (as it has ever been
the fate of truth, when it first arises in the Church from under that long
night of darkness which Antichristianisme had brought upon the world to have a
long shadow of error to accompany it) by laying the plea and claim on their
behalf unto the whole power; and that the Elders set over them did but exercise
that power for them, which was properly theirs, and which Christ had (as they
contended) radically and originally estated in the people only.

But after that all titles have been pleaded, of those that are content with
nothing but the whole, the final judgment and sentence may (possibly) fall to
be a suitable and due proportioned distribution and dispersion of this power
into several interests, and the whole to neither part. In Commonwelaths, it is
a Dispersion of several portions of power and rights into several hands,
jointly to concur and agree in acts and process of weight and moment, which
causes that healthful (...) and constitution of them, which makes them
lasting and preserves their peace, when none of al sorts find they are
excluded, but as they have a share of concernement, so that a fit measure of
power or privilege, is left and betrusted to them. And accordingly the
wisdom of the first Constitutors of Common wealths is most seen in such a
just ballancing of power and privileges, and besides also in setting the exact
limits of that which is committed unto each; yea and is more admired by us in
this than in their other Laws; and in experience, a clear and distinct
definement and confinement of all such parcells of power, both for the kind and
extent of them, is judged to be as essentially necessary (if not more) than
what ever other statutes, that set out the kinds and degrees of crimes or
penalties.

So in that Polity or Government by which Christ would have his churches
ordered, the right disposal of the power therein (we humbly suppose) may lie
in a due and proportioned allotment and dispersion (though not in the same
measure and degree) into diverse hands, according unto the several concernments
and interests that each rank in his Church may have; rather than in an entire
and sole trust committed to any one man (though never so able) or any one sort
or kind of men or officers, although diversified into never so many
subordinations under one another. And in like manner, we cannot but imagine,
that Christ has been as exact in setting forth the true bounds and limits of
what ever portion of power he has imparted unto any (if we of this age could
attain rightly to discern it) as he has been in ordering what kind of
censures, and for what sins and what degrees of proceedings unto those
censures; which we find he has been punctual in.

Now the scope which this grave and judicious Author in this his Treatise does
pursue, is, to lay forth the just lines and terriers of this division of
Church Power, unto all the several subjects of it; to the end to allay the
contentions now on foot, about it. And in general he lays this fundamental
Maxim, that holds in common true of all the particulars, to whom any portion
of power can be supposed to be committed: That look what ever power or right
any of the possessours and subjects thereof may have, they have it each, alike
immediately (that is, in respect of a mediation of delegation or dependence on
each other) from Christ, and so are each, the first subjects of that power that
is allotted to them. And for the particular subjects themselves, he follows
that division (in the handling of them) which the Controversy it self has
made unto his hands; To wit, 1. What power each single Congregation (which is
endowed with a Charter to be a body-politique to Christ) has granted to it to
exercise within it self: And 2. What measure, or rather, kind of power Christ
has placed in Neighbour-Churches without it, and in association with it.

For the first. As he supposes, each Congregation, such, as to have the
privilege of enjoying a Presbytery, or company of more or less Elders,
proper unto it self; so being thus Presbyterated, he asserteth this
incorporate body or society to be the first and primary subject of a complete
and entire power within it self over it is own members; yea, and the sole native
subject of the power of Ordination and Excommunication, which is the highest
Censure. And whereas this corporation consists both of Elders and Brethren,
(for as for women and children, there is a special exception by a Statute Law
of Christ against their enjoyment of any part of this public power;) His
scopeis to demonstrate a distinct and several share and interest of power, in
matters of common concernment, vouchsafed to each of these, and dispersed among
both, by Charter from the Lord: as in some of our towns corporate, to a company
of Aldermen, the Rulers, and a Common Council, a body of the people, there
uses to be the like: He giving unto the Elders or Presbytery a binding power
of Rule and Authority proper and peculiar unto them; and unto the Brethren,
distinct and apart, an interest of power and privilege to concur with them,
and that such affairs should not be transacted, but with the joint agreement
of both, though out of a different right: so that as a Church of Brethren only,
could not proceed to any public censures, without they have Elders over them,
so nor in the Church have the Elders power to censure without the concurrence
of the people; and likewise so, as each alone has not power of Excommunicating
the whole of either, though together they have power over any particular person
or persons in each.

And because these particular Congregations, both Elders and People, may
disagree and miscarry, and abuse this power committed to them; He therefore,
secondly, asserteth an association or communion of Churches, sending their
Elders and Messengers into a Synod, (so he purposely chooses to style those
Assemblies of Elders which the Reformed Churches do call Classes or
Presbyteries, that so he might distinguish them from those Presbyteries of
Congregations before mentioned) And acknowledges that it is an Ordinance of
Christ, unto whom Christ has (in relation to rectifying Mal-administrations
and healing dissentions in particular Congregations, and the like cases)
committed a due and just measure of power, suited and proportioned to those
ends; and furnished them, not only with ability to give counsel and advice,
but further upon such occasions with a Ministerial power and authority to
determine, declare and enjoin such things as may tend to the reducing such
Congregations to right order and peace. Only in his bounding and defining this
power, he affirms it to be. First for the kind and quality of it, but a
dogmaticall or doctrinall power, (though stamped with authority Ministerial as
an Ordinance of Christ) whether in judging of controversies of faith (when they
disturb the peace of particular Congregations, and which themselves find too
difficult for them) or in decerning matters of fact and what censures they do
deserve: but not armed with authority and power of Excommunicating or
delivering unto Satan, either the Congregations or the Members of them: But
they in such cases, having declared and judged the nature of the offense, and
admonished the peccant Churches, and decerned what they ought to do with their
offending members; they are to leave the formal act of this censure to that
authority which can only execute it, placed by Christ in those Churches
themselves; which if they deny to do, or persist in their miscarriage, then to
determine to withdraw communion from them. And also for the extent of this
power in such Assemblies and Association of Churches, he limits and confines
that also unto cases, and with cautions (which will appear in the Discourse) to
wit, That they should not entrench or impair the privilege of entire
Jurisdiction committed unto each Congregation, (as a liberty purchased them by
Christ's blood) but to leave them free to the exercise and use thereof, until
they abuse that power, or are unable to manage it; and in that case only to
assist, guide, and direct them, and not take on them to administer it for them,
but with them, and by them.

As for our selves, we are yet, neither afraid, nor ashamed to make profession
(in the midst of all the high waves on both sides dashing on us) that the
substance of this brief Extract from the Authors larger Discourse, is That very
Middle-way (which in our Apology we did in the general intimate and intend)
between that which is called Brownisme, and the Presbyteriall-government, as it
is practiced; whereof the one does in effect put the chief (if not the whole)
of the rule and government into the hands of the people, and drowns the Elders
votes (who are but a few) in the major part of theirs: And the other, taking
the chief and the principal parts of that rule (which we conceive is the due
of each Congregation, the Elders and Brethren) into this Jurisdiction of a
common Presbytery of several Congregations, does thereby in like manner
swallow up, not only the interests of the people, but even the votes of the
Elders of that Congregation concerned, in the major part thereof.

Neither let it seem arrogance in us, but a testimony rather to the truth,
further to Remonstrate, that this very Boundary platform and disposement of
Church power, as here it is (we speak for the substance of it) set out and
stated; as also that the tenure and exercise thereof in all these subjects,
should be immediate from Christ unto them all, is now new unto our thoughts;
yea it is no other than what our own apprehensions have been molded unto
long since: And this many of our friends and some that are of a differing
opinion having known our private judgments long, as likewise our own Notes
and transcripts written long ago, can testify; besides many public
professions since as occasion has been offered: Insomuch as when we first
read this of this learned Author (knowing what has been the more general
current both of the practice and judgment of our Brethren for the
Congregationall way) we confess we were filled with wonderment at that Divine
hand, that had thus led the judgments (without the least mutual interchange
or intimation of thoughts or notions in these particulars) of our Brethren
there, and our selves (unworthy to be mentioned with them) here: Only we crave
leave of the reverend Author and those Brethren that had the view of it, to
declare: that we assent not to all expressions scattered up and down, or all
and every Assertion interwoven in it; yea nor to all the grounds or allegations
of Scriptures; nor should we in all things perhaps have used the same terms to
express the same materials by.

For instance, we humbly conceive Prophesying (as the Scripture terms it) or
speaking to the edification of the whole Church, may (sometimes) be performed
by Brethren gifted, though not in Office as Elders of the Church; only 1
Occasionally, not in an ordinary course. 2. By men of such abilities as are fit
for Office; And 3. not assuming this of themselves, but judged such by those
that have the power, and so allowed and designed to it: And 4. so as their
Doctrine be subjected (for the judging of it) in an especial manner to the
Teaching Elders of that Church: And when it is thus cautioned, we see no more
incongruity for such to speak to a point of Divinity in a Congregation, then
for men of like abilities to speak to, and debate of matters of religion in an
Assembly of Divines, which this reverend Author allows; and here, with us, is
practiced.

Again, in all humility, we yet see not that Assembly of Apostles, Elders, and
Brethren, Acts 15. to have been a formal Synod, of Messengers, sent, out of a
set and combined association from neighbor Churches; but an Assembly of the
Church of Jerusalem and of the Messengers from the Church of Antioch alone;
that were far remote each from other, and electively now met: Nor are we for
the present convinced that the Apostles to the end to make this a Precedent of
such a formal Synod, did act therein as Ordinary Elders, and not out of
Apostolical guidance and assistance; But we rather conceive (if we would
simply consider the mutual aspects which these two Churches and their Elders
stood in this conjunction, abstracting from them that influence and impression
which (that superior Sphere) the Apostles who were then present had in this
transaction) this to have been a Consultation (as the learned Author does also
acknowledge it to have been in its first original, only rising up to be a
General Council by the Apostles presence, they being Elders of all the
Churches;) or if you will, a reference by way of Arbitration for deciding of
that great controversy risen amongst them at Antioch, which they found to be
too difficult for themselves; and so to be a warrant indeed for all such ways
of communion between all, or any, especially neighbor Churches; and upon like
occasions to be Ordinances furnished with ministerial power for such ends and
purposes. Our reasons for this, we are now many ways bound up from giving the
account of, in this way, and at this season; But however if it should have
been so intended as the learned Author judges, and the Apostles to have acted
therein as ordinary Elders, yet the lines of that proportion of power that
could be drawn from that pattern would extend no further then a Ministerial
Doctrinall power, etc. in such Assemblies, which we willingly grant. And it may
be observed with what a wary eye and exact aim he takes the latitude and
elevation of that power there held forth, not daring to attribute the least,
either for kind or degree, then what that example warrants, which was at utmost
but a Doctrinall decernement both of the truth of that controversy they were
consulted in; as also the matter of fact in those that had taught the contrary,
as belyers of them and subverters of the faith; without so much as brandishing
the sword and power of Excommunication, against those high and gross
delinquents, or others, that should not obey them by that Epistle.

Only in the last place for the further clearing the difference of the peoples
intrest (which the reverend Author usually calls Liberty, sometimes Power)
and the Elders rule and authority (which makes that first distribution of
Church power in particular Congregations) as likewise for the illustration of
that other allotment of Ministerial doctrinal power in an association or
communion of Churches as severed from the power of Excommunication (which is
the second.) We take the boldness to cast a weak beam of our dimne light upon
either of these; and to present how these have layne stated in our thoughts, to
this end that we may happily prevent some readers mistake, especially about the
former. For the first, we conceive the Elders and Brethren in each
Congregation, as they are usually in the New Testament thus mentioned
distinctly apart, and this when their meeting together is spoken of, so they
make in each congregation two distinct intrests (though meeting in one
Assembly) as the intrest of the Common Council or body of the people, in some
Corporations, is distinct from that of the company of Aldermen; so as without
the consent and concurrence of both nothing is esteemed as a Church act. But so
as in this company of Elders, this power is properly Authority; but in the
people is a privilege or power. An apparent difference between these two is
evident to us by this. That two or three or more select persons should be put
into an Office and betrusted with an entire intrest of power for a multitude,
to which that multitude ought (by a command from Christ) to be subject and
obedient as to an ordinance to guide them in their consent, and in whose
sentence the ultimate formal Ministerial act of binding or loosing should
consist: this power must needs be esteemed and a knowledged in these few to
have the proper notion and character of Authority, in comparison of that power
(which must yet concur with theirs) that is in a whole body or multitude of
men, who have a greater and nearer interest and concernement in those affairs,
over which these few are set as Rulers.

This difference of power does easily appear in comparing the several
interest of Father and child, in his disposement of her in marriage, and her
concurrence with him therein, (although we intend not the parallel between the
things themselves.) A virgin daughter has a power truly and properly so
called, yea and a power ultimately to dissent upon an unsatisfied dislike, yea,
and it must be an act of her consent, that makes the marriage valid: But yet
for her Parents to have a power to guide her in her choice (which she ought in
duty to obey) and a power which must also concur to bestow her, or the
marriage is invalid, this (comparing her intrest (wherein she is more nearly
and intimately concerned) with theirs) does arise to the notion of an
extrinsecall authority; whereas that power is in her is but simply the power of
her own act, in which her own concernement which does intrest her free by an
intrinsecall right. The like difference would appear if we had seen a
Government tempered of an Aristocracy and democracy; in which, suppose the
people have a share, and their actual consent is necessary to all laws and
sentences, etc. whereas a few Nobles that are set over them (whose concernement
is less general) in whom the formal sanction of all should lie, in these it
were Rule and Authority, in that multitude but Power and intrest, and such an
Authority is to be given to a Presbytry of Elders in a particular Congregation,
or else (as we have long since been resolved,) all that is said in the New
Testament about their Rule, and of the peoples Obedience to them, is to be
looked upon but as Metaphors, and to hold no porportion with any substantial
reallity of Rule and Government.

And in this Distribution of power, Christ has had a suitable and due regard
unto the estate and condition of his Church; as now under the New Testament, He
has qualified and dignified it. Under the Old Testament, it was in its
infancy, but it is comparatively come forth of its nonage, and grown up to a
riper age (both as the tenure of the Covenant of grace in difference from the
old, runs in the Prophets, and as Paul to the Galatians expresses it.) They
are therefore more generally able, if visible Saints (which is to be the
subject matter of Churches under the N. Testa^ent) to join with their Guides
and Leaders in judging and discerning what concerns their own and their
Brethrens consciences; And therefore Christ has not now lodged the sole power
of all Church matters solely and entirely in the Churches Tutors and Governors
as of old when it was under age He did: But yet because of their weakness and
unskilfulnes (for the generality of them,) in comparison to those who^ He has
ascended to give gifts unto, on purpose for their guidance and the Government
of the^; He has therefore placed a Rule and Authority in those Officers over
them, not directing only but binding: so as not only nothing (in an ordinary
way of Church government) should be done without them, but not esteemed validly
done unless done by them. And thus by means of this due and golden ballancing
and poysing of power and interest, Authority and Privilege, in Elders and the
Brethren, this Government might neither degenerate into Lordlynesse and
oppression in Rulers over the Flock, as not having all power in their hands
alone; nor yet into Anarchy and confusion in the Flock among themselves; and
so as all things belonging to men's consciences might be, transacted to common
edification, and satisfaction.

For the second, Let it not seem a paradoxe that a Ministerial Doctrinall
Authority should be found severed from that power of Excommunication, to second
it, if not obeyed. Every Minister and Pastor has in himself, alone, a
Ministerial Doctrinall authority over the whole Church that is his charge, and
every person in it, to instruct, rebuke, exhort with all authority: By reason
of which those under him are bound to obey him in the Lord, not only vi
Materiae by virtue of the matter of the commands, in that they are the commands
of Christ (for so he should speak with no more authority then any other man,
yea a Child, who speaking a truth out of the word, should lead us, as the
prophet speaks;) But further, by reason of that Ministerial authority which
Christ has endowed him withal, he is to be looked at by them as an Ordinance
of His, over them and toward them: And yet he alone has not the authority of
Excommunication in him, to enforce his Doctrine if any do gainesay it: Neither
therefore is this authority (as in him considered) to be judged vain and
fruitless and ineffectuall, to draw men to obedience.

Neither let it seem strange, that the power of this Censure, of cutting men
off, and delivering them to Satan (in which the positive part (and indeed the
controversy betwixt us and others,) of Excommunication lies) should be
inseperably linked by Christ unto a particular Congregation, as the proper
native privilege hereof, so as that no Assembly or company of Elders justly
presumed and granted to be more wise and judicious, should assume it to
themselves, or sever the formal power thereof from the particular
Congregations. For though it be hard to give the reason of Christ's
institutions. Yet there is usually in the ways of humane wisdom and reason
something analogous thereunto, which may serve to illustorate, if not to
justify this dispersion of intrests: And so (if we mistake not) there may be
found even of this in the wisdom of our Ancestors, in the constitutions of
this Kingdom; The sentencing to death of any subject in the Kingdom, as it is
the highest civil punishment, so of all other the nearest and exactest
parallel to this in spiritualls, of cutting a soul off and delivering it to
Satan; yet the power of this high judgment is not put into the hands of an
Assembly of Lawyers only, no not of all the Judges themselves, men selected
for wisdom, faithfulness, and gravity, who yet are by office designed to
have an inerest herein; But when they upon any special Cause of difficulty,
for council and direction in such judgments do all meet (as sometimes they
do): Yet they have not power to pronounce this sentence of death upon any man
without the concurrence of a Jury of his Peers, which are of his own rank;
and in Corporations, of such as are Inhabitants of the same place: And with a
Jury of these (men, of themselves not supposed to be so skillful in the Laws,
etc.) two Judges, yea one, with other Justices on the Bench has power to
adjudge and pronounce that which all of them, and all the Lawyers in this
Kingdom together, have not without a Jury. And we of this Nation use to admire
the care and wisdom of our Ancestors herein, and do esteem this privilege of
the Subject in this particular (peculiar to our Nation) as one of the glories
of our Laws, and do make beast of it as such a liberty and security to each
persons life, as (we think) no Nation about us can show the like. And what
should be the reason of such a constitution but this (which in the beginning we
insisted on) the dispersion of power into several hands, which in capital
matters, every man's trial should run through; whereof the one should have
the tie of like common intrest to oblige them unto faithfulness; as the other
should have skill and wisdom to guide them and direct therein.

And besides that intrest that is in any kind of Association, fraternity, yea or
neighborhood, or like wise, that which is from the common case of men alike
subjected to an Authority set over them to sentence them, there is also the
special advantage of an exact knowledge of the fact in the heinous
circumstances thereof, yea, and (in these cases) of the ordinary conversation
of the person offending.

We need not enlarge in the application of this: Although a greater Assembly of
Elders are to be reverenced as more wise and able than a few Elders with their
single Congregations, and accordingly may have an higher doctrinall power, (a
power properly, and peculiarly suited to their Abilities.) in cases of
difficulty, to determine and direct Congregations in their way; yet Christ has
not betrusted them with that power He has done the Congregations; because
they are abstracted from the people: And so one Tribe of men concerned in all
the forementioned respects is wanting, which Christ would have personally
concurring, not by delegation or representation alone, not to the execution
only, but even to the legal sentence also of cutting men off, as in the former
parallel and instance may be observed. Yea, and the higher and the greater the
association of the Presbyteries are, the further are they removed from the
people, and although you might have thereby a greater help, in that Juridicall
knowledge of the Rule, to be proceeded by: yet they are in a further distance
(and disinabled thereby) from that Precise practique knowledge of the Fact and
frame of spirit in the person transgressing. And Cases may be as truly
difficult and hard to be decided from obscurity, and want of light into the
Circumstantiation of the Fact, and person: in which it was committed, and by
him obstinately persisted in; as of the Law it self.

Other considerations of like weight might here be added, if not for the proof
(which we do not here intend) yet the clearing of this particular; As also to
demonstrate that that other way of proceeding by withdrawing communion is most
suitable to the relation, that by Christ's endowment all Churches stand in one
toward another, yea and wherein the least (being a body to Christ) does stand
unto all: But we should too much exceed the bounds of an Epistle, and too long
detayne the Reader from the fruitful and pregnant labors of the worthy
Author.

The God of peace and truth, sanctify all the truths in it, to all those holy
ends (and through his grace much more) which the holy and peaceable spirit of
the Author did intend.

THO: GOODWIN. PHILIP NIGH.

Of the Keys of the Kingdom of HEAVEN, and the Power thereof; according to the
WORD of GOD, etc.
CHAP. I. What the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven be, and what their Power.
THe Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are promised by the Lord Jesus (the head
and King of his Church) unto Peter, Mat. 16.19. To thee (says Christ) will I
give the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven. The words being Allegorical, are therefore somewhat
obscure: and holding forth honor and power in the Church, are therefore
controversall; Prove. 15.1.
For where there is no honor (nor pride to pursue it) there is no contention.
It will not therefore be amiss, for opening of the Doctrine of the Power of
the keys; somewhat to open the words of this Text, whereon that power is
built. Five words require a little clearing.

1. What is here meant by the Kingdom of Heaven? 2. What are the keys of this
kingdom, and the giving of them? 3. What are the acts of these Keys, which are
said to be binding and loosing? 4. What is the object of these acts to be bound
or loosed, here put under a general name, Whatsoever? 5. Who is the subject
recipient of this power, or to whom is this power given? To thee will I give
the Keys, etc.
1. For the first: By the Kingdom of Heaven is here meant both the Kingdom of
Grace, which is the Church; and the Kingdom of Glory, which is in the highest
heavens: For Christ giving to Peter the keys of the kingdom of Heaven,
conveyeth therewith not only this power to bind on earth (that is, in the
Church on earth; for he gave him no power at all to bind in the world; The
kingdom of Christ is not of this world:) but he gives him also this
privilege; That what he bound on earth, should be bound in heaven. And heaven
being distinguished from the Church on earth, must needs be meant the kingdom
of Glory.

2. For the second: What the keys of the kingdom of heaven be?

The keys of the kingdom are the Ordinances which Christ has instituted, to be
administered in his Church; as the preaching of the Word, (which is the opening
and applying of it) also the administering of the Seals and censures: For by the
opening and applying of these, both the gates of the Church here, and of heaven
hereafter, are opened or shut to the sons of men.

And the giving of these keys, implies, that Christ investeth those to whom
he gives them, with a power to open, and shut the gates of both. And this
power lies partly in their spiritual calling (whether it be their office, or
their place and order in the Church:) and partly in the concurse and
cooperation of the Spirit of Christ, accompanying the right dispensation of
these keys; that is, of these Ordinances according to his will.

Moreover, these keys are neither Sword nor Scepter; No Sword, for they convey
not civil power of bodily life and death; nor Scepter, for they convey not
Sovereign or Legislative power over the Church, but stewardly and
ministerial. As the key of the House of David was given to Hilkiah ( Isa.
22.22.) who succeeded Shebna in his office; and his office was (...) over the
house, v. 15. and the same word over the house, is translated steward in the
house, Genesis 43.19.

3. Touching the third thing, what are the acts of these keys?

The acts of these keys, are said here to be binding and loosing, which are not
the proper acts of material keys; for their acts be opening and shutting,
which argues the keys here spoken of be not material keys, but metaphorical;
and y t being keys, they have a power also of opening and shutting: for Christ
who has the sovereign power of these keys, he is said to have the key of
David, to open, and no man to shut; to shut, and no man to open, Rev. 3.7.
which implies, that these keys of Christ's Kingdom, have such a power of
opening and shutting, as that they do thereby, bind and loose, retain and
remit; in opening, they loose, and remit; in shutting they bind, and retain:
which will more appear in opening the fourth point.

4. The fourth point then is, What is the subject to be bound and loosed?

The Text in Mat. 16.9. says, whatsoever, which reaches not (so far as the
Papists would stretch it) to whatsoever oaths, or covenants, or contracts, or
counsels, or laws; as if whatsoever oaths of allegiance, covenants of lease
or marriage, etc. the Pope ratifieth or dissolveth on earth, should be ratified
or dissolved in heaven: No, this is not the key of the kingdom of heaven, but
the key of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9.1. But this word whatsoever, is here
put in the Neuter Gender, (not in the Masculine, whomsoever) to imply both
things and persons; Things, as sins; Persons, as those that commit them. For so
when our Savior speaks of the same acts of the same keys ( Ioh. 20.21.) he
explaineth himself thus: Whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted, and
whose sins soever ye retain, they are retained. Whatsoever you bind on earth,
is as much therefore, as whose sins soever you retain on earth; and whatsoever
you loose on earth, is as much as whose sins soever you loose on earth.

Now this binding and loosing of whatsoever sins, in whosever commit them, is
partly in the conscience of the sinner, and partly in his outward estate in the
Church, which is wont to be expressed in other terms, either in foro interiori,
or in foro exteriori. As when in the dispensation of the Ordinances of God, a
sinner is convinced to lie under the guilt of sin, then his sin is retained,
his conscience is bound under the guilt of it, and himself bound under some
Church-censure, according to the quality and desert of his offense; and if his
sin be the more heinous, himself is shut out from the communion of the Church:
But when a sinner repents of his sin, and confesses it before the Lord, and
(if it be known) before his people also, and then in the ministry of the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Gospel, his sin is remitted, and his conscience
loosed from the guilt of it, and himself has open and free entrance, both unto
the promise of the Gospel, and into the gates of the holy communion of the
Church.

5. The fifth point to be explained, is, To whom is this power of the keys
given? The Text says, To thee Simon Peter, the son of Jona, whom Christ
blesses, and pronounces blessed upon his holy confession of Christ, the Son
of the living God, and upon the same occasion promises both to use him and his
confession, as an Instrument to lay the foundation of his Church; and also to
give him the keys of his Church, for the well ordering and governing of it. But
it has proved abusie Question, How Peter is to be considered in receiving this
power of the keys, whether as an Apostle, or as an Elder, (for an Elder also he
was, 1 Pet. 5.1.) or as a Believer professing his faith before the Lord Jesus,
and his fellow Brethren. Now because we are as well studious of peace, as of
truth, we will not lean to one of these interpretations, more than to
another. Take any of them, it will not hinder our purpose in this ensuing
Discourse, though (to speak ingenuously and without offense what we conceive)
the sense of the words will be most full, if all the several considerations be
taken jointly together. Take Peter considered not only as an Apostle, but an
Elder also, yea, and a Believer too, professing his faith, all may well stand
together. For there is a different power given to all these, to an Apostle, to
an Elder, to a Believer, and Peter was all these, and received all the power,
which was given by Christ to any of these, or to all of these together. For as
the Father sent Christ, so Christ sent Peter (as well as any Apostle) cum
amplitudine, and plenitudine potestatis, (so far as either any Church Officer,
or the whole Church it self, was capable of it) John 20.21. So that Austin did
not mistake when he said Peter received the keys in the name of the Church.
Nevertheless, we from this place in Mat. 16.19. will challenge no further
power, either to the Presbytery, or to the Fraternity of the Church, then is
more expressly granted to them in other Scriptures. Now in other Scriptures it
appears; First, That Christ gave the power of retaining or remitting of sins
(that is, the power of binding and loosing, the whole power of the keys) to all
the Apostles as well as to Peter, Joh. 20.21.23. Secondly, It appears also
that the Apostles commended the rule and government of every particular Church
to the Elders (the Presbytery) of that Church, Heb. 13.17. 1 Timothy 5.17. And
therefore Christ gave the power of the Keys to them also. Thirdly, It appears
farther that Christ gave the power of the keys to the Body likewise of the
Church, even to the Fraternity with the Presbytery. For the Lord Jesus
communicates the power of binding and loosing, to the Apostles, or Elders,
together with the whole Church, when they are met in his Name, and agree
together in the censure of an offender, Mat. 18.17, 18. If an offender (says
he) neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen or a
Publican, that is, let him be excommunicated. Which censure administered by
them, with the whole Church, he ratifieth with this promise of the power of the
keys, Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven. In which place, howsoever there be some difference between Classical
and Congregationall Divines, what should be meant by the Church (Tell the
Church) whether the Presbytery or the Congregation: yet all agree in this (and
it is agreement in the truth, which we seek for) That no offender is to be
excommunicated, but with some concurse of the Congregation, at least by way 1.
Of consent to the sentence. 2. Of actual execution of it by withdrawing
themselves from the offender so convicted and censured. Now this consent and
concurse of the Congregation, which is requisite to the power and validity of
the censure, we conceive is some part of the exercise of the power of the keys.

So that when Christ said to Peter, To thee will I give the keys of the
kingdom of heaven: If Peter then received the whole power of the keys, then he
stood in the room and name of all such, as have received any part of the power
of the keys, whether Apostles, or Elders, or Churches. Or if he stood in the
room of an Apostle only, yet that hinders not, but that as he there received
the power of an Apostle, so the rest of the Apostles received the same power,
either there or elsewhere: and the Presbytery of each Church received, if not
there, yet elsewhere, the power belonging to their office: and in like sort
each Church or Congregation of professed Believers, received that portion also
of Church Power which belonged to them.

CHAP. II. Of the Distribution of the Keys, and their power, or of the several
sorts thereof.
THe ordinary Distribution of the keys is wont to be thus delivered. There is
clavis 1. Scientiae, A key of knowledge, and a clavis 2. Potestatis, key of
power:
and the key of power is 1. Ordinis, Either a key of order, or a key of 2.
Jurisdictionis, Jurisdiction.


This distribution though it go for current both amongst Protestants and
Papists, yet we crave leave to express, what in it does not fully satisfy
us. Four things in it seem defective to us: 1. That any key of the kingdom
of heaven should be left without power. For here in this distribution, the key
of knowledge is contradistinguished from a key of power.

2. There is a real defect in omitting an integrall part of the keys, which is
that key of power or liberty, which belongs to the Church it self. But no
marvel, though the Popish Clergy omitted it, who have oppressed all
Church-libertie: and Protestant Churches, having recovered the liberty of
preaching the Gospel, and ministry of the Sacraments, have been well satisfied
therewith, so as some of them have looked no farther, nor so much as discerned
their defect of Church Power, or liberty due unto them in point of discipline:
and others finding themselves wronged in withholding a key or power, which
belongs to them, have wrested to themselves an undue power, which belongs not
to them, the key of authority.

3. There is another defect in the Distribution, in dividing the key of order
from the key of Jurisdiction: of purpose to make way for the power of
Chancellours and Commissaries in foro exteriori: who though they want the key
of order, (having never entered into holy orders, as they are called, or at most
into the order of Deacons only, whereof our Lord spoke nothing touching
Jurisdiction) yet they have been invested with Jurisdiction, yea, and more then
ministerial authority, even above those Elders who labor in word and
doctrine: By this sacrilegious breach of order (which has been as it were the
breaking of the Files and Ranks in an Army) Satan has routed and ruined a
great part of the liberty and purity of Churches, and of all the Ordinances
of Christ in them.

4. A fourth defect (but yet the least, which we observe in this distribution)
is, that order is appropriated to the Officers of the Church only. For though
we be far from allowing that sacrilegious usurpation of the Ministers office,
which we hear of (to our grief) to be practiced in some places, that private
Christians ordinarily take upon them to preach the Gospel publicly, and to
minister Sacraments: Yet we put a difference between Office and Order. Office
we look at as peculiar to those, who are set apart for some peculiar function
in the Church, who are either Elders or Deacons. But order (speaking of
Church Order properly taken) is common to all the members of the Church,
whether Officers or private brethren. There is an order as well in them that
are subject, as in them that rule. There is a (...) as well (...), as (...).
The maid in Athenaeus is said (...), as well as her Mistress. Yet if any man
be willing to make office and order aequipollent, we will not contend about
words, so there be no erroneous apprehension wrapped into the matter.

To come therefore to such a distribution of the keys as is more suitable to
Scripture phrase. For it becomes true Israelites rather to speak the language
of Canaan, then the language of Ashdod.

When Paul beheld, and rejoiced to behold, how the Church of Colosse had
received the Lord Jesus, and walked in him; he summeth up all their Church
estate, to wit, their beauty and power, in these two, Faith and order, Col.
2.5, 6.

There is therefore a key of Faith, and a key of Order.

The key of Faith, is the same which the Lord Jesus calls the key of
knowledge, Luke 11.52. and which he complains, the Lawyers had taken away.
Now that key of knowledge Christ speaks of, was such, that if it had not been
taken away, they that had it, had power by it to enter into the kingdom of
heaven themselves, and it may be to open the door to others, to enter also.
Now such a knowledge, whereby a man has power to enter into heaven, is only
faith, which is often therefore called knowledge, as Isa. 53.11. By the
knowledge of him shall my righteous servant justify many: that is, by the
faith of Christ. And Ioh. 17.3. This is eternal life to know thee: that is, to
believe on thee. This key therefore, the key of knowledge, (saving knowledge)
or which is all one, the key of faith, is common to all believers. A faithful
soul knowing the Scriptures, and Christ in them, receives Christ, and enters
through him into the kingdom of heaven, both here, and hereafter. Here he
enters into a state of grace through faith Heb. 4.3.
: and by the profession of his faith, he enters also into the fellowship of
the Church (which is the kingdom of heaven upon earth:) and by the same faith,
as he believes to justification, so he makes confession to salvation, which
is perfected in the kingdom of glory. Romans 10.10.

The key of Order is the power whereby every member of the Church walks
orderly himself, according to his place in the Church, and helps his
brethren, to walk orderly also.

It was that which the Apostles and Elders called upon Paul, so to carry
himself before the Jews in the Temple, that he might make it appear to all men
that he walked orderly. ( Act. 21.18.24.) Orderly, to wit, according to the
orders of the Jewish Church, with whom he then conversed. And it was the
commandment which Paul gave to the whole Church of Thessalonica, and to all the
members of it, to withdraw themselves from every brother that walks
disorderly, 2 These. 3.6. This their withdrawing from him that walked
disorderly, was the exercise of their key of order. And it was a like exercise
of the same key of order, when he requires the Brethren to warn the unruly,
which is, (in the original) the same word, to admonish the disorderly: 1 These.
5.14. And this key of order (to wit, order understood in this sense) is common
to all the members of the Church, whether Elders or brethren.

Furthermore, of Order there be two keys: a key of power, or interest: And the
key of Authority or Rule. The first of these is termed in the Scriptures,
Liberty: So distinguishing it from that part of Rule and Authority in the
officers of the Church. We speak not here of that spiritual liberty, whether
of impunitie, whereby the children of God are set free by the blood of Christ
from Satan, hell, bondage of sin, curse of the Moral Law, and service of the
Ceremonial Law: nor of immunitie whereby we have power to be called the sons
of God, to come boldly unto the throne of grace in prayer, and as heirs of
glory, to look for our inheritance in light: but of that external liberty, or
interest which Christ also has purchased for his people, as liberty to enter
into the fellowship of his Church, liberty to choose and call well gifted men
to office in that his Church: liberty to partake in Sacraments, or seals of
the Covenant of the Churchs liberty and interest to join with officers in the
due censure of offenders, and the like. This liberty and the acts thereof, are
often exemplified in the Acts of the Apostles: and the Apostle Paul calls it
expressly by the name of liberty. Brethren (says he) you have been called unto
LIBERTY, only use not your liberty as an occasion to the flesh, but by love
serve one another. Galath. 5.13. that the Apostle by that liberty means
Church liberty or power in ordering Church affairs, will evidently appear,
if we consult with the context, rather then with Commenters. For the Apostle
having spent the former part of the Epistle, partly in the confirmation of his
calling, partly in disputation against justification by the works of the Law,
to the end of v. 8. of Chap. 5. in the ninth Verse he descends not to exhort
unto bonos mores in general, (as usually Commenters take it) but to instruct
in Church Discipline, in which he gives three or four directions to the tenth
v. of Chap. 6.

1 Touching the censure of those corrupt Teachers; who had perverted and
troubled them with that corrupt Doctrine of justification by works. Chap. 5.
ver. 9. to the end of the Chapter.

2. Touching the gentle admonition and restoring of a brother fallen by
infirmity, Chap. 6. ver. 1. to 5.

3. Touching the maintenance of their Ministers, ver. 6, 7, 8. and beneficence
to others, ver. 9, 10.

Touching the first, the censure of their corrupt teachers. 1 He lays for the
ground of it (that which himself gave for the ground of the excommunication of
the incestuous Corinth, 1 Cor. 5.6.) A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
verse. 9. 2 He presumes the Church will be of the same mind with him, and
concur in the censure of him that troubled them with corrupt doctrine, v. 10.
(from fellowship with which corrupt doctrine he clears himself, v. 11.) 3 He
proceeds to declare, what censure he wishes might be dispensed against him,
and the rest of those corrupt teachers. I would (says he) they were even cut
off that trouble you: cut off, to wit, by excommunication, ver. 12. Now lest it
should be objected by the brethren of the Church: But what power have we to cut
them off? The Apostle answers, they have a power and liberty (to wit, to
join with the sounder part of the Presbytery, in casting them out, or cutting
them off:) For brethren (says he) you are called unto liberty.

If it should be further objected, Yea, but give the people this power and
liberty in some cases, either to cast off their teachers, or to cut them off,
the people will soon take advantage to abuse this liberty unto much carnal
licentiousness. The Apostle preventeth that with a word of wholesome counsel:
Brethren (says he) you have been called unto liberty: only use not your
liberty as an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another, v. 13. and
thereupon seasonably pursues this counsel with a caveat to beware of abusing
this liberty to carnal contention, (an usual disease of popular liberty) and
withal dehorteth them from all other fruits of the flesh, to the end of the
Chapter.

Evident therefore it is, that there is a key of power or liberty given to the
Church (to the Brethren with the Elders) as to open a door of entrance to the
Ministers calling; so to shut the door of entrance against them in some cases,
as when through corrupt and pernicious doctrine, they turn from Shepherds to
become ravenous wolves.

Having spoken then of that first key of order, namely, the key of power, (in a
more large sense) or liberty in the Church, there remains the other key of
order, which is the key of Authority or of Rule, in a more strict sense, which
is in the Elders of the Church.

Authority is a moral power, in a superior order (or state) binding or
releasing an inferious in point of subjection.

This key when it was promised to Peter, Matthew. 16.19. and given to him with
the rest of the Apostles, Ioh. 20.23. they thereby had power to bind and loose:
and it is the same Authority which is given to their successors the Elders
whereby they are called to feed and rule the Church of God, as the Apostles had
done before them. Act. 20.28. And indeed by opening and applying the Law (the
spirit of bondage accompanying the same) they bind sinners under the curse, and
their consciences under guilt of sin, and fear of wrath, and shut the kingdom
of heaven against them. And by opening and applying the Gospel (the Spirit of
Adoption accompanying the same) they remit sin, and loose the consciences of
believing repenting souls from guilt of sin, and open to them the doors of
heaven. By virtue of this key, as they preach with all authority, not only
the doctrine of the Law, but also the Covenant of the Gospel; so they
administer the seals thereof, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. By virtue also of
this key, they with the Church do bind an obstinate offender under
excommunication, Matthew. 18.17, 18. and release, and forgive him upon his
repentance. 2 Cor. 2.7.

This Distribution of the keys, and so of spiritual power, in the things of
Christ's kingdom we have received from the Scripture. But if any men out of love
to Antiquity, do rather affect to keep to the terms of the former more ancient
Distribution (as there be who are as loath to change Antiquos terminos
verborum, as agrorum) we would not stick upon the words rightly explained, out
of desire both to judge and speak the same things with fellow-brethren. Only
then let them allow some spiritual power to the key of knowledge, though not
Church Power. And in Church power let them put in as well a key of liberty,
that is, a power and privilege of interest, as a key of Authority. And by
their key of order, as they do understand the key of office, so let them not
divide from it the key of jurisdiction (for Christ has given no jurisdiction,
but to whom he has given office) and so we willingly consent with them.

CHAP. III. Of the subject of the power of the keys, to whom they are
committed: and first of the key of knowledge, and Order.
AS the keys of the kingdom of heaven be diverse, so are the subjects to whom
they are committed, diverse: as in the natural body, diversity of functions
belongs to diversity of members.

1. The key of knowledge (or which is all one, the key of Faith) belongs to
all the faithful, whether joined to any particular Church or no. As in the
primitive times, men of grown years were first called and converted to the
faith, before they were received into the Church: And even now an Indian or
Pagan may not be received into the Church, till he have first received the
faith, and have made profession of it before the Lord, and the Church: which
argues, that the key of knowledge is given not only to the Church, but to
some before they enter into the Church. And yet to Christians for the Churches
sake: that they who receive this grace of faith, by it may receive Christ and
his benefits, and therewith may receive also this privilege, to find an open
door set before them, to enter into the fellowship of the Church.

2. The key of order (speaking as we do of Church order, as Paul does, Col.
2.5.) belongs to all such, who are in Church order, whether Elders or
Brethren. For though Elders be in a superior order, by reason of their office,
yet the brethren (over whom the Elders are made Overseers and Rulers) they
stand also in an order, even in orderly subjection, according to the order of
the Gospel. It is true, every faithful soul that has received a key of
knowledge, is bound to watch over his neighbors soul, as his own, and to
admonish him of his sin, unless he be a scorner: but this he does, Non ratione
ordinis, sed intuitu charitatis: not by virtue of a state of order which he is
in (till in Church fellowship) but as of common Christian love and charity.
But every faithful Christian who stands in Church order is bound to do the
same, as well respectu ordinis, as intuitu charitatis, by virtue of that royal
Law, not only of love, but of Church order, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. whereby if
his brother who offended him, do not hearken to his conviction and admonition,
he is then according to order, to proceed further, taking one or two with him:
and if the offender refuse to hear them also, then he is by order to tell the
Church, and afterward walk toward him, as God shall direct the Church to
order it.

CHAP. IIII. Of the subject to whom the key of Church privilege, power, or
Liberty is given.
THis key is given to the Brethren of the Church: for so says the Apostle, in
Gal. 5.13. (in the place quoted and opened before) Brethren, you have been
called to liberty.

And indeed, as it is the (...), and (...) of a Commonwealth, the right and
due establishment and ballancing of the liberties or privileges of the people
(which is in a true sense, may be called a power) and the authority of the
Magistrate: so it is the safety of Church estate, the right and due settling
and ordering of the holy power of the privileges and liberties of the
Brethren, and the ministerial authority of the Elders. The Gospel allows no
Church authority (or rule properly so called) to the Brethren, but reserveth
that wholly to the Elders; and yet preventeth the tyranny and oligarchy, and
exorbitancy of the Elders, by the large and firm establishment of the liberties
of the Brethren, which arises to a power in them. Bucers axiom is here
notable; Potestaspenes omnem Ecclesiamest; Authoritas ministerii penes
Presbyteros and Episcopos. In Mat. 16.19. where Potestas, or power being
contradistinguished from Authoritas, Authority is nothing else but a liberty or
privilege.

The liberties of the Brethren, or of the Church consisting of them, are many
and great.

1. The Church of Brethren has the power, privileges and liberty to choose
their officers. In the choice of an Apostle in to the place of Judas, the
people went as far as humane vote and suffrage could go. Out of 120. persons, (
v. 15.) they chose out, and presented two; out of which two (because an Apostle
was to be designed immediately by God) God by lot chose one; And yet this one
so chosen of God, (...), communibus omnium fuffragiis inter duodecim Apostolos
allectus est, v. 26. was counted amongst the Apostles by the common suffrages
of them all. And this place Cyprian presses amongst others, to confirm the
power, (that is (...), or privilege, or liberty) of the people in choosing or
refusing their Ministers. Plebs Christiana (says he) vel maxim potestatem
habet, vel dignos sacerdotes eligendi, ves indignos recusandi, Epistol. 4. lib.
1.

The like, or greater liberty is generally approved by the best of our Divines
(studious of Reformation) from Act. 14.23. They ordained them Elders, chosen by
lifting up of hands.

The same power is clearly expressed in the choice of Deacons, Act. 6.3.5, 6.
The Apostles did not choose the Deacons, but called the multitude together, and
said unto them, Brethren, look you out seven men amongst you whom we may
appoint over this business: And the saying pleased the whole multitude, and
they chose Stephen, etc.

2. It is a privilege, or a liberty the Church has received, to send forth
one or more of their Elders, as the public service of Christ and of the Church
may require. Thus Epaphroditus was a Messenger or Apostle of the Church of
Philippi unto Paul, Phil. 2.25.

3. The Brethren of the Church have power and liberty of propounding any just
exception against such as offer themselves to be admitted unto their communion,
or unto the seals of it: Hence Saul, when he offered himself to the communion
of the Church at Jerusalem was not at first admitted thereto, upon an exception
taken against him by the Disciples till that exception was removed, Act. 9.26,
27. and Peter did not admit the family of Cornelius to Baptism, till he had
inquired of the Brethren, if any of them had any exception against it, Act.
10.47.

4. As the Brethren have a power of order, and the privilege to expostulate
with their Brethren, in case of private scandals, according to the rule, Mat.
18.15, 16. So in case of public scandal, the whole Church of Brethren have
power and privilege to join with the Elders, in inquiring, hearing, judging of
public scandals; so as to bind notorious offenders and impenitents under
censure, and to forgive the repentant: For when Christ commands a brother, in
case that offense cannot be healed privately, then to tell the Church, Mat.
18.17. it necessarily implies that the Church must hear him, and inquire into
the offense complained of, and judge of the offense as they find it upon
inquiry. When the Brethren that were of the circumcision expostulated with
Peter about his communion with Cornelius, and his uncircumcised family, Peter
did not reject them, and their complaint against him, as transgressing the
bounds of their just power and privilege, but readily addressed himself to
give satisfaction to them all, Act. 1, 1, 2 to 18. The Brethren of the Church
of Corinth being gathered together with their Elders, in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and with his power, did deliver the incestuous person to Satan, 1 Cor.
5.4, 5. And Paul reproves them all, Brethren as well as Elders, that they had
no sooner put him away from amongst them, v. 2. and expressly he allows to
them all power to judge them that are within, v. 22. Yea, and from thence
argues, in all the Saints, even in the meanest of the Saints, and ability to
judge between brethren, in the things of this life, as those that have received
such a spirit of discerning from Christ, by which they shall one day judge the
world, even Angels, so in the next Chapter, the 6. of that 1 Cor. 1.2, 3, 4, 5.
And the same Brethren of the same Church, as well as the Elders, he entreats
to forgive the same incestuous Corinthian, upon his repentance, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.

If it be said, to judge is an act of rule; and to be Rulers of the Church, is
not given to all the Brethren, but to the Elders only: Answ. All judgment is
not an act of authority or rule, for there is a judgment of discretion, by way
of privilege, as well as of authority by way of sentence: That of discretion
is common to all the Brethren, as well as that of authority belongs to the
Presbytery of that Church. In England, the Jury by their verdict, as well as
the Judge by his sentence, do both of them judge the same malefactor; yet in
the Jury their verdict is but an act of their popular liberty: In the Judge it
is an act of his judicial authority.

If it be demanded, What difference is there between these two?

The answer is ready, Great is the difference: for though the Jury have given
up their judgment and verdict, yet the malefactor is not thereupon legally
condemned, much less executed, but upon the sentence of the Judge: In like
sort here, though the Brethren of the Church do with one accord give up their
vote and judgment for the censure of an offender, yet he is not thereby
censured, till upon the sentence of the Presbytery.

If it be said again; Yea, but it is an act of authority to bind and loose,
and the power to bind and loose, Christ gave to the whole Church, Mat. 18.18.

Answ. The whole Church may be said to bind and loose, in that the Brethren
consent, and concur with the Elders, both before the Censure in discerning it
to be just and equal, and in declaring their discernment, by lifting up of
their hands, or by silence: and after the censure, in rejecting the offender
censured from their wonted Communion. And yet their discerning or approving of
the justice of the censure beforehand, is not a preventing of the Elders in
their work. For the Elders before that have not only privately examined the
offender and his offense, and the proofs thereof, to prepare the matter and
ripen it for the Churches cognizance: but do also publicly revise the heads
of all the material passages thereof before the Church: and do withal
declare to the Church the counsel and will of God therein, that they may
rightly discern and approve what censure the Lord requires to be administered
in such a case. So that the peoples discerning and approving the justice of the
censure before it be administered, arises from the Elders former instruction
and direction of them therein: Whereunto the people give consent, in obedience
to the will and rule of Christ. Hence is that speech of the Apostle; We have
in readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your OBEDIENCE IS FVLFILLED, 2
Cor. 10.6. The Apostles revenge of disobedience by way of reproof in
preaching, does not follow the peoples obedience, but proceeds whether the
people obey it or no. It was therefore their revenge of disobedience by way of
censure in discipline, which they had in readiness, when the obedience of the
Church is fulfilled in discerning and approving the Equity of the Censure,
which the Apostles or Elders have declared to them from the Word.

This power or privilege of the Church in dealing in this sort with a
scandalous offender, may not be limited only to a private brother offending,
but may reach also to an offensive Elder. For (as has been touched already) it
is plain that the Brethren of the Circumcision, supposing Peter to have given
an offense in eating with men uncircumcised, they openly expostulated with him
about his offense: and he stood not with them upon terms of his Apostleship,
much less of his Eldership, but willingly submitted himself to give
satisfaction to them all, Act. 11.2. to 18. And Paul writes to the Church of
Colosse, to deal with Archippus, warning him to see to the fulfilling of his
Ministry, Col. 4.17. And very pregnant is his direction to the Galatians, for
their proceeding to the utmost with their corrupt and scandalous false
Teachers. I would (says he) they were even cut off that trouble you; And that
upon this very ground of their liberty, Gal. 5.12, 13. as has been opened
above in Chap. 2.

But whether the Church has power or liberty for proceeding to the utmost
censure of their whole Presbytery, is a Question of more difficulty.

For 1. It cannot well be conceived that the whole Presbytery should be
proceeded against, but that by reason of their strong influence into the hearts
of many of the Brethren, a strong party of the Brethren will be ready to side
with them: and in case of finding dissension and opposition, the Church ought
not to proceed without consulting with the Synod. As when there arose
dissension in the Church at Antioch, and SIDING, (or as the word is (...)) they
sent up to the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, who in way of Synod determined
the business, Act. 15.2. to 23. A precedent and pattern of due Church
proceedings in case of dissension, when some take with one side, some with
another. But of that more here after.

2. Excommunication is one of the highest acts of Rule in the Church, and
therefore cannot be performed but by some Rulers. Now where all the Elders are
culpable, there be no Rulers left in that Church to censure them. As therefore
the Presbytery cannot excommunicate the whole Church, (though Apostate) for
they must tell the Church, and join with the Church in that Censure: so
neither can the Church excommunicate the whole Presbytery, because they have
not received from Christ an office of rule, without their Officers.

If it be said, the twentie-foure Elders (who represent the private members of
the Church, as the four living Creatures do the four Officers) had all of
them Crowns upon their heads, and sat upon thrones ( Rev. 4.4.) which are
signs of regal authority: The answer is, The crowns and thrones argue them
to be Kings, no more then their white rayments argue them to be Priests, ver.
4. but neither Priests nor Kings by office, but by liberty to perform like
spiritual duties by grace, which the other do by grace and office: As Priests
they offer up spiritual sacrifices: and as Kings they rule their lusts,
passions, themselves, and their families, yea, the world and Church also after
a sort: the world, by improving it to spiritual advantage: and the Church, by
appointing their own Officers, and likewise in censuring their offenders, not
only by their officers, (which is as much as Kings are wont to do) but also
by their own royal assent, which Kings are not wont to do, but only in the
execution of Nobles.

But nevertheless, though the Church want authority to excommunicate their
Presbytery, yet they want not liberty to withdraw from them: For so Paul
instructs and beseeches the Church of Rome (whom the holy Ghost foresaw
would most stand in need of this counsel) to make use of this liberty: I
beseech you (says he) mark such as cause divisions and offenses, contrary to
the DOCTRINE you have received, (...), WITHDRAW from them.

So then, by the agitation of this objection, there appear two liberties of
the Church more to be added to the former.

One is this (which is the fifth liberty in members) the Church has liberty
in case of dissension amongst themselves to resort to a Synod, Act. 15.1, 2.
Where also it appears the Brethren enjoyed this liberty, to dispute their
doubts till they were satisfied, ver. 7.12. to join with the Apostles and
Elders in the definitive sentence, and in the promulgation of the same, ver.
22, 23.

The sixth Liberty of the Church is, To withdraw from the communion of those,
whom they want authority to excommunicate. For as they set up the Presbytery,
by professing their subjection to them in the Lord: so they avoid them by
professed withdrawing their subjection from them according to God.

A seventh and last liberty of the Church, is, Liberty of communion with
other Churches. Communion we say: for it is a great Liberty, that no
particular Church stands in subjection to another particular Church, no, not
to a Cathedral Church: but that all the Churches enjoy mutual brotherly
communion amongst themselves: which communion is mutually exercised amongst
them seven ways, which for brevitie and memory sake, we sum up in seven
words. 1. By way of Participation. 2. Of Recommendation. 3. Of Consultation. 4.
Of Congregation into a Synod. 5. Of Contribution. 6. Of Admonition. 7. Of
Propagation or Multiplication of Churches.

1. By way of Participation, the members of one Church, occasionally coming to
another Church, where the Lords Supper comes to be administered, are willingly
admitted to partake with them at the Lords Supper, in case that neither
themselves, nor the Churches from whence they came, do lie under any public
offense. For we receive the Lords Supper, not only as a Seal of our
communion with the Lord Jesus, and with his members in our own Church, but
also in all the Churches of the Saints.

2. By way of Recommendation; Letters are sent from one Church to another,
recommending to their watchfulness and communion, any of their members, who by
occasion of business, are for a time to reside amongst them. As Paul sent
Letters of Recommendation to the Church of Rome, in the behalf of Phoebe, a
Deaconesse of the Church at Cenchrea, Romans 16.1, 2. And of these kind of
Letters he speaks to the Church of Coriuth also, though not as needful to
himself (who was well known to them) yet for others, 2 Cor. 3.1.

But if a member of one Church have just occasion to remove himself, and his
family, to take up his settled habitation in another Church, then the Letters
written by the Church in his behalf, do recommend him to their perpetual
watchfulness and communion. And if the other church have no just cause to
refuse him, they of his own church do by those letters wholly dismiss him from
themselves; whereupon the letters (for distinction sake) are called letters of
dismission; which indeed do not differ from the other, but in the durance of
the recommendation, the one recommending him for a time, the other for ever.

3. By way of consultation, one Church has liberty of communicating with
another to require their judgment and counsel, touching any persons or cause,
wherewith they may be better acquainted then themselves. Thus the Church of
Antioch by their messengers consulted with the Church at Jerusalem, touching
the necessity of circumcision, Act. 15.3. although the consultation brought
forth a further effect of communion with Churches; to wit, their Congregation
into a Synod. Which is the fourth way of communion of Churches: All of the
Churches have the like liberty of sending their messengers to debate and
determine in a Synod, such matters as do concern them all; As the Church of
Antioch sent messengers to Jerusalem for resolution and satisfaction in a doubt
that troubled them: the like liberty by proportion might any other Church have
taken; yea, many Churches together; yea, all the Churches in the world, in any
case that might concern them all. What authority these Synods have received,
and may put forth, will come to be considered in the sequel.

A fifth way of communion of Churches is, the liberty of giving and receiving
mutual supplies and succors one from another. The Church of Jerusalem
communicated to the Churches of the Gentiles, their spiritual treasures of
gifts of Grace; and the Churches of the Gentiles ministered back again to them,
liberal oblations of outward beneficence, Romans 15.26, 27. Act. 11.29, 30. When
the Church of Antioch abounds with more variety of spiritual gifted men then
the state of their own Church stood in need of; they fasted and prayed; as for
other ends, so for the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom in the improvement of
them. And the Holy Ghost opened them a door for the succor of many countries
about them, by the sending forth of some of them, Act. 13.1, 2, 3.

A sixth way of communion of Churches is by way of mutual admonition, when a
public offense is found amongst any of them: For as Paul had liberty to
admonish Peter before the whole Church at Antioch, when he saw him walk not
with a right foot (and yet Paul had no authority over Peter, but only both of
them had equal mutual interest one in another) Gal. 2.11. to 14. So by the
same proportion, one Church has liberty to admonish another, though they be
both of them of equal authority; seeing one Church has as much interest in
another, as one Apostle in another. And if by the royal law of love, one
Brother has liberty to admonish his brother in the same Church, ( Mat. 18.15,
16.) then by the same rule of brotherly love and mutual watchfulness one
Church has power to admonish another, in faithfulness to the Lord, and unto
them. The Church in the Canticles took care not only for her own members, but
for her little sister, which she thought had no breast; yea, and consulteth
with other churches what to do for her, Cant. 8.8. And would she not then have
taken like care, in case their little sister having breasts, her breasts had
been distempered, and given corrupt matter in stead of milk?

A seventh way of communion of churches may be by way of propagation and
multiplication of churches: As when a particular Church of Christ shall grow so
full of members, as all of them cannot hear the voice of their Ministers; then
as an Hive full of Bees swarmeth forth, so is the church occasioned to send
forth a sufficient number of her members, fit to enter into a church state, and
to carrry along church-work amongst themselves. And for that end they either
send forth some one or other of their Elders with them, or direct them where to
procure such to come unto them. The like course is wont to be taken, when
sundry Christians coming over from one country to another; such as are come
over first, and are themselves full of company, direct those that come after
them, and assist them in like sort, in the combination of themselves into
Church order, according to the rule of the Gospel. Though the Apostles be dead,
whose office it was to plant and gather and multiply Churches; yet the work is
not dead, but the same power of the keys is left with the Churches in common,
and with each particular church for her part, according to their measure, to
propagate and enlarge the kingdom of Christ (as God shall give opportunity)
throughout all generations.

CHAP. V. Of the subject to whom the key of Authority is committed.
THe key of Authority or Rule, is committed to the Elders of the Church, and
so the act of Rule is made the proper act of their office. The Elders that rule
well, etc. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.7.17.

The special acts of this rule are many.

The first and principal is that which the Elders who labor in the Word and
Doctrine, are chiefly to attend unto, that is, the preaching of the Word with
all Authority, and that which is annexed thereto, the administration of the
Sacraments or seals. Speak, rebuke and exhort (says Paul to Titus) with all
authority. Tit. 2.15. And that the administration of the seals is annexed
thereto, is plain from Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go (says Christ to the Apostles) make
Disciples, and baptize them, etc.

If it be objected, private members may all of them prophecy publicly, 1
Cor. 14 31. and therefore also baptize: and so this act of Authority is not
peculiar to preaching Elders.

Ans. 1. The place in the Corinths does not speak of ordinary private members,
but of men furnished with extraordinary gifts. Kings at the time of their first
Coronation give many extraordinary large gifts, which they do not daily pour
out in like sort in their ordinary government. Christ soon after his ascenfion
poured out a larger measure of his spirit then in times succeeding. The members
of the Church of Corinth (as of many other in those primitive times) were
enriched with all knowledge, and in all utterance. I Cor. 1.5. And the same
persons that had the gift of prophecy in the Church of Corinth, had also the
gift of tongues, which put upon the Apostle a necessity to take them off from
their frequent speaking with tongues, by preferring prophecy before it, 1 Cor.
14.2. to 24. So that though all they might prophecy (as having extraordinary
gifts for it) yet the like liberty is not allowed to them that want the like
gifts. In the Church of Israel, none besides the Priests and Levites, did
ordinarily prophecy, either in the Temple, or in the Synagogues, unless they
were either furnished with extraordinatie gifts of prophecy, (as the Prophets
of Israel) or were set apart, and trained up, to prepare for such a calling, as
the sons of the Prophets. When Amos was forbidden by the high Priest of Bethel,
to prophecy at Bethel, Amos does not allege nor plead the liberty of any
Israelite to prophecy in the holy Assemblies, but alleges only his
extraordinary calling, Amos 7.14, 15. It appears also that the sons of the
Prophets, that is, men set apart, and trained up to prepare for that calling,
were allowed the like liberty, 1 Samuel 19.20.

Answ. 2. But neither the sons of the Prophets, nor the Prophets themselves,
were wont to offer sacrifices in Israel, (except Samuel and Eliah by special
direction) nor did the extraordinary Prophets in Corinth take upon them to
administer Sacraments.

If any reply, That if the Prophets in the Church at Corinth had been endued
with extraordinary gists of prophefie, they had not been subject to the
judgment of the Prophets, which these are directed to be. 1 Cor. 14.22.

Ans. It follows not. For the people of God were to examine all prophesies,
by the Law and testimony, and not to receive them but according to that rule.
Psalm. 8.20. Yea, and Paul himself refers all his Doctrine to the Law and
Prophets. Act. 26.22. And the Bereans are commended for examining Paul's
doctrine according to the Scriptures. Act. 17.11, 12.

2. A second act of Authority common to the Elders, is, they have power, as
any weighty occasion shall require, to call the Church together, as the
Apostles called the Church together for the election of Deacons, Act. 6.2. And
in like sort are the Priests of the old Testament stirred up to call a solemn
Assembly, to gather the Elders, and all the inhabitants of the land, to
sanctify a Fast. Joel 1.13, 14.

3. It is an act of their power, to examine, if Apostles, then any others
(whether officers or members) before they be received of the Church. Rev. 2.2.

A fourth act of their rule is, the Ordination of officers (whom the people
have chosen) whether Elders or Deacons. 1 Timothy 4.14. Act. 6.6.

5. It is an act of the key of Authority, that the Elders open the doors of
speech and silence in the Assembly. They were the Rulers of the Synagogue, who
sent to Paul and Barnabas to open their mouths in a word of exhortation, Act.
13.15. and it is the same power which calls men to speak, to put men to
silence when they speak amiss. And yet when the Elders themselves do lie under
offense, or under suspicion of it, the Brethren have liberty to require
satisfaction, in a modest manner, concerning any public breach of rule, as
has been mentioned above out of Act. 11.2, 3, etc.

6. It belongs to the Elders to prepare matters beforehand, which are to be
transacted by themselves, or others in the face of the Congregation, as the
Apostles and Elders being met at the house of James, gave direction to Paul,
how to carry himself, that he might prevent the offense of the Church, when he
should appear before them. Act. 21.18. Hence when the offense of a brother is
(according to the rule in Matthew. 18.17.) to be brought to the Church, they are
beforehand to consider and enquire whether the offense be really given or no,
whether duly proved, and orderly proceeded in by the Brethren, according to
rule, and not duly satisfied by the offender: lest themselves and the Church,
be openly cumbred with unnecessary and tedious agitations: but that all things
transacted before the Church, be carried along with most expedition and best
edification. In which respect they have power to reject causlesse and
disorderly complaints, as well as to propound and handle just complaints before
the Congregation.

7. In the handling of an offense before the Church, the Elders have authority
both Jus dicere, and Sententiam serre; When the offense appears truly
scandalous; the Elders have power from God to inform the Church, what the Law
(or Rule and will) of Christ is for the censure of such an offense: And when
the Church discerns the same, and has no just exception against it, but
condescendeth thereto, it is a further act of the Elders power, to give
sentence against the offender. Both these acts of power in the Ministers of the
Gospel, are foretold by Ezekiel, Chap. 44.23, 24. They shall teach my people
the difference between holy and profane, and cause them to discern between
the unclean and the clean. And in controversy they shall stand in judgment,
and they shall judge it according to my judgment, etc.

8. The Elders have power to dismiss the Church, with a blessing in the name
of the Lord, Number. 6.23. to 26. Heb. 7.7.

9. The Elders have received power, to charge any of the people in private,
that none of them live either inordinately without a calling, or idly in
their calling, or scandalously in any sort, 2 These. 3.6. and ver. 8, 10, 11,
12. The Apostles command argues a power in the Elders, to charge these duties
upon the people effectually.

10. What power belongs to the Elders in a Synod; is more fitly to be spoken
to in the Chapter of Synods.

11. In case the Church should fall away to blasphemy against Christ, and
obstinate rejection and persecution of the way of grace, and either no Synod to
be hoped for, or no help by a Synod, the Elders have power to withdraw (or
separate) the Disciples from them, and to carry away the Ordinances with them,
and therewithal sadly to denounce the just judgment of God against them, Act.
19.9 Exodus 33.7. Mark. 6.11. Luke 10, 11. Act. 13.46.

Obj. But if Elders have all this power to exercise all these acts of Rule,
partly over the private members, partly over the whole Church, how are they
then called the servants of the Church? 2 Cor. 4.5.

Answ. The Elders to be both servants and Rulers of the Church, may both of
them stand well together. For their rule is not lordly, as if they ruled of
themselves, or for themselves, but stewardly and ministerial, as ruling the
Church from Christ, and also from their call: and withal, ruling the Church
for Christ; and for the Church, even for their spiritual everlasting good. A
Queen may call her servants, her mariners, to pilot and conduct her over the
Sea to such an Haven: yet they being called by her to such an office, she must
not rule them in steering their course, but must submit her self to be ruled
by them, till they have brought her to her desired Haven. So is the case
between the Church and her Elders.

CHAP. VI. Of the Power and Authority given to Synods.
SYnods we acknowledge, being rightly ordered, as an Ordinance of Christ. Of
their Assembly we find three just causes in Scripture. 1. When a Church
wanting light or peace at home, desires the counsel and help of other
Churches, few or more. Thus the Church of Antioch being annoyed with corrupt
teachers, who darkened the light of the truth, and bred no small dissension
amongst them in the Church; they sent Paul and Barnabas and other messengers
unto the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, for the establishment of Truth and
Peace. In joining the Elders to the Apostles (and that doubtless by the advice
of Paul and Barnabas) it argues that they sent not to the Apostles as
extraordinary and infallible, and authentical Oracles of God, (for then what
need the advice and help of Elders?) but as wise and holy guides of the
Church, who might not only relieve them by some wise counsel, and holy order,
but also set a Precedent to succeeding ages, how errors and dissensions in
Churches might be removed and healed. And the course which the Apostles and
Elders took for clearing the matter, was not by publishing the counsel of God
with Apostolic authority, from immediate revelation, but by searching out the
truth in an ordinary way of free disputation, Act. 15. v. 7. which is as fit a
course for imitation in after ages, as it was seasonable for practice then.

2. Just consequence from Scripture gives us another ground for the assembly
of many churches, or of their messengers, into a Synod, when any church lies
under scandal, through corruption in doctrine and practice, and will not be
healed by more private advertisements of their own members, or of their
neighbor Ministers, or Brethren. For there is a brotherly communion, as
between the members of the same church, so between the churches. We have a
little sister (says one church to another, Cant. 8.8.) therefore churches have
a brotherly communion amongst themselves. Look then as one brother being
offended with another, and not able to heal him by the mouth of two or three
brethren privately, it behooveth him to carry it to the whole church; so by
proportion, if one church see matter of offense in another, and be not able to
heal it in a more private way, it will hehove them to procure the Assembly of
many churches, that the offense may be orderly heard, and judged and removed.

3. It may so fall out, that the state of all the churches in the country may
be corrupted; and beginning to discern their corruption, may desire the
concurse and counsel of one another, for a speedy, and safe, and general
reformation. And then so meeting and conferring together, may renew their
covenant with God, and conclude and determine upon a course, that may tend to
the public healing, and salvation of them all. This was a frequent practice in
the old Testament, in the time of Asa, 2 Cron. 15.10. to 15. in the time of
Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.4. to 19. In the time of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.29. to 33.
and in the time of Ezra, Ezra 10.1. to 5. These and the like examples were not
peculiar to the Israelites, as one entire national church: For in that respect
they appealed from every Synagogue and Court in Israel, to the national high
Priest, and Court at Jerusalem, as being all of them subordinate thereunto (and
therefore that precedent is usually waved by our best Divines, as not appliable
to Christian churches:) but these examples hold forth no superiority in one
church or court over another, but all of them in an equal manner, give advice
in common, and take one common course for redress of all. And therefore such
examples are fit precedents for churches of equal power within themselves, to
assemble togegether, and take order with one accord, for the reformation of
them all.

Now a Synod being assembled; three questions arise about their power: 1. What
is that power they have received? 2. How far the fraternity concurreth with the
Presbytery in it; the brotherhood with the Eldership? 3. Whether the power
they have recieved reaches to the injoyning of things, both in their nature,
and in their use indifferent?

For the first; we dare not say that their power reaches no farther then
giving counsel: for such as their ends be, for which according to God, they do
assemble, such is the power given them of God, as may attain those ends. As
they meet to minister light and peace to such churches, as through want of
light and peace lie in error (or doubt at least) and variance; so they have
power by the grace of Christ, not only to give light and counsel in matter of
Truth and Practice; but also to command and enjoin the things to be believed
and done. The express words of the Synodall letter imply no less; It seemed
good to the Holy Ghost, and unto us, to lay upon you no other burden, Act.
15.27. This burden therefore, to observe those necessary things which they
speak of, they had power to impose. It is an act of the binding power of the
keys, to bind burdens. And this binding power arises not only materially from
the weight of the matters imposed, (which are necessary necessitate praecepti
from the word) but also formally, from the authority of the Synod, which being
an Ordinance of Christ, binds the more for the Synods sake. As a truth of the
Gospel taught by a Minister of the Gospel, it binds to faith an obedience,
not only because it is Gospel, but also because it is taught by a Minister for
his callings sake, seeing Christ has said, Who so receives you receives me.
And seeing also a Synod sometime meets to convince, and admonish an offending
church or Presbytery; they have power therefore, (if they cannot heal the
offenders) to determine to withdraw communion from them. And further, seeing
they meet likewise sometimes for general reformation; they have power to
decree and publish such Ordinances, as may conduce according to God, unto such
reformation: Examples whereof we read, Neh. 10.32. to 39. 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13.

For the second question; How far the Fraternity, or the Brethren of the
church, may concur with the Elders in exercising the power of the Synod?

The Answer is; The power which they have received, is a power of liberty: As
1. They have liberty to dispute their doubts modestly and Christanly amongst
the Elders: For in that Synod at Jerusalem, as there was much disputation, Act.
15.7. so the multitude had a part in the Disputation, v. 12. For after Peter's
speech, it is said, the whole multitude kept silence, and silence from what? to
wit, from the speech last in hand amongst them, and that was, from Disputation.
2. The Brethren of the church had liberty to join with the Apostles and Elders,
in approving of the sentence of James, and determining the same as the common
sentence of them all. 3. They had liberty to join with the Apostles and Elders
in choosing and sending messengers, and in writing Synodall Letters in the
names of all, for the publishing of the sentence of the Synod. Both these
points are expressed in the Text, v. 22.23. to 29. Then pleased it the Apostles
and Elders, with the whole Church, to send chosen men, and to write Letters by
them. See the whole church distinguished from the Apostles and Elders; and
those whom he called the whole Church, v. 22. he calls the Brethren, v. 23.
The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren, etc.

But though it may not be denied, that the Brethren of the church present in
the Synod, had all this power of liberty, to join with the Apostles and Elders
in all these acts of the Synod; yet the authority of the Decrees lay chiefly
(if not only) in the Apostles and Elders. And therefore it is said, Act. 16.4.
That Paul and Silas delivered to the Churches for to keep the Decrees that were
ordained of the Apostles and Elders: So then it will be most safe to preserve
to the Church of Brethren their due liberties, and to reserve to the Elders
their due authority.

If it be said, The Elders assembled in a Synod, have no authority to determine
or conclude any act that shall bind the Churches, but according to the
instructions which before they have received from the Churches.

Answ. We do not so apprehend it; For what need Churches send to a Synod for
light and direction in ways of truth and peace, if they be resolved aforehand
how far they will go? It is true, if the Elders of Churches shall conclude in a
Synod any thing prejujudiciall to the truth and peace of the Gospel, they may
justly expostulate with them at their return, and refuse such sanctions as the
Lord has not sancited. But if the Elders be gathered in the name of Christ in
a Synod, and proceed according to the rule (the word) or Christ, they may
consider and conclude sundry points expedient for the estate of their Churches,
which the Churches were either ignorant or doubtful of before.

As for the third Question, whether the Synod have power to enjoin such things
as are both in their nature and their use indifferent? We should answer it
negatively, and our reasons be:

1. From the pattern of that precedent of Synods, Act. 15.28. They laid upon
the Churches no other burden, but those necessary things: necessary, though
not all of them in their own nature, yet for present use, to avoid the offense
both of Jew and Gentile: of the Jew, by eating things strangled and blood; of
the Gentile and Jew both, by eating things sacrificed to Idols, as Paul
expounds that Article of the Synod, 1 Cor. 8.10, 11, 12. and Chap. 10.28.
This ea ing with offense was a murder of a weak brothers soul, and a sin
against Christ, 1 Cor. 8.11, 12. and therefore necessary to be forborne,
necessi^ate praecepti, by the necessity of Gods Commandment.

2. A second reason may be from the latitude of the Apostolical commission,
which was given to them, Mat. 28.19, 20. where the Ap^stles are commanded to
teach the people to observe all things which Christ had commanded. If then the
Apostles teach the people to observe more then Christ has commanded, they go
beyond the bounds of their commission, and a larger commission then that given
to the Apostles, nor Elders, nor Synods, nor churches can challenge.

If it be said, Christ speaks only of teaching such things which he had
commanded, as necessary to salvation.

Answ. If the Apostles or their successors should hereupon usurp an authority
to teach the people things indifferent, they must plead this their authority
from some other commission given them elsewhere: for in this place there is no
foot step for any such power. That much urged and much abused place in 1 Cor.
14.40. will not reach it. For though Paul requiring in that place, all the
duties of Gods worship, whether Prayer or Prophesying, or Psalms, or Tongues,
etc. that they should be performed decently and orderly, he thereby forbids
any performance thereof undecently; as for men with long hair, and women to
speak in open assemblies, especially to pray with their hair loose about them.
And though he forbids also men speaking two or three at once, which to do,
were not order, but confusion; yet he does not at all, neither himself enjoin,
nor allow the Church of Corinth to enjoin such things as decent, whose want, or
whose contrary is not undecent; nor such orders, whose want or contrary would
be no disorder. Suppose the Church of Corinth, (or any other Church or Synod)
should enjoin their Ministers to preach in a gown. A gown is a decent garment
to preach in: yet such an Injunction is not grounded upon that Text of the
Apostle. For then a Minister in neglecting to preach in a gown should neglect
the commandment of the Apostle, which yet indeed he does not. For if he preach
in a cloak, he preaches decently enough, and that is all which the Apostles
Canon reaches to. In these things Christ never provided for uniformitie, but
only for unity.

For a third reason of this point, (and to add no more) it is taken from the
nature of the ministerial office, whether in a Church or Synod. Their office
is stewardly, not lordly: they are Ambassadors from Christ, and for Christ. Of
a Steward it is required he be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. and therefore he
may dispense no more injunctions to Gods house, then Christ has appointed him:
Neither may an Ambassador proceed to do any act of his office, further then
what he has received in his Commission from his Prince. If he go further, he
makes himself a Praevaricator, not an Ambassador.

But if it be enquired, Whether a Synod has power of Ordination and
Excommunication; we would not take upon us hastily to censure the many notable
precedents of ancient and later Synods, who have put forth acts of power in
both these kinds. Only we doubt that from the beginning it was not so: and for
our own parts, if any occasion of using this power should arise amongst our
selves (which hitherto through preventing mercy it has not) we (in a Synod)
should rather choose to determine, and to publish and declare our determination.
That the ordination of such as we find fit for it, and the excommunication of
such as we find do deserve it, would be an acceptable service both to the Lord,
and to his Churches: but the administration of both these acts we should refer
to the Presbytery of the several Churches, whereto the person to be ordained
is called, and whereof the person to be excommunicate is a member: and both
acts to be performed in the presence, and with the consent of the several
Churches, to whom the matter appertains. For in the beginning of the Gospel
in that precedent of Synods, Act. 15. we find the false teachers declared to be
disturbers and troublers of the Churches, and subverters of their souls, Act.
15.24. but no condign censure dispensed against them by the Synod. An evident
argument to us, that they left the censure of such offenders (in case they
repented not) to the particular Churches, to whom they did appertain. And for
Synodicall ordination, although Act. 1. be alleged, where Matthias was called
to be an Apostle, yet it does not appear that they acted then in a Synodicall
way: no more then the Church of Antioch did, when with fasting and prayer they
by their Presbyters imposed hands on Paul and Barnabas, and thereby separated
them to the work of the Apostleship, whereto the holy Ghost had called them,
Act. 13.1, 2, 3. Whence as the holy Ghost then said, (...): so thereupon Paul
styleth himself (...). Romans 1.1. And this was done in a particular Church, not
in a Synod.

CHAP. VII. Touching the first Subject of all the forementioned power of the
Keys. And an explanation of Independency.
WHat that Church is, which is the first Subject of the power of the keys, and
whether this Church have an independent power in the exercise thereof, though
they be made two distinct Questions, yet (if candidely interpreted) they are
but one. For whatsoever is the first Subject of any accident or adjunct, the
same is independent in the enjoyment of it, that is, in respect of deriving it
from any other subject like it self. As if fire be the first subject of heat,
then it depends upon no other subject for heat. Now in the first subject of
any power, three things concur. 1. It first receives that power whereof it is
the first subject, and that reciprocally. 2. It first adds and puts forth
the exercise of that power. 3. It first communicates that power to others. As
we see in Fire, which is the first subject of heat: it first receives heat,
and that reciprocally. All fire is hot, and whatsoever is hot is fire, or has
fire in it. Again, Fire first puts forth heat it self, and also first
communicates heat, to whatsoever things else are hot. To come then to the
first subject of Church Power, or of the power of the keys. The substance of
the doctrine thereof, may be conceived and declared in a few Propositions.
Church Power is either supreme and sovereign, or subordinate and ministerial.
Touching the former, take this proposition.

The Lord Jesus Christ, the head of his Church, is the (...), the first proper
subject of the sovereign power of the keys. He has the key of David: He
opens, and no man shuts; He shuts, and no man opens, Revel. 3.7. The
government is upon his shoulder, Isa. 9.6. And himself declares the same to
his Apostles, as the ground of his granting to them Apostolical power. All
power (says he) is given to me in heaven and earth, Matthew. 28.18. Go ye
therefore, etc.

Hence 1. All legislative power (power of making of Laws) in the Church is in
him, and not from him derived to any other. Jam. 4.12. Isa. 33.22. The power
derived to others, is only to publish and execute his Laws and Ordinances, and
to see them observed. Mat. 28.20. His Laws are perfect, Psalm. 19.9. and do make
the man of God perfect to every good work. 2 Timothy 3.17. and need no addition.

2. From his sovereign power it proceeds, that he only can erect and ordain
a true constitution of a Church Estate, Hebr. 3.3. to 6. He builds his own
house, and sets the pattern of it, as God gave to David the pattern of
Solomon's Temple, 1 Chronicles. 28.19. None has power to erect any other
Church-frame, then as this Master Builder has left us a pattern thereof in the
Gospel. In the old Testament the Church set up by him was National, in the
New, Congregationall; yet so as that in sundry cases it is ordered by him,
many congregations or their messengers, may be assembled into a Synod. Act. 15.

3. It is from the same sovereign power, that all the offices, or ministeries
in the Church are ordained by him, 1 Cor. 12.5. yea and all the members are set
in the body by him, together with all the power belonging to their offices and
places: as in the natural body, so in the Church. 1 Cor. 12.18.

4. From this sovereign power in like sort it is, that all gifts to discharge
any office, by the officers, or any duty by the members, are from him, 1 Cor.
12.11. All treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, and grace, and the fullness
thereof are in him for that end, Col. 2.3. and v. 9, 10. Joh. 1.16.

5. From this sovereign power it is, that all the spiritual power, and
efficacy, and blessing, in the administration of these gifts in these offices
and places, for the gathering, and edifying, and perfecting of all the
Churches, and of all the Saints in them is from him. Mat. 28.20. Lo I am with
you always, etc. Col. 1.29. 1 Cor. 15.9.

The g od pleasure of the Father, the personal union of the humane nature with
the eternal Son of God, His purchase of his Church with his own blood, and His
deep humiliation of himself unto the death of the Cross, have all of them
obtained to him this his highest exaltation, to be head over all things unto
the Church, and to enjoy as king thereof this sovereign power, Col. 1.19. Col.
2.2, 9, 10. Act. 20.28. Phil. 2.8, to 11.

But of this sovereign power of Christ, there is no question amongst
Protestants, especially studious of Reformation. Now as concerning the
Ministerial power, we give these following Propositions.

I. Propos. A particular Church or Congregation of Saints, professing the
faith, TAKEN INDEFINITELY FOR ANY CHVRCH (one as well as another) is the first
subject of all the Church-offices, with all their spiritual gifts and power,
which Christ has given to be executed amongst them; whether it be Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, all are yours, (speaking to the Church of Gorinth, 1 Cor.
3.22.) not as a peculiar privilege unto them, but common to them with any
other particular church. And theirs was such a Church, of whom it is said; That
they came all together into one place, for the communication of their
spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 14 23. And Paul tells the same church, that God has
set the officers, and their gifts, and all variety of members, and their
functions in his Church, 1 Cor. 14.28. where it is not so well translated [
Some] God has set some in his church, for he has set all; but speaking of
the members of the church v. 27. he proceeds to exemplify those members in
v. 28. (...), and which God has set in his Church; that is, which members,
Apostles, Prophets, etc. For though the Relative be not of the same gender with
the Antecedent before, yet it is an usual thing with the penmen of the new
Testament, to respect the sense of the words, and so the person intended,
rather then the gender of their name, and to render the Relative of the same
gender and case with the Substantive following: so here, (...), etc.

In the new Testament, it is not a new observation that we never read of any
national church, nor of any national officers given to them by Christ. In the
old Testament indeed, we read of a National church. All the tribes of Israel
were three times in a year to appear before the Lord in Jerusalem, Deuteronomy.
16.16. And he appointed them there an high Priest of the whole nation, and
certain solemn sacrifices by him to be administered, Lev. 16.1. to 29. and
together with him other Priests and Elders, and Judges, to whom all appeals
should be brought, and who should judge all difficult and transcendent cases,
Deuteronomy. 17.8. to 11. but we read of no such national church or high Priest, or
court in the new Testament; And yet we willingly grant that particular churches
of equal power, may in some cases appointed by Christ, meet together by
themselves, or by their messengers in a Synod, and may perform sundry acts of
power there, as has been showed above. But the officers themselves, and all
the Brethren members of the Synod; yea, and the Synods themselves, and all the
power they put forth, they are all of them primarily given to the several
churches of particular Congregations, either as the first subject in whom they
are resident, or as the first object about whom they are conversant, and for
whose sake they are gathered and employed.

II. Propos. The Apostles of Christ were the first subject of Apostolical
power; Apostolical power stood chiefly in two things: First, in that each
Apostle had in him all ministerial power of all the officers of the Church.
They by virtue of their office might exhort as Pastors, 1 Timothy 2.1. teach as
Teachers, 1 Timothy 2.7. rule as Rulers. 2 Timothy 4.1. receive and distribute the
oblations of the Church as Deacons, Act. 4.35. yea, any one Apostle or
Evangelist carried about with him the liberty and power of the whole Church;
and therefore might Baptize; yea, and censure an offender too, as if he had the
presence and concurrence of the whole Church with him. For we read that Philip
baptized the Eunuch without the presence of any Church, Act. 8.38. And that
Paul himself excommunicated Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20. and it is not mentioned
that he took the consent of any Church or Presbytery in it. It is true
indeed, where he could have the consent and concurse of the Church and
Presbytery in exercise of any act of church power, he willingly took it, and
joined with it, as in the ordination of Timothy (2 Timothy 1.6. with 1 Timothy 4.14.)
and in the excommunication of the incestuous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. But
when both himself and the person to be baptized, or ordained, or
excommunicated, were absent and distant from all churches, the Apostles might
proceed to put forth their power in the administration of any church act
without them. The amplitude and plenitude of power, which they received
immediately from Christ, would bear them out in it. As my Father sent me
(says Christ) to wit, with amplitude and plenitude of sovereign power, so
send I you (with like amplitude and plenitude of ministerial power) Joh. 20.21.

2. Apostolical power extended it self to all churches, as much as to any one.
Their line went out into all the world, (Psalm. 19.4. compared with Romans 10.)
And as they received commission to preach and baptize in all the world, Mat.
28.19. So they received charge to feed the flock of Christ's Sheep and Lambs
(which implies all acts of Pastoral government over all the Sheep and Lambs
of Christ) Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. Now this Apostolical power, centring all
church power into one man, and extending it self forth to the circumference of
all churches, as the Apostles were the first subject of it, so were they also
the last; Nevertheless that ample and universal latitude of power, which was
conjoined in them, is now divided even by themselves amongst all the churches,
and all the officers of the churches respectively, the officers of each church
attending the charge of the particular church committed to them, by virtue of
their office, and yet none of them neglecting the good of other churches, so
far as they may be mutually helpful to one another in the Lord.

III. Propos. When the church of a particular congregation walks together in
the truth and peace, the Brethren of the church are the first subject of
church-liberty, and the Elders thereof of church authority; and both of them
together are the first subject of all church power needful to be exercised
within themselves, whether in the election and ordination of officers, or in
the censure of offenders in their own body.

Of this Proposition there be three Branches: 1. That the Brethren of a
particular church of a Congregation, are the first subjects of church-liberty:
2. That the Elders of a particular church, are the first subjects of
church authority: 3. That both the Elders and Brethren, walking and joining
together in truth and peace, are the first subjects of all church power,
needful to be exercised in their own body.

Now that the key of church-priviledge or liberty is given to the Brethren of
the church, and the key of rule and authority to the Elders of the church, has
been declared above, in Chapt. 3. But that these are the first subjects of
these keys; and first the church, the first subject of liberty, may appear
thus.

From the removal of any former subject of this power or liberty, from whence
they might derive it. If the Brethren of the congregation were not the first
subject of their church-liberty, then they derived it either from their own
Elders, or from other churches. But they derived it not from their own Elders:
for they had power and liberty to choose their own Elders, as has been showed
above, and therefore they had this liberty before they had Elders, and so could
not derive it from them.

Nor did they derive it from other particular churches. For all particular
churches are of equal liberty and power within themselves, not one of them
subordinate to another. We read not in Scripture, that the Church of Corinth,
was subject to that of Ephesus, nor that of Ephesus to Corinth; no, nor that of
Cenchrea to Corinth, though it was a church situate in their vicinity.

Nor did they derive their liberty from a Synod of churches. For we found no
foot-step in the pattern of Synods, Act. 15. that the Church of Antioch
borrowed any of their liberties from the Synod at Jerusalem. They borrowed
indeed light from them, and decrees, tending to the establishment of truth and
peace. For upon the publishing of the decrees of that Synod, the Churches were
established in the faith (or truth) Act 16.4, 5. and also in consolation and
peace, Act. 15.31, 32. but they did not borrow from them any church-liberty at
all.

2. Now, the second branch of the Proposition was, That the Elders of the
church of a particular Congregation, are the first subject of rule or
authority, in that church (or congregation) over which the Holy Ghost has made
them overseers.

1. From the charge of rule over the Church committed to them immediately from
Christ: For though the Elders be chosen to their office by the church of
Brethren, yet the office it self is ordained immediately by Christ, and the rule
annexed to the office, is limited by Christ only. If the Brethren of the church
should elect a presbytery to be called by them in the Lord, this will not
excuse the Presbyters in their neglect of rule, either before the Lord, or to
their own consciences. For thus runs the Apostles charge to the Elders of
Ephesus, (Act. 20.28.) Take heed to your selves, and to the whole flock, over
which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers.

2. The same appears from the gift of rule, required especially in an Elder,
without which they are not capable of election to that office in the church, 1 Timothy 3, 4, 5. He must be one that is able to rule well his own house, or else
how shall he order the church of God? The like gift of rule is not necessary to
the admission of a member into the church, as to the election of an Elder: If a
private brother be not so well able (through weakness in prudence or courage)
to rule his own house, it will not justly debar him from entrance into the
church; but the like defect will justly debar a man from election to the office
of an Elder. Neither has God given a spirit of rule and government ordinarily
to the greater part of the body of the brethren: and therefore neither has he
given them the first Receipt of the key of Authority, to whom he has not given
the gift to employ it.

If it be objected; How can the brethren of the Church invest an Elder with
rule over them, if they had not power of rule in themselves to communicate to
him?

Ans. They invest him with rule, partly by choosing him to the office which God
has invested with rule, partly by professing their own subjection to him in
the Lord: we by the rule of Relatives does necessarily infer, and prefer
the authority of the Elders over them. For in yielding subjection, they either
set up, or acknowledge Authority in him, to whom they yield subjection.

Ob. 2. The body of the Church is the Spouse of Christ, the Lambs wife, and
ought not the wife to rule the servants and stewards in the house, rather then
they her? Is it not meet that the keys of Authority should hang at her girdle
rather then at theirs?

Answ. There is a difference to be put between Queens, Princesses, Ladies of
great Honor, (such as the Church is to Christ, Psalm. 45.9.) and Country
huswives, poor men's wives. Queens and great persons have several offices and
officers for every business and service about the house, as Chamberlains,
Stewards, Treasurers, Comptrollers, Vshers, Bailiffs, Grooms, and Porters, who
have all the authority of ordering the affairs of their Lords house in their
hands. There is not a key left in the Queens hand of any office, but only of
power and liberty to call for what she wants according to the Kings royal
allowance: which if she exceed, the officers have power to restrain her by
order from the King. But country huswives, and poor men's wives, whose
husbands have no Officers, Bailiffs or Stewards, to oversee and order their
estates, they may carry the keys of any office at their own girdles, which the
husband keeps not in his own hand. Not because poor huswives have greater
authority in the house then Queens; but because of their poverty and mean
estate, they are fain to be in stead of many servants to their husbands.

Obj. 3. The whole body natural, is the first subject of all the natural
power of any member in the body; as the faculty of sight is first in the body,
before in the eye.

Answ. It is not in the mystical body (the Church) in all respects alike, as
in the natural body. In the natural body there be all the faculties of each
part actually inexistent, though not exerting or putting forth themselves, till
each member be articulated and formed. But in the body of the Church of
Brethren it is not so. All the several functions of Church power, are not
actually inexistent in the body of Brethren, unless some of them have the
gifts of all the officers, which often they have not, having neither
Presbyters, nor men fit to be Presbyters. Now if the power of the Presbytery
were given to a particular Church of Brethren, as such, primo and per se, then
it would be found in every particular Church of Brethren. For a Quatenus
adomnia valet consequentia.

Obj. 4. But it is an usual tenent in many of our best Divines, that the
government of the Church is mixed of a Monarchy, an Aristocracie, and a
Democracy. In regard of Christ the head, the government of the Church is
sovereign and monarchical. In regard of the Rule by the Presbytery, it is
stewardly and Aristocraticall: in regard of the peoples power in elections and
censures, it is Democraticall: which argues, the people have some stock of
(...), power and authority in the government of the Church.

Answ. In a large sense, Authority after a sort, may be acknowledged in the
people. As 1. when a man acts by counsel according to his own discerning
freely, he is then said to be (...), Dominus sui actus. So the people in all
the acts of liberty which they put forth are Domini sui actus, Lords of their
own action.

2. The people by their acts of liberty, as in election of officers, and
concurrency in censure of offenders, and in the Determination and Promulgation
of Synodall acts; they have a great stroke or power in the ordering of Church
affairs, which may be called (...), or potestas, a POWER, which many times
goes under the name of rule or authority, but in proper speech it is rather a
privilege or liberty then authority, as has been opened above in Chap. 3.
For no act of the peoples power or liberty does properly bind, unless the
authority of the Presbytery concur with it.

3. A third argument whereby it may appear that the Elders of a particular
Church are the first subject of authority in that Church, is taken from the
like removal of other subjects, from whence they might be thought to derive
their authority, as was used before to prove the Church of Brethren was the
first subject of their own liberty in their own Congregation. The Elders of
Churches are never found in Scripture to derive their authority which they
exercise in their own congregation, either from the Elders of other Churches,
or from any Synod of Churches. All particular Churches and all the Elders of
them are of equal power, each of them respectively in their own Congregations.
None of them call others their Rabbis, or Masters, or Fathers (in respect of
any authority over them) but all of them own and acknowledge one another as
fellow Brethren, Matthew. 23.8, 9, 10.

And though in a Synod they have received power from Christ, and from his
presence in the Synod, to exercise Authority in imposing burdens (such as the
holy Ghost lays) upon all Churches whose Elders are present with them, Act.
15.28. (for the Apostles were Elders in all Churches) yet the Elders of every
particular Church, when they walk with the brethren of their own Church in
light and peace, they need not to derive from the Synod any power to impose the
same, or the like burdens upon their own Churches. For they have received a
power and charge from Christ, to teach and command with all authority the
whole counsel of God unto their people. And the people discerning the light of
the truth delivered, and walking in peace with their Elders, they readily yield
obedience to their Overseers, in whatsoever they see and hear by them
commended to them from the Lord.

3. Now we come to the third branch of the third Proposition, which was this.
That the Church of a particular congregation, Elders and Brethren walking and
joining together in truth and peace, are the first subject of all Church Power,
needful to be exercised within themselves, whether in the election or
ordination of officers, or in the censure of offenders in their own body.

The truth hereof may appear by these Arguments. 1 In point of ordination. From
the complete integrity of a Ministers calling (oven to the satisfaction of his
own and the peoples conscience) when both the Brethren and the Elders of the
particular Church whereto he is called, have put forth the power which
belongs to them about him. As, when the Brethren of the Church have chosen
him to office, and the Presbytery of the Church have laid their hands upon
him: and both of them in their several acts have due respect to the inward
ministerial gifts whereunto God has furnished him: he may then look at
himself as called by the holy Ghost, to exercise his talents in that office
amongst them, and the people may and ought to receive him, as sent of God to
them.

What defect may be found in such a call, when the Brethren exercise their
lawful liberty, and the Elders their lawful authority, in his ordination,
and nothing more is required to the complete integrity of a Ministers calling?
If it be said there wanted imposition of hands by the Bishop, who succeeds in
the place of Timothy and Titus, whom the Apostle Paul left the one in Ephesus,
the other in Crete, to ordain Elders in many Churches. Tit. 1.5.

Ans. Touching ordination by Timothy, and Titus, and (upon pretense of them) by
Bishops, enough has been said by many godly learned heretofore, especially of
later times.

The sum comes to these conclusions. 1 That Timothy and Titus did not ordain
Elders in many Churches, as Bishops, but as Evangelists. Timothy is expressly
termed an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.5. And Titus is as clearly decyphered to be an
Evangelist as Timothy, by the characters of an Evangelist, which either
Scripture holds forth, or Eusebius notes in his Ecclesiast. histor. lib. 3.
cap. 37. Gr. cap. 31. Lat. Not to be limited to a certain Church, but to follow
the Apostles, finishing their work in planting and watering Churches, where
they came. They did indeed ordain officers where they wanted, and exercised
jurisdiction (as the Apostles did) in several Churches; yet with the rest of
the Presbytery, and in the presence of the whole Church, 1 Timothy 5. But for the
continuance of this office of an Evangelist in the Church, there is no
direction in the Epistles either to Timothy or Titus, or any where else in
Scripture.

2. Conclusion. Those Bishops whose callings or offices in the Church, are set
forth in those Epistles to be continued; they are altogether Synonyma with
Presbyters. Tit. 1.5, 7. 1 Timothy 3.1. to 7.

3. Conclus. We read of many Bishops to one Church, Phil. 1.1. Act. 14.23. and
Chap. 20.17, 28. Tit. 1.5.7. but not of many Churches (much less all the
Churches in a large Diocese) to one Bishop.

4. Conclus. There is no transcendent proper work, cut out, or reserved for
such a transcendent officer as a Diocesan Bishop throughout the New Testament.
The transcendent acts reserved to him by the Advocates of Episcopacie, are
Ordination and Jurisdiction. Now both these are acts of Rule. And Paul to
Timothy acknowledges no Rulers in the Church above Pastors and Teachers, who
labor in word and doctrine, but rather Pastors and Teachers above them. The
Elders (says he) that rule well, are worthy of double honor, but especially
they that labor in word and doctrine. 1. Tim. 5.17.

5 Conclus. When after the Apostles times, one of the Pastors by way of
eminency was called Bishop for order sake, yet for many years he did no act of
power, but 1 With consent of the Presbytery. 2 With consent, and in the
presence of the people. As is noted out of Eusebius, Ecclesiast. Histor. lib.
6. ca. 43. Gr. ca. 35. Lat. Cyprian Epist. lib. 3. Epist. 10. and lib. 1. Epist
3. Casanb. adversus Baronium, exercitat. 15. number. 28.

When it is alleged out of Hiereme to confirm the same, that in the primitive
times, Communi Presbyterorum consilie, Ecelesiae gubernabantur. It is a weak
and poor evasion, to put it off with observing, that he says, Communi
Presbyterorum consilie, not authoritate. For 1. No authority is due to
Presbyters over the Bishop or Pastor, no more then to the Pastor over them.
They are (...), fellow-Elders, and coequall in authority. And 2. when Hiereme
says, The Churches were governed by the common counsel, but all with it, else
it might be said, the Bishop governed the Churches with the common counsel of
Presbyters, to wit, asked, but not followed. And that would imply a
contradiction to Hieronus testimony, to say the Churches were governed by the
sole authority of Bishops, and yet not without asking the common counsel of
the Presbyters. For in asking their counsel, and not following it, the Bishop
should order and govern the Churches against their counsel. Now that the
Churches were governed by the common counsel of Presbyters, and against the
common counsel of Presbyters, are flat contradictories.

2. For a second Argument, to prove that the Brethren of the Church of a
particular congregation, walking with their Elders in truth and peace, are the
first subject of all that Church power which is needful to be exercised in
their own body: It is taken

From their indispensable and independent power in Church censures. The censure
that is ratified in heaven cannot be dispensed withal, nor reversed by any
power on earth. Now the censure that is administered by the Church of a
particular congregation, is ratified in Heaven. For so says the Lord Jesus
touching the power of Church censures, Matthew. 18 17, 18. If the offender refuse
to hear the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen and a Publican. Verily I
say unto you Whatsoever ye shall bind onearth, shall be bound in Heaven: and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

Against this Argument from this Text many objections are wont to be made, but
none that will hold.

Object. 1. By Church in Mat. 18.17. is not meant the Christian Church (for it
was not yet extant, nor could the Apostles then have understood Christ if he
had so meant) but the Jewish church, and so he delivers their censure, in a
Jewish phrase; to account a man as an Heathen and a Publican.

Answ. 1. The Christian Church, though it was not then extant, yet the Apostles
knew as well what he meant by Church in Mat. 18.17. as they understood what he
meant by building his Church upon the Rock in Mat. 16.18. It was enough the
Apostles looked for a Church which Christ would gather, and build upon the
confession of Peter's faith; and being built, should be endued with heavenly
power in their censures, which they more fully understood afterward, when
having received the Holy Ghost, they came to put these things in practice.

Answ. 2. The allusion in the Church-censure to the Jewish custom, in
accounting a man as an Heathen and Publican, does not argue that Christ
directs his Disciples to complain of scandals to the Jewish Synagogues; but
only directs them how to walk toward obstinate offenders, excommunicate by
the Christian church, to wit, to walk toward them, as the Jews walk toward
Heathens, (to wit, denying to them religious communion) and as toward
Publicans, withholding from them familiar civil communion; for so the Jews
said to Christ's Disciples, Why eats your Master with Publicans and Sinners?

Answ. 3. It is not credible, that Christ would send his Disciples to make
complaint of their offenses to the Jewish Synagogues:

For, first, Is it likely he would send his Lambs and Sheep, for right and
healing, unto Wolves and Tigres? Both their Sanhedrim, and most of their
Synogogues were no better. And if here and there some Elders of their
Synagogues were better affected, yet how may it appear that so it was, where
any of themselves dwelt? And if that might appear too, yet had not the Jews
already agreed; That if any man did confess Christ, he should be cast out of
the Synagogues, Joh. 9.22.

Object. 2. Against the argument from this Text, it is objected; That by the
Church is meant the Bishop, or his Commissary?

Answ. 1. One man is not the Church.

If it be said, one man may represent a church; the reply is ready: one man
cannot represent the Church, unless he be sent forth by the Church; but so is
neither the Bishop nor his Commissary. They not for them, but they come unsent
for, (like water into a Ship) chiefly for the terror of the servants of Christ,
and for the encouragement of the profane. And though some of Christ's servants
have found some favor from some few of Bishops, (men of more learning and
ingenuity) yet those Bishops have found the less favor themselves from their
fellow-Bishops.

Answ. 2. The Bishop ordinarily is no member of the Church of that
congregation, where the offense is committed, and what is his satisfaction to
the removal of the offense given to the Church?

Answ. 3. The new Testament acknowledges no such ruler in the Church, as
claims honor above the Elders that labor in word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17.

Object. 3. To tell the Church, is to tell the Presbytery of the Church.

Answ. 1. We deny not, The offense is to be told to the Presbytery; yet not to
them as the Church, but as the guides of the church, who, if upon hearing the
cause, and examining the witnesses, they find it ripe for public censure,
they are then to propound it to the Church, and to try and clear the state of
the cause before the church, that so the church discerning fully the nature and
quality of the offense may consent to the judgment and sentence of the Elders
against it, to the confusion of the offender; and the public edification of
them all, who hearing and fearing, will learn to beware of the like wickedness.

Answ. 2. The Church is never put for the Presbytery alone (throughout the new
Testament) though sometime it be put expressly for the Fraternity alone, as they
are distinguished from the Elders and Officers, Act. 15.22. and therefore Tell
the Church, cannot be meant Tell the Presbytery alone.

Object. In the old Testament, the Congregation is often put for the Elders and
Rulers of the Congregation.

Answ. Let all the places alleged be examined, and it will appear, that in
matters of judgment, where the Congregation is put for the Elders and Rulers,
it is never meant (for ought we can find) of the Elders and Rulers alone,
sitting apart, and retired from the Congregation; but sitting in the presence
of the Congregation, and hearing and judging causes before them: In which case,
if a sentence have passed from a Ruler, with the dislike of the Congregation,
they have not stuck to show their dislike, sometime by protesting openly
against it (as 1 Samuel 14.44, 45.) sometime by refusing to execute it. (1 Samuel
22.16, 17.) And what the people of the Congregation lawfully did in some cases,
at some times, in waving and counterpoizing the sentence of their Rulers, the
same they might and ought to have done in the like cases at any time. The whole
Host or Congregation of Israel might protest against an unrighteous illegal
sentence; and a part of the Congregation, who discerned the iniquity of a
sentence, might justly withdraw themselves from the execution of it.

Object. 4. When Christ said Tell the Church, he meant a Synodicall or
Classical assembly of the Presbyters of many Churches. For it was his meaning
and purpose in this place, to prescribe a rule for the removing of all scandals
out of the Church, which cannot be done by telling the Church of one
Congregation; for what if an Elder offend; yea, what if the whole Presbytery
offend? The people or Brethren have not power to judge their Judges, to rule
their Rulers. Yea, what if the whole Congregation fall under an offense (as
they may do, Lev. 4.13.) a Synod of many Presbyters may reform them, but so
cannot any one Congregation alone; if the Congregation that gave the offense
stand out in it.

Answ. 1. Reserving due honor to Synods rightly ordered, or (which is all one)
a Classis or Convention of Presbyters of particular churches, we do not find
that a Church is any where put for a Synod of Presbyteries. And it were very
incongruous in this place: For though it be faid a particular Congregation
cannot reach the removal of all offenses; so it may be as truly said, that it
were unmeet to trouble Synods with every offense that falls out in a
Congregation; Offenses fall out often, Synods meet but seldom; and when they
do meet, they find many more weighty employments, then to attend to every
offense of every private brother. Besides, as an whole particular Congregation
may offend, so may a general Assembly of all the Presbyters in a Nation offend
also: For general Councels have erred; and what remedy shall be found to
remove such errors and offenses out of this Text? Moreover, if an offense be
found in a Brother of a Congregation, and the Congregation be found faithful
and willing to remove it by due censure; why should the offense be called up to
more public judicature, and the plaster made broader than the sore?

Again, If an Elder offend, the rest of the Presbytery with the Congregation
joining together, may proceed against him, (if they cannot otherwise heal him)
and so remove the offense from amongst them. If the whole Presbytery offend,
or such, a part as will draw a party and a faction in the Church with them
their readiest course is, to bring the matter then to a Synod. For though this
place in Matthew direct not to that; yet the Holy Ghost leaves us not without
direction in such a case, but gives us a pattern in the church of Antioch, to
repair to a Synod. And the like course is to be taken in the offense of a
whole Congregation, if it be persisted in with obstinacy. Neither is it true
which was said, that it was the purpose of Christ in Mat. 18.17. to prescribe a
rule for the removal of all offenses out of the Church; but only of such
private and less heinous offenses, as grow public and notorious only by
obstinacy of the offenders: For if offenses be heinous and public at first,
the Holy Ghost does not direct us to proceed in such a general course from a
private admonition by one brother alone, and then to a second, by one or two
more, and at last, to tell it to the Church. But in such a case the Apostle
gives another rule, (1 Cor. 5.11.) to cast an heinous notorious offender, both
out of church communion, and private familiar communion also.

Object. 5. The Church here spoken of, Mat. 18.17. is such an one, as whereto a
complaint may orderly be made: But a complaint cannot be orderly made to a
multitude, such as an whole Congregation is.

Answ. And why may not a complaint be orderly made to a whole multitude? The
Levite made an orderly conplaint to a greater multitude, then 400. particular
Congregations are wont to amount to, Jud. 20.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

Object. 6. The Church here to be complained of meets with authority, (for
censures are administered with authority) but the church of a particular
Congregation meets with humility, to seek the face and favor of God.

Answ. Humility to God may well stand with authority to men. The 24. Elders
(who represent the grown heirs of the Church of the new Testament) they are
said in Church Assemblies to sit upon thrones with crowns on their heads, Rev.
4.4. yet when they fall down to worship God and the Lamb, they cast down their
crowns at his feet, v. 10.

Object. 7. In the church of a particular Congregation, a woman may not speak:
but in this Church here spoken of, they may speak; for they may be offenders,
and offenders must give an account of their offenses.

Answ. When the Apostle forbids women to speak in the church, he means,
speaking partly by way of authority, as in public praying or prophesying in
the Church, (1 Timothy 2.12.) partly by way of bold inquiry, in asking questions
publicly of the Prophets in the face of the Church, 1 Cor. 14.34. But to
answer it: If the whole Congregation have taken just offense at the open sin of
a woman, she is bound as much to give satisfaction to the whole Congregation,
as well as to the Presbytery.

Object. 8. When Schisms grew to be scandalous in the Church of Corinth, the
household of Chloe told not the whole Congregation of it, but Paul, 1 Cor. 1.11.

Answ. The contentions in the Church of Corinth were not the offense of a
private brother, but of the whole church. And who can tell whether they had not
spoken of it to the Church before? But whether they had or no, the example only
argues, that Brethren offended with the sins of their brethren, may tell an
Elder of the church of it, that he may tell it to the Church, which no man
denies. Paul was an Elder of every church of Christ, as the other Apostles
were, as having the government of all the churches committed to them all.

Having thus (by the help of Christ) cleared this Text in Mat. 18.17. from
variety of misconstructions, (which not the obscurity of the words, but the
eminency of the gifts, and worth of Expositors has made difficult) Let us add
an argument or two more to the same purpose, to prove, that the Church of a
particular Congregation, fully furnished with officers, and rightly walking in
judgment and peace, is the first subject of all Church Authority, needful to
be exercised within their own body.

3. A third argument to prove this, is usually and justly taken from the
practice and example of the Church of Corinth, in the excommunication of the
incestuous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5.1. to 5.

Obj. 1. The excommunication of the incestuous Corinthian, was not an act of
judicial authority in the church of Corinth, whether Elders or Brethren, but
rather an act of subjection to the Apostle, publishing the sentence, which the
Apostle had before decreed and judged: for (says the Apostle) I though absent
in body, yet present in spirit, have judged already, concerning him that has
done this deed, etc.

Answ. 1. Though Paul (as a chief Officer of every church) judged beforehand
the excommunication of the incestuous Corinthian: yet his judgment was not a
judicial sentence, delivering him to Satan, but a judicious doctrine and
instruction, teaching the Church what they ought to do in that case.

2. The act of the church in Corinth in censuring the incestuous person, was
indeed an act of subjection to the Apostles divine doctrine and direction (as
all church censures, by whomsoever administered, ought to be acts of subjection
to the word of Christ) but yet their act was a complete act of just power,
(even an act of all that liberty and authority which is to be put forth in any
censure.) For, first they delivered him to Satan, in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and with the power of the Lord Jesus, v. 4. and that is the highest
power in the Church. Secondly, the spirit of Paul, that is, his Apostolic
spirit was gathered together with them, in delivering and publishing the
sentence; which argues, both his power and theirs was co-incident and
concurrent in this sentence. Thirdly, the holy end and use of this sentence
argues the heavenly power from whence it proceeded. They delivered him to
Satan for the destruction of the flesh (that is, for the mortifying of his
corruption) that his soul might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
Fourthly, when his soul came to be humble and penitent by the means of this
sentence, Paul entreats the church to release and forgive him, 2 Cor. 2.6. to
10. Now ejusdem potestatis est ligare and solvere, claudere and aperire.

Object. 2. All this argues no more, but that some in the church of Corinth
had this power (to wit, the Presbytery of the church, but not the whole body of
the people) to excommunicate the offender.

Answ. 1. If the Presbytery alone had put forth this power, yet that suffices
to make good the Proposition, that every church furnished with a presbytery,
and proceeding righteously and peaceably, they have within themselves so much
power as is requisite, to be exercised within their own body.

Answ. 2. It is apparent by the Text, that the Brethren concurred also in this
sentence, and that with some act of power, to wit, such power as the want of
putting it forth, retarded the sentence, and the putting of it forth was
requisite to the administration of the sentence.

For, first, the reproof for not proceeding to sentence sooner, is directed to
the whole church, as well as to the Presbytery; They are all blamed for not
mourning, for not putting him away, for being puffed up rather, 1 Cor. 5.2.

2. The commandment is directed to them all, when they are gathered together,
(and what is that but to a Church meeting?) to proceed against him. 1 Cor. 5.4.
In like sort, in the end of the Chapter he commands them all, Put away
therefore from among you that wieked person, v. 13.

3. He declares this act of theirs in putting him out, to be a judicial act,
v. 12. Do you not judge them that are within? Say that the judgment of
authority be proper only to the Presbytery, yet the judgment of discretion
(which as concurring in this act with the Presbytery has a power in it (as was
said) may not be denied to the Brethren: for here is an act of judgment
ascribed to them all: which judgment in the Brethren he esteems of it so
highly, that from thence he takes occasion to advise the members of the
Church, to refer their differences even in civil matters, to the judgment of
the Saints or Brethren. Know ye not (says he) that the Saints shall judge the
world? yea the Angels? 1 Cor. 6.1, 2, 3. how much more the things of this life?
Yea rather then they should go to Law, and that before Infidels, in any case
depending between Brethren, he advises them rather to set up the meanest in
the Church to hear and judge between them, 1 Cor. 6.4.

4. When the Apostle directs them upon the repentance of an offender, to
forgive him, 2 Cor. 2.4, to 10. he speaks to the Brethren, as well as to
their elders to forgive him. As they were all (the Brethren as well as the
Elders) offended with his sin: so it was meet they should all a like be
satisfied, and being satisfied should forgive him: the Brethren in a way of
brotherly love and Church-consent, as well as the Elders, by sentencing his
absolution and restitution to the Church.

3. Obj. But was not this Church of Corinth (who had all this power) a
metropolis, a mother Church of Achaia, in which many Presbyteries, from many
Churches in the villages were assembled to administer this censure?

Ans. No such thing appears from the story of the Church of Corinth, neither
in the Acts ( Act. 18.) nor from either of the Epistles (...) Corinthians. True
it is, Corinth was a mother-city, but not a Mother Church to all Achaia: and
yet it is not unlikely that other Churches in that region, might borrow much
light from their gifts; for they abounded, and were enriched with variety of
all gifts, 1 Cor. ^. (...). But yet that which the Apostle calls the Church
of Corinth, (...) the whole Church was no larger, then was wont to meet
together in one place, one congregation, 1 Conrinth. 14.23.

A fourth and last Argument to prove the Proposition, that every Church so
furnished with officers (as has been said) and so carried on in truth and
peace, has all Church power needful to be exercised within themselves, is
taken from the guilt of offense, which lies upon every Church, when any
offense committed by their members lies uncensured and unremoved. Christ has
something against the Church of Pergamus, for suffering Balaam and the
Nicolaitans, Revel. 2.14, 15. and something against the Church of Thyatira, for
suffering Jezabel. Now if these Churches had not either of them sufficient
power to purge out their own offenders, why are they blamed for toleration of
them? yea, why are not the neighbor Churches blamed for the sins of these
Churches? But we see, neither is Pergamus blamed for tolerating Jezabel, nor
Thyatira for tolerating Balaam, nor Smyrna for tolerating either. Indeed what
Christ writes to any one Church, his Spirit calls all the Churches to
hearken unto, and so he does our Churches also at this day: not because he
blamed them for the toleration of sins in other Churches, but because he would
have them beware of the like remissness in tolerating the like offenses
amongst themselves: and also would provoke them to observe notorious offenses
amongst their Sister-Churches, and with brotherly love and faithfulness to
admonish them thereof.

It is an unsound body that wants strength to purge out his own vicious and
malignant humors. And every Church of a particular congregation, being a
body, even a body of Christ in it self, it were not for the honor of Christ,
nor of his body, if when it were in a sound and athletick constitution, it
should not have power to purge it self of its own superfluous and noisome
humors.

IV. Proposition. In case a particular Church be disturbed with error or
scandal, and the same maintained by a faction amongst them. Now a Synod of
Churches, or of their messengers, is the first subject of that power and
authority, whereby error is judicially convinced and condemned, the truth
searched out, and determined, and the way of truth and peace declared and
imposed upon the Churches.

The truth of this Proposition may appear by two Arguments.

1. Argum. From the want of power in such a particular church to pass a
binding sentence, where error or scandal is maintained by a faction; For the
promise of binding and loosing which is made to a particular church, Mat.
18.18. is not given to the church, when it is leavened with error and variance.
It is a received maxim, Clavis errans non ligat; and it is as true, Ecclesia
litigans not ligat: And the ground of both arises from the estate of the
Church, to which the promise of binding and loosing is made, Mat. 18.17, 18.
which, though it be a particular church (as has been showed) yet it is a
Church AGREEING together in the name of Christ, Mat. 18.19, 20. If there want
agreement amongst them, the promise of binding and loosing is not given to
them: or if they should agree, and yet agree in an error, or in a scandal,
they do not then agree in the name of Christ; For to meet in the name of
Christ, implies, they meet not only by his command and authority, but also
that they proceed according to his Laws and Will, and that to his service and
glory. If then the church, or a considerable part of it fall into error through
ignorance, or into faction by variance, they cannot expect the presence of
Christ with them, according to his promise to pass a binding sentence. And
then as they fall under the conviction and admonition of any other sister
church, in a way of brotherly love, by virtue of communion of churches; so
their errors and variance, and whatsoever scandals else do accompany the same,
they are justly subject to the condemnation of a Synod of churches.

2. A second Argument to prove that a Synod is the first subject of power, to
determine and judge errors and variances in particular churches, is taken from
the pattern set before us in that case, Act. 15.1. to 28. when certain false
Teachers, having taught in the church of Antioch, a necessity of circumcision
to salvation, and having gotten a faction to take part with them, (as appears
by the (...) and (...) of Paul and Barnabas against them) the church did not
determine the case themselves, but referred the whole matter to the Apostles
and Elders at Jerusalem, Act. 15.1, 2. Not to the Apostles alone, but to the
Apostles and Elders. The Apostles were as the Elders and Rulers of all
churches; and the Elders there were not a few, the Believers in Jerusalem being
many thousands. Neither did the Apostles determine the matter (as has been
said) by Apostolical authority from immediate revelation; but they assembled
together with the Elders, to consider of the matter, v. 6. and a multitude of
Brethren together with them ( v. 12.22, 23.) and after, searching out the cause
by an ordinary means of disputation, v. 7. Peter cleared it by the witness of
the Spirit to his Ministry in Cornelius his family; Paul and Barnabas by the
like effect of their Ministry among the Gentiles ^ James confirmed the same
by the testimony of the Prophets, wherewith the whole Synod being satisfied,
they determine of a judicial sentence, and of a way to publish it by letters
and messengers; in which they censure the false Teachers, as troublers of their
Church, and subverters of their souls; they reject the imposition of
circumcision, as a yoke which neither they nor their fathers were able to
bear: they impose upon the churches none but some necessary observations, and
them by way of that authority which the Lord had given them, v. 28. Which
pattern clearly shows us to whom the key of authority is committed, when
there grows offense and difference in a church. Look as in the case of the
offense of a faithful brother persisted in, the matter is at last judged and
determined in a church, which is a Congregation of the faithful: so in the
case of the offense of the church or congregation, the matter is at last judged
in a congregation of churches, a Church of churches: for what is a Synod else
but a Church of churches?

Now, from all these former Propositions which tend to clear the first subject
of the power of the keys, it may be easy to deduce certain corollaries from
thence, tending to clear a parallel Question to this; to wit, In what sense it
may, and ought to be admitted, that a church of a particular congregation is
independent in the use of the power of the keys, and in what sense not? For in
what sense the Church of a particular congregation is the first subject of the
power of the keys, in the same sense it is independent, and in none other. We
taking the first subject and the independent subject to be all one.

1. Corollary. The Church is not independent on Christ, but dependent on him
for all church power.

The Reason is plain, because he is the first subject of all church power by
way of sovereign eminency, as has been said. And therefore the church, and
all the Officers thereof; yea, and a Synod of churches is dependent upon him,
for all ministerial church power. Ministry is dependent upon soveraigntie;
yea, the more dependent they be upon Christ, in all the exercise of their
church power, the more powerful is all their power in all their adminstrations.

2. Corollary. The first subject of the ministerial power of the keys, though
it be independent in respect of derivation of power from the power of the sword
to the performance of any spiritual administration, yet it is subject to the
power of the sword in matters which concern the civil peace.

The matters which concern the civil peace, wherein Church-subjection is
chiefly attended, are of four sorts.

1. The first sort be civil matters, (...) the things of this life, as is the
disposing of men's goods or lands, lives, or liberties, tributes, customs,
worldly honors, and inheritances. In these the Church submits, and
refers it self to the civil State. Christ as minister of the circumcision,
refused to take upon him the dividing of Inheritances amongst Brethren, as
impertinent to his calling, Luke 12.13, 14. His kingdom (he acknowledges) is
not of this world, Joh. 18.36. Himself paid tribute to Caesar, (Matthew. 17.27.)
for himself and his disciples.

2. The second sort of things which concern civil peace, is, the establishment
of pure Religion, in doctrine, worship, and government, according to the word
of God: as also the reformation of all corruptions in any of these. On this
ground the good Kings of Judah, commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, and to worship him, according to his own statutes and commandments:
and the contrary corruptions of strange gods, high places, Images, and Groves,
they removed, and are commended of God, and obeyed by the Priests and people in
so doing, 2 Chronicles. 14.3, 4, 5. 2 Chronicles. 15.8. to 16. 2 Chronicles. 17.6. to 9. 2 Chronicles. 19.3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 24.4, 5, 6. 8, 9, 10. 2 Chronicles. 29.3. to 35. 2 Chronicles.
30.1. to 12. 2 Chronicles. 34.3. to 33. The establishment of pure Religion, and the
reformation of corruptions in Religion, do much concern the civil peace. If
Religion be corrupted, there will be war in the gates, Judge. 5.8. and no
peace to him, that comes in, or goes out. 2 Chronicles. 15.3, 5, 6. But where
Religion rejoices, the civil State flourishes, Hagg. 2.15. to 19. It is
true, the establishment of pure Religion, and reformation of corruptions
pertain also to the Churches and Synodicall Assemblies. But they go about it
only with spiritual weapons, ministry of the Word, and Church Censures upon
such as are under Church Power. But Magistrates address themselves thereto,
partly by commanding, and stirring up the Churches and Ministers thereof to go
about it in their spiritual way: partly also by civil punishments upon the
wilful opposers, and disturbers of the same. As Iehosaphat sent Priests and
Levites (and them accompanied and countenanced with Princes and Nobles) to
preach and teach in the Cities of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9. So Josiah put to
death the idolatrous Priests of the high places, 2 King. 22.20. Nor was that a
peculiar duty or privilege of the Kings of Judah, but attended to also by
heathen Princes, and that to prevent the wrath of God, against the Realm of
the King and his sons. Ezra 7.23. yea, and of the times of the New Testament it
is prophesied, that in some cases, capital punishment shall proceed against
false Prophets, and that by the procurement of their nearest kindred. Zach.
13.3. And the execution thereof is described, Revel. 16.4. to 7. where the
rivers and fountains of waters (that is, the Priests and Jesuits, that
conveigh the Religion of the Sea of Rome throughout the countries) are turned
to blood, that is, have blood given them to drink, by the civil Magistrate.

Nevertheless, though we willingly acknowledge a power in the Civil
Magistrate, to establish and reform Religion, according to the Word of God: yet
we would not be so understood, as if we judged it to belong to the civil
power, to compel all men to come and sit down at the Lords table, or to enter
into the communion of the Church, before they be in some measure prepared of
God for such fellowship. For this is not a Reformation, but a Deformation of
the Church, and is not according to the Word of God, but against it, as we
shall show (God willing) in the sequel, when we come to speak of the
disposition or qualification of Church Members.

3. There is a third sort of things which concern the civil peace, wherein the
Church is not to refuse subjection to the Civil Magistrate, in the exercise of
some public spiritual administrations, which may advance and help forward the
public good of Civil State according to God. In time of war, or pestilence,
or any public calamity or danger lying upon a Commonwealth, the Magistrate
may lawfully proclaim a Fast as Iehosaphat did, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. and the
Churches ought not to neglect such an administration, upon such a just
occasion. Neither does it impeach the power of the Church to call a Fast, when
themselves see God calling them to public humiliation. For as Iehosaphat
called a Fast: so the Prophet Joel stirs up the Priests to call a Fast in
time of a famine threatening the want of holy Sacrifices, Joel 1.13, 14.

It may fall out also, that in undertaking a war, or in making a league with
a foreign State, there may arise such cases of conscience, as may require the
consultation of a Synod. In which case, or the like, if the Magistrate call for
a Synod, the Churches are to yield him ready subjection herein in the Lord.
Jehosaphat though he was out of his place, when he was in Samaria visiting an
idolatrous King: yet he was not out of his way, when in case of undertaking the
war against Syria, he called for counsel from the mouth of the Lord, by a
Council or Synod of Priests and Prophets. 1 King. 22.5, 6, 7.

4. A fourth sort of thing, wherein the church is not to refuse subjection to
the Civil Magistrate, is in patient suffering their unjust persecutions
without hostile or rebellious resistance. For though persecution of the
churches and servants of Christ will not advance the civil peace, but
overthrow it; yet for the church to take up the sword in her own defense, is
not a lawful means of preserving the church peace, but a disturbance of it
rather. In this case, when Peter drew his sword in defense of his Master, ( the
Lord Jesus) against an attachment served upon him, by the Officers of the high
Priests and Elders of the people: our Savior bade him put up his sword into
his sheath again; for (says he) all they that take the sword, shall perish by
the sword, Mat. 27.50, 51, 52. where he speaks of Peter, either as a private
Disciple, or a church officer, to whom, though the power of the keys was
committed, yet the power of the sword was not committed. And for such to take
up the sword, though in the cause of Christ, it is forbidden by Christ; and
such is the case of any particular church or of a Synod of churches. As they
have received the power of the keys, not of the sword, to the power of the keys
they may, and ought to administer, but not of the sword. Wherein nevertheless,
we speak of churches and Synods, as such, that is, as church members, or
church assemblies, acting in a church way, by the power of the keys received
from Christ. But if some of the same persons be also betrusted by the civil
State, with the preservation and protection of the Laws and Liberties, peace
and safety of the same state, and shall meet together in a public civil
assembly (whether in Council or Camp) they may there provide by civil power
(according to the wholesome laws and liberties of the country) Ne quid
Ecclesia, ne quid Respublica detrimenti capiat. If King Saul swear to put
Jonathan to death, the Leaders of the people may by strong hands rescue him
from his fathers unjust and illegal fury. 1 Samuel 14.44, 45. But if Saul
persecute David (though as unjustly as Jonathan) yet if the Princes and Leaders
of the people will not rescue him from the wrath of the King, David (a private
man) will not draw out his sword in his own defense, so much as to touch the
Lords anointed, 1 Samuel 24.4. to 7.

To conclude this Corollary, touching the subjection of churches to the civil
State, in matters which concern the civil peace, this may not be omitted, that
as the Church is subject to the sword of the Magistrate in things which concern
the civil peace: so the Magistrate (if Christian) is subject to the keys of
the Church, in matters which concern the peace of his conscience and the
kingdom of heaven. Hence it is prophesied by Isaiah, that Kings and Queens,
who are nursing fathers and mothers to the church, shall bow down to the
Church, with their faces to the earth, Isai. 49.23. that is, they shall walk in
professed subjection to the Ordinances of Christ in his Church. Hence also it
is, that David prophesies of a two-edged sword, (that is, the sword of the
Spirit, the word of Christ) put into the hands of the Saints (who are by
calling the Members of the Church) as to subdue the nations by the ministry of
the Word, to the obedience of the Gospel ( Psalm. 149.6, 7.) so to bind their
Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron, to execute upon them
the judgment written, (that is, written in the Word) Psalm. 149. v. 8, 9.

3. A third Corollary touching the independency of churches is this, That a
church of a particular Congregation, consisting of Elders and Brethren, and
walking in the truth and peace of the Gospel, as it is the First subject of all
Church Power, needful to be exercised within it self, so it is independent
upon any other (Church or Synod) for the exercise of the same.

That such a Church is the first subject of all church power, has been cleared
above in the opening the third Proposition of the first subject of the power of
the keys. And such a church being the first subject of church power, is
unavoidably independent upon any other church or body for the exercise thereof,
for as has been said before, the first subject of any Accident or Adjunct, is
independent upon any other either for the enjoying, or for the employing (the
having or the using) of the same.

4. A fourth Corollary touching the independency of churches is, That a Church
fallen into any offense (whether it be the whole church, or a strong party in
it) is not independent in the exercise of church power, but is subject both to
the admonition of any other church, and to the determination and judicial
sentence of a Synod for direction into a way of truth and peace.

And this also arises from the former discourse. For, if clavis errans non
ligat, and Ecclesia litigans non ligat; that is, if Christ has not given to a
particular church a promise to bind and loose in heaven, what they bind and
loose on earth, unless they agree together, and agree in his name, then such a
church is not independent in their proceedings, as do fail in either. For all
the independency that can be claimed is founded upon that promise, What ye
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: what ye loose on earth, shall be
loosed in heaven, Matthew. 18.18. On that promise is founded both the
independency and security, and parity also of all churches. But if that promise
be cut off from them, they are like Samson when his hair was cut off, weak,
and subject to fall under other men; and yet they fall softer then he did: he
fell into the hands of his enemies, but they fall under the censure of their
friends. As the false Prophet recanting his error did acknowledge, so may they:
Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends, Zach. 13.6. In the house of a
neighbour-church or two, I was friendly smitten with a brotherly admonition,
which (like a precious oil) did not break mine head: and in the house of a
Synod of churches, I was friendly, yea, brotherly censured and healed.

5. A fifth and last Corollary arising from the former discourse, touching the
independency of churches, may be this; Though the church of a particular
Congregation, consisting of Elders and Brethren, and walking with a right foot
in the truth and peace of the Gospel, be the first subject of all church power
needful to be exercised within it self; and consequently be independent from
any other church or Synod in the use of it; yet it is a safe and whole some,
and holy Ordinance of Christ, for such particular churches to join together in
holy Covenant or Communion, and consolation amongst themselves, to administer
all their church affairs, (which are of weighty, and difficult and common
concernment) not without common consultation and consent of other churches
about them. Now church-affaires of weighty and difficult and common
concernment, we account to be the election and ordination of Elders,
excommunication of an Elder, or any person of public note, and employment: the
translation of an Elder from one Church to another, or the like. In which case
we conceive it safe and wholesome, and an holy ordinance to proceed with common
consultation and consent. Safe, for in multitude of counselors there is
safety (as in civil, so in Church affairs) Prove. 11.14. And though this or
that Church may be of a good and strong constitution, and walk with a right
foot in the truth, and peace of the Gospel: yet all Churches are not in a like
athletick plight, and they will be Ioath to call in, or look out for help as
much or more then others, though they have more need then others: yea, and the
best Churches may soon degenerate, and stand in as much need of help as others,
and for want of it may sink and fall into deep Apostasy, which other Churches
might have prevented, had they discerned it at first.

It is also wholesome, as tending to maintain brotherly love, and soundness of
doctrine in Churches, and to prevent many offenses, which may grow up in this
or that particular Church, when it transacteth all such things within it self
without consent.

It is likewise an holy ordinance of Christ, as having just warrant from a like
precedent. The Apostles were as much independent from one another, and stood in
as little need of one another help, as Churches do one of another. And yet
Paul went up to Jerusalem, to confer with Peter, James and John, lest he should
run in vain in the course of his ministry, Galat. 2.2. And though in
conference the chief Apostles added nothing to Paul, ver. 6. yet when they
perceived the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed to Paul and Barnabas,
as that of the circumcision to Peter, James and John, they gave unto one
another the right hand of fellowship. ver. 9. Now then it will follow by just
proportion, that if the Apostles who are each of them independent one of
another, had need to consult and confer together about the work of their
ministry, to procure the freer passage to their calling, and to their
doctrine: then surely Churches, and Elders of Churches, though independent one
of another, had need to communicate their courses and proceedings in such cases
one with another, to procure the freer passage to the same. And if the
Apostles, giving right hand of fellowship one to another, did mutually
strengthen their hands in the work of the ministry: then the Elders of
Churches, giving right hand of fellowship to one another in their ordination,
or upon any fit occasion, cannot but much encourage and strengthen the hearts
and hands of one another in the Lords work.

Again, something might be added, if not for confirmation, yet for illustration
of this point, by comparing the dimensions of the new Jerusalem, which is a
perfect platform of a pure Church, as it shall be constituted in the Jewish
Church state, at their last conversion. The dimensions of this Church as they
are described by Ezekiel (Chap. 48.30.) are (according to Iunius) twelve
furlongs, which after the measure of the Sanctuary (which is double to the
common) is about three miles in length, and as much in breadth. But the
dimensions of the same Church of the Jews, in Revel. 21.16. is said to be
twelve thousand furlongs. Now how can these two dimensions of the same Church
stand together, which are so far discrepant one from another? For there be a
thousand times twelve furlongs, in twelve thousand furlongs. The fittest and
fairest reconciliation seems plainly to be this, that Ezekiel speaks of the
dimensions of any ordinary Jewish Church of one particular congregation. But
John speaks of the dimensions of many particular Jewish Churches, combining
together in some cases, even to the communion of a thousand Churches. Not that
the Church of the Jews will be constituted in a National and Diocesan frame,
with National officers, and Diocesan Bishops, or the like: but that sometimes
a thousand of them will be gathered into a Synod, and all of them will have
such mutual care, and yield such mutual brotherly help and communion one to
another, as if they were all but one body.

If any man say, Theologia symbolica, or parabolica non est argumentativa, that
arguments from such parables and mystical resemblances in Scripture are not
valid, let him enjoy his own apprehension: and (if he can yield a better
interpretation of the place) let him wave this collection. Nevertheless, if
there were no argumentative power in parables, why did the Lord Jesus so much
delight in that kind of teaching? and why did John, and Daniel, and Ezekiel
deliver a great part of their prophesies in parables, if we must take them for
riddles, and not for documents nor arguments? Surely if they serve not for
argument, they serve not for document.

But furthermore, touching this great work of communion and consociation of
Churches, give us leave to add this caution; A Caution.
To see that this consociation of Churches be not perverted, either to the
oppression or diminution of the just liberty and authority of each particular
Church within it self: who being well supplied with a faithful and expert
Presbytery of their own, do walk in their integrity according to the truth
and peace of the Gospel. Let Synods have their just authority in all Churches,
how pure soever, in determining such (...), as are requisite for the
edification of all Christ's Churches according to God. But in the election and
ordination of Officers, and censure of offenders, let it suffice the Churches
consociate to assist one another, with their counsel, and right hand of
fellowship, when they see a particular Church to use their liberty and power
aright. But let them not put forth the power of their community, either to
take such Church acts out of their hands, or to hinder them in their lawful
course, unless they see them (through ignorance or weakness) to abuse their
liberty and authority in the Gospel. All the liberties of Churches were
purchased to them by the precious blood of the Lord Jesus: and therefore
neither may the Churches give them away, nor many Churches take them out of the
hands of one. They may indeed prevent the abuse of their liberties, and direct
in the lawful use of them, but not take them away, though themselves should be
willing. The Lord Jesus having given equal power to all the Apostles, it was
not lawful for eleven of them to forbid the twelfth to do any act of his
office without their intervention. Neither was it lawful for the nine who were
of inferior gifts, to commit the guidance and command of all their Apostolic
administrations unto Peter, James and John, who seemed to be pillars. And that,
not only because they were all (one as well as another) immediately guided by
the holy Ghost: but because they were all equal in office, and every one to
give account for himself unto God.

It is the like case (in some measure) of particular churches, yea, there is
moreover a threefold further inconvenience, which seems to us, to attend the
translation of the power of particular churches in these ordinary
admninistraons, into the hands of a Synod of Presbyters, commonly called a
Classis.

1. The promise of Binding and Loosing, in way of Discipline, which Christ gave
to every particular church (as has been showed) is by this means not received,
nor enjoined, nor practiced by themselves immediately, but by their Deputies or
Overseers.

2. The same promise which was not given to Synods in acts of that nature (as
has been showed in the Chapter of Synods) but in acts of another kind, is
hereby received, and enjoined, and practiced by them, and by them only, which
ought not to be.

And which is a third inconvenience, The practice of this power of the keys
only by a Synod of Presbyters, still keeps the Church as under nonage, as if
they were not grown up to the full fruition of the just liberty of their riper
years in the days of the Gospel. For a mother to bear her young daughter in
her arms, and not to suffer it to go on its own feet, whilst it is in the
infancy, is kindly and comely: but when the Damsel is grown up to riper
years, for the mother still to bear her in her arms, for fear of stumbling, it
were an uncecessary burden to the mother, and a reproach to the Virgin; Such
is the case here: The community of churches (according to the Hebrew phrase) is
as the Mother; each particular church is as the Daughter. In the old Testament,
while the Church was in her nonage, it was not unseasonable to leave the whole
guidance and bearing thereof in the hands of their Tutors and Governors, the
Priests and Levites, and in the community of the national courts. But now in
the days of the new Testament, when the churches are grown up (or should be
grown at least) to more maturity, it were meet more to give the Church liberty
to stand alone, and to walk upon her own legs; and yet in any such part of her
way, as may be more hard to hit right upon, as in her Elections, and
Ordinances, and Censures of eminent persons, in office; it is a safe and holy
and faithful office of the vigilance of the community of churches, to be
present with them, and helpful to them in the Lord. And at all times when a
particular church shall wander out of the way, (whether out of the way of
truth, or of peace) the community of churches may by no means be excused from
reforming them again into their right way, according to the authority which the
Lord has given them for the public edification of all the several churches
within their Covenant.

Soli Christo, (...) This is licensed and entered according to Order.

FINIS.

