AN ABSTRACT OVT OF THE RECORDS OF THE TOVVER, Touching The KINGS Revenue: AND
How they have supported themselves. By Sir ROBERT COTTON, Knight and Baronet.

LONDON, Printed for G. Tomlinson, T. A. and A. C.

AN ABSTRACT OVT Of the Records of the Tower, touching the Kings Revenue.
THE Kings of England have supported and repaired their estates, either 1. By
annual proportioning their Issues and Expenses with their certain and casual
Revenues, and that either by 1. Advice of their privy Council, Or, 2.
Parliament.
2. By abating and reforming the excess of 1. Household. 2. Retinue and
Favorites. 3. Gifts and Rewards.
3. By raising of Money, and improving the Revenues of the Crown, and that
either by the 1. Grant of the Subject, Or, 2. Power absolute in the Sovereign.



First, for proportioning the Issues and expenses, with their certain and
casual Revenues.

H. 4. Anno 12. when the Revenue and profits of the Kingdom, together with the
Subsidy of Wool, (...) and Tenth of the Clergy, amounted to no more then 48000
l'. of which 24000 l'. was allotted for the expense of house, most of the rest
to the guard of the Sea, and defense of this Kingdom, the Realm of Ireland,
Ex Rot. orig. intent. Act. Conc H. 4. Marked 21.
and Dominions in France. In this estimate the profit by Wards and Marriage,
was but two thousand. And then an Ordinance was made by the King, Prince, and
all his Council the^e named the Roll.

The like was Anno 11. when for the charge of House was appointed 16000 l'. and
7000 l'. to the City of London in discharge of the Kings debt.

Ex Rot. in actis Conc, An, 2. H. 5.
H. 5. Anno 2. did the like as his father, entering upon the Roll, as an
ordinance in future, That the Treasurer of England, or of the Exchequer, shall
annually make declaration, of the state of their office, and the Revenue of the
Realm, together with the charge of the Kings House, Chamber, Wardrobe,
Garrisons, Navy and debts.

Anno 3. H. 5. the like assignments were made proportionable to the Revenue
which in the great custom of Woolls, Ex Rot. orig. A. 8. H. 5. M^r^ed B B.
the petty custom, Tunnage and Poundage, Revenue of Wales, and the Duchy of
Cornwall, the Hamper, the accounts of Sheriffs and Escheators, the exchange of
Bullion, and the benefit of Wards and Marriage (then rated at but 1000 Marks a
piece) rose not to above 56966 l'. and being at such time as he undertook the
conquest of France.

Anno 9. H. 5. the Revenue of the Kingdom amountting to 55743 l'. 20 s. 10 d.
was so by the King with advice of his Council, Ex ordinat. anno 9 H 5. Marked
Ox 7.
ordered as before. And by this Record it appears, that the Clerk of the
Navy, and not the Treasurer, was the officer only for that place.

Ex Rot. Par. anno 12. H. 6.
H. 6. anno 12. in Parliament, Cromwell then Treasurer, delivering up an
account of the axitus and introitus of the Exchequer, settled the estate of his
expense, of which there was allowed for his House 10978. and to his Chamber and
Wardrobe 2000 l'.

The rest to defray the debts and necessary occasion^ of the State.

Ex computo Dom. Burleigh T^^^^a^.
Queen Elizabeth anno 12, at which time, besides the Wards, and Duchy of
Lancaster, the profit of the Kingdom was 188197 l.' 4 s. The payments and
assignments 110612 l'. 13 s. of which the household was 30000 l'. privy Purs^
2000 l'. Admiralty 30000 l'. which by an estimate 1. Mali anno 1604. was 40000
l'. and i^ now swollen to near 50000 l', yearly, by the error and abuse of
Officers.

2. For abating and reforming the excess of -- 1. Household. 2. Retinue and
Favorites. 3. Gifts and Rewards.
1. For abating and reforming the excess of household, either by 1. Parliament.
2. Councell-Table.

1. By Parliament.
Anan 3. E. 2. An ordinance was ma^e pro hospitio Regis, Ex Angl. Manuscrip.
fol, 29.
in ease of the people oppressed with purveyance, by reason of the greatness
thereof, and the motive of that Ordance was Al honneur de dieu et al honneur et
profit de Saint Esglise et al honneur de Roy, et son profit, et au profit de
son peuple selons droit et reason delserement quod le dit nostre Signeur le Roy
fist a son Coronment. Ex libro dicto a ula R^gis.


And about this time was the Kings house new formed, and every Officer limited
his charge and salary.

Anno 36. E. 3. Rot. Par. anno 36. E. 3.
The household was brought to such moderation of expense, as may be answerable to
the Revenues of the Crown: and a Commission granted at the Petition of the
Commons to survey and abate the household, which not taking th^^ ^esired effect,
Anno 5. Rot. Par. anno 5. and 6. R. 2.
the Commons petitioned that (...) excessive number of Meniall servants may be
remedied, or otherwise the Realm will be utterly undone, and that his household
might not exceed the ordinary revenues of the Realm, etc.

Anno 4. H. 4. Rot. Par. an. 4. 7. and 11. H. 4.
the people crave reformation of the Kings house. And anno 7. that he would
dismiss some number of the Retinue, since it was now more chargeable, but
less honorable then his progenitors. And that the ancient Ordinances of the
household, in ease of the people, might be kept, and the Officers of the
household sworn to put the Ordinances and Statutes in due execution, and so
consider the just griefs of his subjects by unjust purveyance, contrary to the
Statute, that hereafter Vous poir viure le vostre biens propres in ease de
vostre peuple, Ex ordinat in ^o^. ^ct. Conc. anno 11. H. 4. Marked R R.
which the King willingly does, as appears by an ordinance in Council,
whereby the charge of the household is limited to 16000 Marks.

Rot. Parl. anno 12. and 18. H. 6.
Anno 12. and 18. Hen. 6. the charge of the Kings house is reduced to a
certainty, and lessened by Petition and order in Parliament.

Ex rot. Parl. anno 12. E. 4. Ex lib. Or^in. hospit^ tempore. E 4.
Anno 12. E 4. The King promises to abate his household, and hereafter to live
upon his own. So settling a new form of his Court, which is extant in many
hands, entitled Ordinations for the Kings House.

And to ease the charge of the Kings house, the Queens have allowed a portion
of their joincture, sui^ng to their own expense, to the Treasurer of the
household; as did Philippa, the wife of Edward the third. And so likewise Henry
the fourth his wife, anno 7. And H. 6. his wife allowed 2000 l'. a year out of
her estate.

2. Excess of household abated and reformed by Council Table.
Ex aula regis fact. tempore. E. 3.
Edward the third caused his household to be certain in allowances, making
thereof a Book by way of Ordinance, which is called Aula Regis.

Act Conc. 8. H. 4. Marked P P.
Henry the fourth counseled his son the Prince, and the rest of his
Council, to ordain such moderate governance of his house that may continue,
Au pleiser du Dieu et du peuple.

Hen. 6. Anno 27. Mich. recept. 27. H. 6.
reduced his charge of house to 12000. l'. whereof 2000. l'. was out of the
Queens Jointure.

Ed. 4. Anno 12. reformeth it again, Ex lib. Ordin. hospiti^ temp. E. 4.
and publishes a book of Orders for their better direction, which afterward
Cardinal Wolsey, for the more honor and profit of the King, amendeth.
Ordinat. Card. Wolsey, temp. H. 8.
And that still remains the groundwork of the present government; which
being now so much corru^ted, it may seem fit either to put down the Tables,
and leave all the attendants to allowance of money, as France and Spain does,
or else by setting up the Hall again, reduce the Household to the best, first,
and most magnificent order: So all things being spent in public, will be to
the Kings honor, and the secret waste by chamber-diet and purloyning,
prevented, to the Kings benefit. For there is never a back door in Court,
which costs not the King so little as 2000 l'. yearly. And few mean houses in
Westminster that are not maintained with food and firing by stealth of the
Court Instruments.

2. By abating and reforming the excess of Retinue and Favorites.
Thus Henry the second did with William de Ipre Earl of Kent, a Netherlander,
Ex Gerratio Dorobornens.
and all his Country men and followers, when they grew heavy, and a burden to
the State, unable to foster more then her own natural children.

Thus Richard 1. did with Otho Earl of York, Ex Ric. Canonico in vita R 1.
and all the Bavarians, although he was the son of his sister, taking from
him that Earldome, for that the people opposed it, and giving him in exchange
the Title of Poictou.

Thus Henry the third did with his half brethren the Earl of Pembroke, and
Bishop of Winchester, Ex libro sancti Al^an. and Will. R^sh^nger and liber
Baron. P P.
and all the Poictors their followers.

Ex ordinat. 3. E. ^ in libro l^gum, M S. fol. ^85.
Thus Edward 2. did by his Ordinance, L^^ to^ ^^g^age sire Pieres de Gaveston
s^it entirement ^^stre desire ent^vi^ (...) Roy, and de son servis:

Item Burgois de Till soit ouste and son fia^ quod est Mar^scall del Exchequer.
Ite^ quod Bertram Assabi and son friar and ceux de Gascoigne and Aymerick de
Trisc^mband sei^s oustre and ses Terres prises en le main le Roy.

Ex rot. Par. anno 10 R 2.
Thus Richard 2. did with the Bohemians, anno 10. by an Act of Parliament at the
petition of the people surcharged.

Thus Henry 4. did with the Gascoines and Welsh in like sort overburdening and
impoverishing the King and Realm, Ex rot. Par. anno 7. and 12. H. 4.
with perpetual suits, so that in Court (as the Record says) there were Ne ad
null substance des persons vaylantes and suffesants si bes^igne seroit mes de
Rascail^ par la grendre part.

3. By abating and reforming the excess of Gifts, and Rewards.
Hence was it that the wisdom of former times foreseeing the mischief that
the open hand of the Sovereign may bring the State into, made a Law, 11. R. 2.
That whatsoever comes to the King by Judgment, Rot. Par. anno 11. R. 2. Anno
2. 4. and 5 H. 4.
Escheat, Forfeiture, Wardship, or any other ways, shall not be given away,
and that the procurer of any such gift shall be punished.

Rot. Par. anno 7. H. 4.
Thus the Parliament continued 7. H. 4. until the King was out of debt, making
frustrate the grant, and ordaining a penalty of double value to every mover or
procurer of any such.

Rot. Par. anno 11. H. 4. N. 23.
The like anno 11. H. 4. and that no petition for any thing should be delivered
the King, but in the presence of the Council, who might examine it, lest the
Kings wants should light upon the Commons.

Rot. par. 2. anno 25. H. 6. M. 24.
And to keep the hands of King Henry 6. from wastfull ^iving, the Council
induced him to convey to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and others, all profits
of Words, Marriages, Reliefes, Escheats and forfeitures, to defray the charge
of his house.

It is one of the greatest accusations against the Duke of Summerset, Ex Rot.
Par. anno 28. H. 6.
for suffering the King to give away the possessions of the Crown in manner of
a spoil; for so are the words of the Record.

And it was made the first and chiefest Article to depose King Richard for
wasting and bestowing the Lands and Revenue of the Crown upon unworthy
persons, Ex rot. Par. anno 1. E. 4.
and thereby over-charging the Commons by exaction.

3. By raising of money and improving the Revenue of the Crown, either
By the 1. Grant of the Subject, which is 1. general, as Parliament, Or, 2.
Particular.
2. Power absolute in the Sovereign, as by -- Loanes, Or, Benevolence.



1. General, as in the Parliament, Ex lib. Rubro in Scaccario ex Ioh. Eversden.
wherein they give the King part of their own by way of retribution only, as
for

I. defense of the State: hence grew the scr^tage granted to H. 2. R. 1. King
John and H. 3.

To E, 2. Ex histor. Roffensi. Ex Rot. tempore. Ed. 3. Ex rot. Par. anno 2. 3.
7. R. 2.
diverse Fifteenes and Tenths for his wars against the Scots and Welshmen.

The Subsidy of Woolls, and other contributions to Edw. 3. for his wars. And
the like granted to Rich. 2. an. 2.3.7. so they may be employed in the wars and
particular Treasurers to account in Parliament. So in the 8. and 9. H. 4, on
the like condition.

Tonnage and Poundage began an. 5. E, 3. Rot. P^r. anno 8. and 9 H. 4.
had thence his original. And therefore 13. Ed. 4. and 1. Hen. 5. they are
granted so in express words, and that they proceed of good will, and not of
duty.

Presidents of this nature are plentiful in all the Rolls of Parliament. Ex
benedicto Monacho in vita H. 2.


II. For maintenance of Religion and Church as in the year 1266.

Ex Adamo Merioneth.
To H. 2 was given 12 d. in the pound. And in the 18. of E. 1. a Fifteenth was
granted to expel the Jews.

Ex rot. Par. anno 4 R 2.
And anno 4. R. 2. a Tenth of the Clergy, and Fifteenth of the Commons for his
help to suppress the Wicklivian heresy.

Ex Radulpho Cogsh^ll ex hist. Roffensi. Rot. Par. anno 23. E. 1. 13. E. 3. and
7 H. 4.
III. For support of the laws and liberty of the Common wealth. So did the
Statute to H. 3. an. 27. for confirmation of the great Charter. For the like a
Fifteenth was granted 29. or 23. E. 1. and 13. E. 3. and 7. Hen. 4. that the
laws may be executed against Purveyors.

Rot. Par. anno 15. E. 3. N. 16. Ex rot. Par. anno 7. 8. 10. 11. R. 2. Ex rot.
par. anno 4. and 7 H 5. Ex rot. Par. anno 7. E. 4.
IV. For redress of the agrievances, as in the 15. of Ed. 3. so that the King
would perform their petitions, or else they held themselves not bound to pay
the grant they had given. The like was the 7. 8. 9. 10. and 11. of R. 2. The
Tenth and Fifteenth granted the 4. and 7. of Hen. 5. is upon condition that
they lay no impositions upon the State. And in the 7. E. 4. the State relieveth
the King, so he will promise to live hereafter upon his own, and not burden
the State: The which he professes to perform.

Ex orig. anno 3. R 2.
And it is to be observed, that to improve the Grants of Subsidies to the
extremest value, there were new Commissioners appointed to survey and advance
men's fortunes above the estimate of the former taxes. And Commissions have been
granted out, as 3. R. 2. to enable him out of his own by an act of Resumption
of Lands, Offices, Claus. anno 6. H 3. Rot. ordinat. anno 5. and Cl^us. anno 9.
and 10. E. 2. Rot. Par. anno 1. R 2. Rot. Par. anno 1. 2. and 6. H. 4. Ex Rot.
Par. anno 1. and 2. H. 5.
Annuities, etc. Thus did H. 3. anno 6.

And E. 2. anno 5. 9. and 10. by an Ordination of the Prelates, Earls and
Barons.

All grants made by Edward 3. to unworthy persons, R. 2. resumed anno primo.

And by H. 4. anno 6. all patents for life or years since the fourth of E. 3.
were resumed.

At the petition of the people H. the 5. revokes all grants out of the
principality made to unworthy persons, and all annuities out of the customs of
Wool deducting 20000 l'. a year out of all other annual pensions rateably,
Rot. Par. anno 28. 29. and 33. H. 6.
leaving the remain of any to the Patentees.

H. 6. anno 29. and 33. resumeth in England all Lands, Offices, Liberties, and
Grants, from anno 1. Rot. Par. anno 4.7. and 12. E. 4. Ex act. Conc. anno 21.
H. 6. Rot. Par. anno 2. H. 7.
and the like anno 21. in Ireland. So did Edward the 4. anno 4.7. and 12. And
H. 7. an. 2. resumed all grants made by Ed. 4. or R. 3.

2. Particular, by Loanes 1. Voluntary, or Benevolence, 2. Compulsive.


1. Loanes voluntary, Rot. Par. an. 13. E. 3. Act. Conc. 20 and 22. H. 6.
as upon assurance of Bond of the Nobility. So was William de la Poole bound
for E. 3. anno 13. in great sums. And the Duke of Gloucester, anno 2. H. 6.
And the Cardinal pawned his silver vessels for H. 6. his debt.

Pawn upon Jewels.
Thus did H. 3. anno 26. to the Archbishop of York: Claus. anno 26. H. 3.
and when his own were at gage, he took Aurum and Jo^alia Feretri sancti
Edwardi Confessoris, and pawned them.

Edward the first employed one Andaver ad jocalia sua impignoranda. Claus. anno
29. E. 9.


Edw. 2. pawned his jewels to the Lord Beamont. Rot. Franc. anno 9. E. 2. Com.
Inscript. 30. E. 3. Pat. anno 7. R. 2. Henry 4.


Edw. 3. pawned Magnam Coronam Angliae to Sir John Wesenham for 8. years.

R. 2. pawned Vasa^^^^a and diversa jocalia, to Sir Robert Knolls.

Hen. 4. Invadiavit tabellas and tressellas suas Argentent de Hispania.

H. the 5. Pat. anno 5. H. 5. Pat. anno 10. 12. and 29 H. 6.
pawned his great Crown of gold to the rich Bishop of Winchester. And H. the
6. to the same man then Cardinal, many parcels of his Jewels in the 10. 12.
and 29. of his reign. And the like to many others.

And the late Queen to ease her people, did the like with her jewels in the
Tower, besides the often Mortgage of her Land.

Upon assignment of Customs and Subsidies. Act. Conc. an. 22. H. 6.

So did the Cardinal Beauford lend 10000 l'. to H. 6. anno 22. upon security
of the Customs of London and Southampton. Ex billa signat. anno 15. H. 6. and
12. E. 4.
The King intending to turn the course of most Trade thither.

And H. 6. anno 15. and E. 4. anno 12. did secure their debts, by assignment
over of the next Subsidy or aid that should be granted from the Church or
Laity to them, being a device (in truth) to draw on a supply the sooner from
the State.

Upon the great Seal, or privy Seal.
Rot. orig. anno 3^. H. 4. M^^ked B B.
The great Seal under which they should have (without paying fee) a patent
sealed for repayment of their dues by a day certain.

The privy Seal, which is of late most in use, and it is worthy of
observation to see the willingness of former times in respect of these.

Rot Act. Conc. anno 13. H. 6.
In the 13. of H. the 4. there is a Roll entitled, L^ nommes de ceux qui ont da
prester au R^y les sommes escrits. The Archbishop of Canterbury lent 1000
Marks, the Bishop of Lincoln as much, the Bishop of Norwich 600. the Bishop of
London 500. Marks, the Bishop of Bath 400 Marks, the Lord Privy Seal 200
l'. the Clerks of the Chancery a thousand Marks.

Particular grants of the Subject by Loanes compulsive.
^x ^r^in. C^nc anno 3. H 5 M^^ked N N.
So were the Merchants of Florence, Venice, and S. Luke, compelled by an order
in Counsel, 3. H. 5. because they had by grace and sufferance, Du Roy grantes,
privileges, etc. reportants grand lucre pour Lex ercise de Leur Merchandre en
le Angleterre. And the persons that refused to lend, were committed to the
Fleet.

Act Conc. 3. H. 6.
Neither were the English more free in anno 3. H. 6. diverse being enjoined to
attend the Council Table, or else to pay the demanded Loan.

Ex instruct. Co^mi^^. 14. H. 8.
In the time of H. 8. anno 14 of his reign, he exacted by way of Loan, 10 l'.
in the 100. of all Goods, Jewels, Utensils and Land, according to the
extremest rate revealed by oath, of the possessions, notwithstanding there is
a law 2. R. 2. ^. R 2.
That none shall be denied (in demand of any Loan,) his reasonable excuse.

Particular grants of the Subject by Contribution, or benevolent Gifts.
These were of old usual and free: therefore called, Ex ^harta Ep^. ^ant. rot.
Cl^us. 29. E. 1. claus. 35 E. 3.
Liberalitas populi by R. 1. and Curialitas by E. 1. E. 3. H. 4. And H. 5.
confessed them to proceed Ex spontan^a voluntate, nec de ju^o vindicare potest.
Yet did H. 6, anno 20. in an Instruction to Commissioners employed in procuring
a benevolence, say, that forasmuch as by the Law he might compel all his
Subjects, Ex instru^tione ^rig. ^^no 2. H 8.
and at their own charge to attend his wars, he was contented to spare such
as would contribute but as much after his degere and reputation,, as two days
in his personal service would stand him in; thereby implying a necessity in
them to give, to escape a further expense. This Law upon which H. 6. grounded
himself, was by a Statute in Queen Mary's time repealed; and that since
repealed: this last year has made a reviving of the former, whereby the King
is remitted into his former advan^age, Ex act Par. anno 5. Mariae.
and the subject in the former mischief. And 8. H. 8. anno 17. although he
moves for a benevolence, he sought it with no other style then Amicable
grant, yet he threatened the refusers with convention before his Council, and
confiscation of goods.

The Kings raise money, and improve the Revenues of the Crown,
By power absolute in the Sovereign in the disposing 1. Lands. 2. Merchandise.
3. Regalities.


1. Lands, as by selling, which has been often and old, if they were not of
the ancient demeasne lands, which our forefathers held impious to alienate
from the Crown. And those were such Lands as go under the title of Terra Regis,
in the book of Doomsday, ^^ber Doomesday.
and were the lands of Edward the Confessor: of other lands I never observed
question, neither do ever find that acts of Resumption ever reached to lands
that were sold for valuable consideration.

By passing in Fee ^arme, except places of the Kings residence, Parkes,
spacious wastes, or Forests, all the lands of the Crown, which remains
either in the annexation, custody, land^, or the Queens joincture, and exceed
not yearly 32000 l'. These although largely estated out in several natures,
some for lives, some for years, will one with the other be advanced to a
treble rent, which amounting to 96000 l'. leaving an annual improvement of
64000 l'. And if the offer be not made restrictive for the new Tenant, there is
no doubt but his Majesty shall find ready and hearty undertakers amongst the
Gentry and Nobility too, who have any place of residence near any of his
Majesty's Manors. And the Kings security the better, since their abilities will
settle the Fee-farme rent upon more land then the purchase.

If any shall object against this a loss by fines and profits of Courts, a
prejudice in not serving necessity (as of late) by sales or diminution of
Regalities in seizure of so many Royalties.

It may be answered to the first, that the casual profits of Courts, never
defrayed to the present Officers their fee and expenses. And this appears
from a collection made the 44. year of the late Queen, where the total issue
of such certain charge exceeded the receipt of such chances above 8000 l'.

To the second, if looking upon the several Rates of the Kings lands exposed
to Fee-farme sales, we find some of 50. others at 21 years, as to the late
contractors, and make out of these extremes a Medium of the largest forty
years, and set on the other side the common and current estimate for d^ad
rents 15 years purchase, we must find that 5 l'. land sold unimproved
respectively to the like trebled by a Fee-farme will be 250 l'. loss to his
Majesty in the sale. As for Regalities, though it may add somewhat to the
Subject in increasing such his petty command, it can nothing to a Sovereign,
whose transcendent power drowneth in it all such subordinate Dependencies and
Regards.

But if we consider besides the former improvement the increase of casual
advantage at diminution of certain charge, we shall have just cause not to
continue this course.

For if the Commissioners in this business may be ordered by instruction to
reserve upon every Manor of above 30. l'. per annum, a tenure in a Knights
service by half a Fee and of above 50 l' in Capite. by an entire fee, and by
the purchase to pay his Rent into the receipt himself, half yearly, and
strike there his Tally; the former will advance the Revenue accidental of the
Crown in Wardships, primer seisin, Alienations and Aides, and the latter cut
off at once so many their unnecessary Receivers, Auditors, Stewards, Bailiffes,
and Clarks, as stand the King in yearly above 12000. l'. As for other dues or
casual Revenues, which now fall under the charge of these Officers: The
collection and payment may be as it has been with the rest, from the time of
H. 2. until of late days laid ^on the Sheriffs of the Shires, and all the
accounts left to the two Auditors of the press to draw up, and the Clerks of
the Pipe to enter in Magno Rotulo, as in former times; for it must seem
strange to all men of judgment, that it should be with those Officers who had
their beginning but since the 25. year of King Henry the eight, by addition of
his new Revenue of 150000 l'. from the suppressed Monasteries, otherwise then
with all things in Nature and reason Cessante causa and effectus, not to be
discontinued when as all Crown annexed. Lands that gave them their just
employment for the most part passed from the Sovereign into the Subjects
possession.

Besides this of a general disposing in Fee Farm, there has been a project
in particular to infranchise the Copyholders in the several Manors which I
should hold to be of more prejudice to his Majesty, then the other, bringing
with it all the former inconveniences, loss of Fines, Regalities, and
advantages of Sale, and being without many of the advantages, as Wardships,
Primer seisin, Alienation, and Aids; for no man will buy quillets but in
soccage, and discontinuance of Officers, who must still remain, though they
can bring but l^ttle benefit.

Rot Par. anno 7 H. 4.
2. By farming out for years, Lands, Casualties, or Wastes, as in the 7. of H.
4. the State held it more just to help the King out of his own, then to
burden the commonwealth, and therefore gave way by Parliament to the King, to
improve up his Lands, though in Lands, though in Lease, provided that the
Lessee should have refusal of the bargain if he would.

Rot ^n^. anno 2. E 1.
Edw. the 1. anno 2. granted a Commission to farm out all such Waste quod
absque injuria alterius sieri potest. And in anno 15. asserted a great part of
his Woods for rent, and dissafforrested in most Counties of England for a sum
of money which they gave him. Rot. Par. a^^ 0 15. E. 1.


And it was not the least of charitable thrift in the King, to reduce much of
his waste to habitation of Christians, especially the remote Forests, which
would increase many thousand families for his service, and bring many thousand
pounds to his Coffers. But in the carriage of this business there must be much
caution to prevent commotion: for in them there are many that have right in
Common, sans number. And the resolution in agreement with them must be sudden,
and confident: for multitudes are jealous and inconstant, and the instruments
to effect this, must be such as be neighbors interessed and popular, not
strangers.

And the first demise to the Inhabitants, and at under and easy values.

3, By manuring of Lands.
R t. C^^^. ^no 1^. 3. M ^^.
Thus did H. anno 13. in removing out of most of his Parkes (as Gillingham,
Brigstocke, Chiffe, Woodstocke, Haverell) all men's Cattle pro bobos, pro
lardaria Regis in parcis praedi^^ is impinguendis. And E. 1. commanded all the
Escheators in England, ex color seminar^ and appropriare ad maximum Regis
proficium omnes terras quae Regi and Corona suae devonerint per mortem
aliquorum vacatione Epi^copatum, R^^. (...) 2. and ^ b 1.
etc.

The Kings raise money, and improve the Revenewes of the Crown.
By Merchandise 1 Trading themselves. 2 Licencing others to Trade Commodities,
3 Improving Customs 1 Lawful. 2 Unlawful.



1 Trading themselves, thus did Edw. 1. Anno 22. Rot. voscon. 22. E. 1.
who seized into his hands all the Woolls in the Kingdom as the Merchants were
lading them in the Ports, giving them security of payment at a long day and a
shortprice; and then transported them to his own best and readiest sale.

Thus did Edw. 3. Anno 12. with all the Tin and H. 6. Rot. Almgne 12. E. 3.
Act. Cons. An. 20. H. 6.
Anno 20. by advice of his Counsel took up by way of purveyance a great
quantity of Grain, and transported it into Cascoigne, where by reason of a
Dearth the price was extreme, and in Anno 31. he arrested all the Tin in
Southhampton, and sold it to his own present use, and in the year following
using the advantage of the Statute which bound all men to trade the Staple
commodities to no other place but Calice, Ex billa signat. An. 31. and. 32 H. 6.
vented himself many sackes of wool to other Ports of better advantage.

And the late Queen Anno 1567. Warrant sub. private sigillo An. 9. Eliz.
Reginae.
caused by Warrant of privy Seal a great quantity of Beer to be purveyed,
transported and sold to her own use beyond the seas.

2 By lycencing others to trade Commodities 1 Lawful or 2 Unlawful.


First Lawful but solely.
Thus did H, 6. Rot. Par. An. 29. H. 6. N. 15
by approbation of Parliament with all the trade of Allome for two years,
granted to the Merchants of South-hampton for 8000. pound, and again for the
like sum to those of Geneway.

Secondly, Unlawful or prohibited.
Thus did many of the Kings after such time as the heavy burden of imposition
began in the miserable necessity of H. 3. called then by no better name then
Maltolt, and continued until the 15: Rot. Claus. Anno 19. H. 3.
year of R. 2. by diverse intermissions, (for then I find the last Petition of
many in Parliament against it) was altogether taken away.

Rot. Par. 15. R. 2.
For when R. 2. and his Successors found the Revenue lessened, by the
importunate cry of the people, whereby impositions were laid aside, then began
to advise an other supply out of the unbounded Prerogative, and finding a
greedy desire of one Merchant to prevent another of his market (restrained by
that Statute which tied them to one time, Ex. Bill. Signar Anno 20. R 2.
and one Port Calice for all Staple commodities) they used to sell Licenses
with clause of Non obstante, whereby they dispensed with multitudes to trade
what commodities, and to what places they would. To the Merchants of New
Castle, R. 2. gave leave to carry Wool Fells etc, to any Port besides Calice,
upon condition that they should pay for them Custom and Subsidy according to
Le sage discretion de vous and vostre Council, to diverse Citizens of London H.
4. in like sort dispenceth for great quantities of Tynne for seven years
paying 1000. Ex Pet. Anno 7, H 4 Ex. Pet Anno 5 R. 6. Ex. Act. Com.
yearly above the custom H. 6. Anno 5.21. 30. renews to the Town of New
Castle the same License they had Anno 20. R. 2. and grants 600. sacks of
wool to Benedict Benony, Merchant of Florence with an obstante any Statute or
restraint. In this year such Licenses were so frequent that the Town of
Calice complained in Parliament of their decay thereby, yet without relief as
it seems, for the same King Anno 36. gives leave to Lawrence Barbarico to
transport from London or Cicister 12000. Ex. B ll^ Orig An. 10. ^. 4.
sacks of Wool to what Ports he list, and Edward the 4. Anno 10. borrowing
10000. pound of diverse Merchants permitted them non obstante, any Law to carry
any Staple Commodities to the straights of Morocco until they were satisfied
their sum.

H. 7. raised much money by giving leave to many Merchants to trade inward and
outward commodities prohibited, as to Alonso de Burgues great proportions of
Wood, Anno 6. H. 7. Ex. lib. Comp. int. H 7 and Dudley.
and to a multitude of others all kinds of grain and other forbidden things:
as in Anno 20, 21, 22.

Improving of Customs by 1. Farming out of Ships 2. Raising the book of rates
3. Farming the Customs.


1. Ex. lib. H. 7.
Farming out of Ships to the Merchants and taking security of them either to
bring in or carry out yearly as much Commodities as shall yield the King in
Customs the sum agreed on, or else to make it up out of their own money thus
did H. 7. many years not only with his ships, but with diverse stocks of money.

2. Rot. Claus 29. E. 1. Rot. Almaigne 3. E. 3. Extract. Brux. Ell^.
Raising the book of Rates this was in some sort done Consensu Mercatorum by
Ed. 1. and Ed. 3. And again in H. 8. time of which the house of Burgundy
complained as against the treaty of intercourse, and of late so stretched, as
it is feared it will prove the overthrow of Trade. Neither do I find this
course at any other time, as a branch of this may partly fall out, the benefit
Princes made by Prerogative power of imposing inward and outward upon
Commodities over and above the ancient Custom or Subsidy.

The first that used this course after the State was settled from a King of a
Voluntary government after the Conquest (when as Kings ruled more by the edge
of the sword then by rule of Law was H. 3. about the entrance of his Reign,
Mag. Charta. Dors claus, An 16. H 3. N. 20.
but finding it to be an apparent overthrow of Commerce and Trade, against the
great Charter, made proclamation Anno. 16. H. 3. in all the Ports of England
that all Merchants might come faciendo rectas et debitas consuetudines sed tibi
timeant de Malistoltis for it had no better name then Maltolts. Stat An. 25. E.
1.
Some Impositions being laid by Ed. 1. he in Anno 25. takes them away with
promise that neither he nor his Successors should do any such thing without
assent of Parliament, Rot. Par. 31. E. 1. M. 42.
granting in Anno 31. to the Merchants many immunities as release of prisage
for which they requite him with some increase of Customs, but not as imposed
by his own power, Stat. 34 E. 1. Ca 1. and 2.
for he in Anno 34. declares that no tallage or aid should be levied without
the assent of Parliament nor nothing to be taken of wools by color of Maltolt,
in E. 2. it appears that levying of new Customs, and raising old, was the
destruction of Traffic, and therefore repealeth all Maltolts, only in Anno
11. and 12. he takes by way of Loan, Rot. Cl^us An. 11. E. 2
and with leave of the Merchant, some former increase upon wool, ascribing
nothing to any supreme power to impose.

Rot. Finem 4 E. 3.
The like did E. 3. Anno 1. confirming in Anno 2. the great Charter for free
Traffic. But having about Anno Quinto granted certain Commissions for a new
kind of raising Tallage, Stat. 2. E. 3. Ca. 9.
the people complained the year followng whereupon he repealeth the said
Commissions, and promises never to assesse any, Stat. An 11 E 3. Cap 1.
but as in time of his Ancestors After in Anno 11. by reason of a Statute then
made, restraining all men upon pain of death from transporting any woolls
without License from the King and Council. Rot. Almaine 12, E. 3. M. C. 22, in
Dors
E. 3. made great advantage by selling of dispensations of that Law, and
grounded upon it many impositions, but it fell so heavy upon the people, that
their discontents so far increased that the King was enforced to cause the
Archbishop of Canterbury to persuade them to patience by his godly
exhortations, Stat. 13. E. 3. Rot. Part 13. E Stat, 14. E 3.
yet notwithstanding he continued by gentle intermissions the advantage he
had by that Law, taking an improvement of Custom for opening the passage, that
thereby was shut in. Anno 13. until the same year the State made purch^se of
their former freedom and discharge of the Maltolt by granting the tenth Sheafe
and fleece, etc.

And thus it continued all his Reign, being a time of great necessity and
expense by reason of the wars, he sometimes taking the advantage either to
raise an imposition, or else to gain an aid from the people in discharge
thereof, they continually urging the injury in barring them their Birthright;
and the King on the other side, the greatness of his own occasions, and it
may be gathered by Record, that thus it held on, until the fifteenth of R. 2.
in which year is the last Petition against Impositions generally grounded (in
likelihood) from the Kings power in restrayning or permitting trade all the
time after: though License with Non obstante were ordinary, Lcience grant^d by
H. 4. H. 5. H. 6. to many Merchants with Non obstante any Statute.
yet were they to private persons and for particular proportions of
commodities, whereby the King succeeding raised no less benefit then by sale
of any general permission.

To this of impositions I may add the Rule I find Anno 20. H. 6. made in
counsel, That all goods for payment of Subsidy shall berated of commodities
domestic, as they may be sold between Merchant and Merchant; and if foreign,
then so as it shall appear upon Oath of the Merchant or his Factor they stood
them in at the first, and the general Maxim which limits all Regal advantage
upon Trade of Merchants is, Vt causa honesta sit and necessaria, ratio facili^
tempus idoneum.

Farming out of Customs.
So did Ed. 3. Claus Au. 5. E. 3. Orig. 17. E. 3. Rot.
with the new and old customs at London for 1000. Marks monthly to be paid
into the Wardrobe.

The like he did Anno 17. R. 2. Anno 20. lets out for term of life the
Subsidy of Cloth in diverse Countries, and E. 4. Anno 1. the Subsidy of
ulnage of Cloth. Thus did H. 8. with his Customs, and since his time the late
Queen, and our late Sovereign Lord King James, and it was so then in use in
the best governed State (Rome) which let out their portions and Decims to the
Publicans.

Kings raise money, and improve the Revenewes of the Crown.
By Regalities 1 Temporal or 2 Mixed.
As for 1 Liberties etc. 2 Penalties of Laws. 3 Letters of favor.


1 Liberties in granting restraining or renewing them.

It is a course usual that the Kings have raised money by calling in question
the Charters and Liberties of Corporations, Leetes, free Warrens, and other
Royalties.

Thus did R. 1. proclaiming Quod omnes Chartoe and confirmationes quae prioris
Sigilli impressione roboraverint irrita forent nisi porsteriori sigillo
roborentur. Ex. Rado. Cogsh ll.


And H. 3. Anno 10. enjoined all qui suis volebant libertatibus gaudere, ut
innovarent Chartas suas, de nova regio sigillo getting money thereby.

Edw. 1. by diverse Commissions, with Articles called Articuli de Ragman
annexed to them, Rot. Ragman. Anno 7. E. 1.
called in question about Anno 7. all the liberties and freedoms of England,
Gilbert de Thornton his Attorney putting in information by quo warranto
against all persons, as well bodies politic as others, whereby they are
enforced anew to renew their Charters, and Fine for their Liberties.

Ex. quo Warrant, 13. E 3.
The like was in Anno 13. E. 3. in whose time Anno 9. Al clauses of allowances
by Charter of Amerciaments, Fines, etc. imposed by the Kings Ministers upon any
of the Tenants of other men, were adjudged void, and the penalties made payable
to the Kings Officers, Com. term. Hill. An 9. E 3. 9. 3. Rot. 8.
unless they made a new purchase of their Liberties; and this was one of the
usuallist and easiest means to raise money from the people, because it
lights only upon the best abilities, and if there were now but twenty pound
taken of every Corporation, of every Person that holds by Charter his
liberties 50. pound for renewing of them. And of every one that claims by
prescription ten pound for purchase of a Charter. All which would be easy and
acceptable, it would amount to above one hundred thousand pound.

2. For penal Laws they have been sometime, but with ill success wrought
upon.

When R. 2. Anno 22. began his Course, Instruct. Orig. 22. R. 2.
appointing in all his Commissions Bushey only to be of the Quorum for
compounding with Delinquents it wrought in the affections of his people such
distaste, that it grew the death of the one, and deposition of the other,

No less fatal was the like to Empson and Dudley, Proc. contra Dudley An. 1.
H. 8.
and there is no string will sooner jar in the Commonwealth then this if it be
generally touched.

3. For Letters of favor either for mitigation or dispatch of Justice.

Of the first sort there be many found in H. 6. and E. 4. their times,
sometimes of Protection, although by course of the Common Law, none are
warrantable but to such as are going in Obsequium Regis, or Ibidem Moraturi,
sometimes freeing men from Arrests by calling them up to appear before the
Kings Council, sometimes in cases highly criminal, releiving the Prisoner, in
commanding the Judges to make stay of all proceedings upon supposall of
indirect practices until the King was better informed.

Of the second sort there are many in H. 7. Lib. Acquit. inter. H. 7. and
Dudley.
his time where the King has taken for writing to the Judges of Assize, money
for his Letters of favor.

4. For Offices thus did King John with the Chancellorship, selling it for
term of life to Gray for five thousand Marks.

Diverse Offices now in the gift of the Master of the Rolls were engaged to the
Chancellor and Treasurer of England, as are to be found in Records of H. 4. H.
5. and H. 6. to be passed by warrant under the Kings hand and upon some
Considerat^on. And H. 7. renewed this course using Dudley as his instrument to
compound with Suitors for those and any other places, and by that Record we
find the Chancellor the chief Justice the Keeper of most of the Record, the
Clerks of the Assizes and peace, the Masters of the game and Parkes, and what
else carrying either profit or reputation paid to the King, Familius in vita
Lewis 12.
some proportion of money for their places. Neither is this different from the
course of other States for in France, Lewis the 12. (called the father of his
Country) did so with all the Offices not being of Judicature which his
Successors did not forbear.

Vasques C. 12, 40, 43.
In Spain it is usual and Vasques the Spanish Advocate and Charles the fifth.
precsribeth it to his son as a rule in his last instruction drawing his
ground of reason and Convenience from the example and practice of the Sea of
Rome. Instruct. Car. 5 to Phil. 2.


The like might be of all inferior promotions that are or may be in the Kings
Gift whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal, if they were after the true value
in profit and reputation listed into ranks according to the several Natures
of their employments respectively.

5 For honor, and that either by power legal or election.

Of the first it is only in respect of Land whereby every man is to find, when
the King shall require that has ability to be made a Knight and is not. Of
this sort there is plenty of examples. The other out of choice and grace; As
Hugo de putiaco Bishop of Durham was by King R. 1. created Earl of
Northumberland for a great sum of money, And I doubt not but many of these
times, would set their ambition at as high a price. And for his Majesty now to
make a degree of Honor hereditary as Barronets next under Barons, and grant
them in Tail taking of every one a thousand pound. In Fine it would raise with
ease ten thousand pound. And by a Judicious election be a means to content
those worthy Persons in the Commonwealth, that by the confused admission of
Many Knights of the Bath held themselves all this time disgraced.

6 For Coin and Bullion by which although some Kings out of a last shift have
seemed to relieve themselves, yet was it (in truth) full of danger and distrust
to the Commonwealth being assured token of a Bankerupt State, and to the
Prince in conclusion of most disadvantage, for the Revenewes of the Crown
being commonly in certain Rents they must in true value, howsoever in verbal
sound be abated to the proportion that the money shall be abased, and every
man will rate his Commodity in sale, not according to the account of pence or
pounds, but to the weight of the pure Silver contained in the current money; As
for example, that which was before the descrying of the Coin worth five
shillings in the pound weight, will (if the allay be to the half) be held at
ten shillings, and so in every proportion respectively, for money is not
merely to be esteemed in respect of the sculpture or figure, but it must
value in Pecunin quantum in Massa, and Silver is a Commodity as other wares,
and therefore holds his estimation as they do according to the goodness.
And the Lord Treasurer Burleigh in Anno one thousand five hundred sixty one,
when the Court of State affected an abasement of Coin, after a grave
deliberation advised the Queen from it, and never would give way to any such
resolution in his time.

But that benefit which truly the King may make more of Bullion then now he
does, is to erect again Cambrium Regis his own Exchange, an Office as ancient
as before H. 3. and so continued until the middle of H. 8. the profit of it
being now engrossed amongst a few Goldsmiths, and would yield above two
thousand pound a year if it were heedfully regarded, and then should the King
himself never want the materials if two things were observed; the one to
permit all men bringing in Bullion to Trade outward the value thereof in
domesticke Commodities at an abated Custom, the other to abate the mighty
indraught of Foreign Manufactures, and unnecessary Wares, that the outward
Trade might overbalance the inward, which otherwise will (as it has done)
draw on this desperate consumption of the Commonwealth, which in Anno twenty
seven E. 3. was otherwise, for then the exitus exceeded the introitus pounds,
and in the last times of the late Queen, for at this time the unmeasurable use
of Luxurious Commodities was brought in, as Wine, Spices, Silk and fine
Linen, etc. For of the latter sort above ten Groates the Ell, there is above
360000 pound yearly spent, which is half the value of our Cloths transported,
makes the State to buy more then they do sell, whereas a good Father of a
Family ought to be Vendacem and not Emacem; Besides the condition of our people
is now such that the greater part neither get nor save, which in a private
house is an apparent Argument of ruining, and must be no less in a
Commonwealth. And it is observed generally that hence the want of Bullion now
is such, that there is not money (in specie) sufficient to pay the Lenders
their principal, so that Usury is paid for money upon supposition and not
really.

If then his Majesty shall be pleased to advise of his Counsel to advantage
himself, any otherwise by Coynage it will be safe^ to do it upon a simple
Metal then by any impliant or better suite, which well governed States both
modern and ancient used; for Rome in her greatest pitch of glory had their
money Ere argento, auro, puro puto, and so have all the absolute Monarchies to
this day in Christendom. And I believe it may be wrought to his Majesty of
good value, and to the state of much ease if it may be put in practice with
discreet caution, and constant resolution, for the danger may only be in the
venting of the quantity, which may clog the State with the useless money in
extention of example which may work in by degrees an abasement of Bullione.

The proportion that I would hold beneficial and safe should be in the Mass
at first one hundred twenty thousand pound by which his Majesty should gain
ten hundred thousand pound clearly, the increase annually twelve thousand
pound in which his Majesty should gain a thousand pound. And the limitation
that none be enforced to take any but in sums under 20 s. and then but the
twentieth part proportionably.

Against this some may object that it will either not advantage the King so
much as is projected, either from the difficulty in venting, or facility in
counterfeiting, or else prejudice the State with a worthless money.

The benefit to the King will easily fall out if he restrain Retailers of
victuals and small wares from using their own tokens; For in and about London
there are above three thousand that one with another cost yearly five pound a
piece of leaden tokens whereof the tenth remains not to them at the years
end when they renew their store which amounts to above fifteen thousand
pound. And all the rest of the Realm cannot be inferior to the City
proportion and the form and figure may with an Engine so subtle be nulled
that the charge will prevent all practice of false play for the prejudice,
since London (which is not the 24 part in people of the Kingdom) had in it
found above 800000, by a late inquiry by the order of the late Queen and so
falls out to be 2. pence a person in the entire State, it may be nothing
either of loss by the first uttering being so easy, nor burden any with too
great a Mass at a time since continual use will disperse so small a quantity
into so many hands. But on the other side will be to the meaner sort (except the
Retaylers that made advantage formerly of their own Tokens as the King shall
now) of necessary use and benefit, for the buyers hereafter shall not be tied
to one seller and his bad Commodities as they are stilll when his tokens
hereafter made current by authority, shall leave him to the choice of any other
Chapman. And to the poor in this time of small Charity. It will be of much
relief since many are like to give a farthing Alms that will not part with a
greater sum.

Besides it cannot but prevent much wast of silver that by the minting pence
and halfepence is occasioned, there will be no cause hereafter to cut Bullion
into proportion so fit for loss, what that has been may be conject^red. If
we mark but of the great quantities from the penny downward since H. 8. time
stamped, how few remain. Whereas of all the Coins from three pence upwards
which are manuable (or manual) plenty pass still in daily payment.

Regalities mixed.
As for restitution of the temporalities of Abbots and Bishops for which H. 7.
received great sums.

Corodaries in Cathedral Churches.
And having in every Cathedral and collegiate Church as incident to his Crown
a Corodarie and made money of it at the highest rate he could.

Vacancie of Bishoprics.
The benefit of the vacancy of any Bishop some Kings have used to their best
advantage, making a Circular remove of as many as in reputation and profit were
inferior to the place void,

Concurrent Jurisdiction as the Pope had in former times.

Besides these there are two of no mean Commodity.

The one is grounded upon a concurrent Jurisdiction with every Ordinary in the
Diocese with the King by having the power Papal in that point invested in him
by Act of Parliament, may exercise by his Commission or otherwise remit to the
Ordinary for some valuable respect. Thus did Cardinal Wolsey with Wareham the
Archbishop of Canterbury and all other the Bshops of the Kingdom after he
had got his Legative power. Ex. Compos^t. Orig. inte^. Wolser and Arch. Cant.
dat. 14. H. 8.
And this if it were put in practice would draw to the King two hundred
thousand pound into his Coffers.

The other is the short account yielded the King of such Ecclesiastical Tenths
and duties as were often or annually paid unto the Pope in former times. Tenths
of the Church Lands now in the Laity.
And now by Statute invested in the Crown, for in former times the Sea of Rom^
received them not as only out of the mere Spiritualties of Spiritual
persons, which Lands being now divided from the Church into the hands of the
Laitye, yet ought they to pay this duty, since they were settled in the Crown
by a former Law, and no subsequent ever has discharged them.

FINIS.

