A Believers Triumph OVER DEATH, Exemplified in a RELATION OF The LAST HOURS OF
Dr ANDREW RIVET.

AND An Account of diverse other Remarkable Instances.

BEING An History of the Comfortable End, and dying Words of several eminent
Men; with other Occasional Passages: All tending to comfort Christians against
the Fear of Death, and prepare them for a like Happy Change.

He shall enter into Peace: They shall rest in their Beds, each one walking in
his Vprightness. Isa. 57. 2. London, Printed for Benjamin Alsop at the Angel
and Bible in the Poultrey, 1682.

The PREFACE.
I Will not trouble the Reader with a long Preface to a little Book, nor waste
Time in an affected Apology for my Undertaking to publish the ensuing Stories
in the English Tongue; for I doubt not but upon a serious Perusal, the things
here Related will be esteemed by every Pious Christian of that worth and use,
as will sufficiently recommend this Account of them to their good acceptance,
who were not capable of reading them in another Language.

The first, and largest part, of what is here offered to your Service, (viz.
The last Hours of Dr. Rivet) was first written, and published in the French
Tongue, and soon after turned into Latin, and printed again in the last
Edition of his learned and elaborate Works; from whence you have it now
translated into our own Language: I have added nothing of my own to it, nor
omitted the mention of the least circumstance there set down, but have
faithfully represented the whole in the same order as I met with it my self:
And I may modestly say, It Is as great ^ Story of this kind as most Age^ can
furnish us with. That thi^ might not go alone, I have in the Appendix added the
Memorable Examples of the Blessed and Peaceful End of some others also, eminent
for their Piety, and zealous Profession of the Protestant Religion while they
lived: In which (where no other Author is cited) I have followed the Authority
of Melchior Adamus, or of those from whom he made his Collections; and do
assure you, that as there is nothing Reported without good Warrant, as to the
truth of matter of fact, so I am confident nothing will occur, but what is
suitable to feed and increase those holy Affections, and that Pious Zeal, which
I hope the foregoing Narrative may enkindle in the Readers heart.

That which I aim at in the whole is, the Quickening and Encouragement of
Christians in their spiritual Course; and that the weighty Sayings, and happy
End of these Great men may provoke us to imitate that worthy Pattern of Faith
and Holiness, which they have left us both living and dying: Instruction backed
by Example is more powerful than that given by Precept alone: It Is truly said,
Verba docent; Exempla trahunt: i. e. Words teach, but Examples draw: Howbeit,
even the Words of Dying men do usually make a deeper Impression upon the Heart,
than other Discourses can do: The Sayings of one upon the brink of Eternity
are next of kin to those of one returned from the Dead, and sent back from
another World to give us Warning, and direction in our way thither, and
therefore do justly claim a more than ordinary attention from us. These men
call to us from the borders of Light, having already tasted the Fruit of the
heavenly Canaan; and have left behind them such a feeling Testimony of its
Sweetness and Glory, as may greatly engage our Souls in pursuit after that same
Blessedness which they are arrived at. And if we would have our Death to be as
Gainf^ and Comfortable as theirs, w^ must make the Glory of Christ the highest
End and Design o^ our Lives, as they did. Wha^ is the Talent of Time lent u^
for, but that we might wor^ out our own Salvation with fea^ and trembling? We
lose all ou^ time and pains that are not employed this way; and shall a^ last
be of his mind that said upon his Deathbed, I repent Dr. Donn.
of all my Life, but that part of it which I spent in Communion with God and
doing Good. All the World will not relieve a Dying Man; For what will it profit
a Matt. 16. 26.
man if he Gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? or what shall a man
give in Exchange for his Soul? The greatest Monarch that dies without Grace,
must subscribe to the last words of Sept. Severus the Roman Emperor, Pezel.
Mellif.
(...). i. e. I have been all things, and nothing profits me.

I cannot but add the Grave and serious words of Salmasius, who was a Man of
Great Learning, of extraordinary diligence in his Studies, and of Great Fame
among the Scholars of this last Age; and yet upon his Deathbed he pours forth
this bitter Complaint:

Oh I have lost a deal of Time! Time! that most precious thing in the World,
whereof had I but one Year longer, it should be spent in Reading David's
Psalms, and Paul's Epistles: Oh Sirs, mind the World less, and God more; All
the Learning in the World without Piety, and the true Fear of God, is nothing
worth: The Fear of the Lord that is Wisdom, and to Depart from Evil that is
Understanding.

In like manner, the Great Hugo Grotius, after all his Labor, Study, and
Proficiency in other Knowledge, at the close of his Life told his Friends, That
he would give all his Learning and Honor for the Plain Integrity and Piety of
John Urick; who was a devout Poor man, that spent eight hours of his time in
Prayer, eight in Labor, and the other eight he allowed for his Sleep and
necessary Refreshments.

These Learned men found Religion to be the Truest and Best Wisdom in a Dying
Hour: This is the one thing needful; and we shall all find it so, when we must
take leave of this World, and make our appearance before God. That the
following lines may through the Blessing of God be made useful to the awakening a
sense of Religion in those that do peruse them, is my Desire, and shall be my
earnest Prayer to him who alone can bless the Seed sown, and increase the
Fruits of Righteousness.

Nehemiah Coxe*

ERRATA.
THe Errors of the Press which disturb the sense, are thus to be corrected:

Page 19. l. 23. for Order r. Ardor, p. 20. ^ 10. for great very r. very great,
p. 40. l. 19. ^^ seeing, p. 133. l. 4. dele which, p. 200. l. 8* dele his.

THE LAST HOURS OF Dr. ANDREW RIVET.
. 1. THE multitude and variety of things memorable which do occur in this
Narrative, does so much amaze us, that through fear of our own insufficiency
either to remember, or express them in a due man^er, and according to their
^ignity and worth, we cannot ^ut wish, this task had been ^ndertaken by abler
hands. But ^eeing it is matter of fact, and ^ords heard, which we are to give
an account of, we had rather (so we may but serve the profit of our Friends)
expose our prudence unto censure, than be defective in our care and good
endeavors in this matter; wherein, that we might be sure to write nothing but
most certain Truth, we have chosen to bury many things in oblivion, by a silen^
passing over what we have but an imperfect remembranc^ of; and shall content
our selve^ to make a rehearsal with simplicity and truth, of those grav^ and
almost divine Speeches which as they were poure^ forth by this Holy man, were
faithfully preserved, partly i^ the Memory, and partly in the written Notes of
those wh^ constantly attended on him And yet though we employ ou^ utmost
diligence herein, w^ shall never be able to give them their just weight and
Emphasis; for who can imitate that flowing stream of words which with equal
wisdom and piety proceeded from him, in an (almost) continued discourse, for
the space of twelve days and as many nights? Or who can represent to the Life
the motions of a mind, boiling with Meditations, when the Spirit of God
administered such an extemporary effort of sayings proceeding from his fruitful
breast, and gravely uttered when his senses were no ways impaired, as he was
diversely acted either by Grief and Fear, or Hope and Joy?

. 2. It will be but necessary, before we enter upon the Relation of other
things, briefly to mention something concerning the Temper and Disposition of
this holy person, and his Circumstances before his last sickness, that the
Grace of God toward his Servant may appear the more illustrious; when we see
with what care and Providence he disposed his Affairs in the whole course of
his life, but especially in this last act thereof.

Besides those excellent gifts wherewith he was adorned (which cannot here be
reckoned up particularly) through the Goodness of God he had been favored with
the enjoyment of a sound Mind in a sound and healthy Body; he was of a cheerful
and sedate Spirit, holding on in an even course of Life, neither lifted up with
prosperity, nor cast down by adversity. So that by the habit of a comely and
moderate deliberation, he was ever blessed with an inward Joy, and possessed
all things with delight and Gratitude; being no less ready to part with them
without regret and trouble, pursuing his own profit and advantage in a serious
contemplation of the vanity of all worldly things; often repeating that of the
Apostle: The things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not
seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 18. He was never moved with sorrowful events that
fell out suddenly, whether in public, or in his private concerns, as a man
surprised by an unexpected evil; neither was the tranquillity of his mind shaken
by them: He was wont to say; Nothing is impossible; I wonder at nothing.
Neither on the contrary, did he at any time break forth into a loose and
immoderate Joy; as being one set in an higher place, and looking down upon all
things here below as uncertain and perishing. He never found himself, on any
other account under such perturbation, nor showed the like, as upon the decease
of the young Prince of Orange, who from a Child had been committed to his
instruction and tuition; and whose Death (as he often affirmed) he bewailed out
of pure Charity, and not for any private loss that himself might sustain
thereby: Because the confidence he had of his excellent disposition, and
expectation of his longer Life, had raised him to the hope that he would prove
a useful Instrument for the good both of the State and the Church. From that
time he seemed to be more than ever drawn off from worldly things, and used to
speak of them with a certain loathing and disdain. The frame of his mind was
also discovered, by a frequent interrupting of his accustomed course of reading
the Scriptures in order in his Family, and turning to some select Chapters,
such as Job 14. Eccles. 3. and 4. Psalm. 49. and 144. From whence he took the
occasion of such discourses, as showed what Meditations he was customarily
taken up with.

. 3. In the last week wherein he lived in health, being in his Garden
accompanied by a Friend, and walking up and down therein, as he was wont, with
great pleasure, he gave order what he would have done in the dressing of some
Trees, and then added: If I live till the Spring time, they will afford me a
pleasant sight; but if not, I shall be in a Garden far more pleasant. When his
Friend interposed and said, There was no cause why he should presage such a
thing to himself, seeing he was sound and lively; he received a Rebuke from Dr.
Rivet to this purpose: The time is now come that I am to be treated after
another manner; my age is so far declined and hasting to an end, as plainly to
declare that death (which none can be exempted from) stands at my door: And
truly death is the principal matter that I meditate on; God is my witness, that
I desire not it is delay, but am ready with a cheerful mind to embrace it, yea
even this day, if the will of God were so.

On the same day he was entreated by Mr. Hulsius the Pastor of the French
Church in that place Breda.
, that on the next day, being December. 25. he would preach a thanksgiving Sermon
after the celebration of the Lords Supper; which he consenting to do, chose for
his Text Psalm. 144. 3, 4. Lord, what is man that thou take knowledge of him,
or the Son of man that thou make account of him? Man is like to Vanity; his
days are as a shadow that passes away. In his Sermon he had an eminent
assistance from God, and delivered his matter with a strong and clear voice,
and great liberty of speech; and chiefly applied his discourse, to show what
favor and honor God had vouchsafed unto man, as well in causing that the Son
of God should be a Man, as in giving him for our nourishment unto Eternal Life;
from thence teaching the Notice God took of mortal men, and how it had pleased
him to embrace them in his favor, and to magnify them.

And in speaking to the answer of the Psalmist, Man is like to Vanity, he
touched upon the loss of the Prince, whose Instructor he had been, which was
then fresh in memory; but with words no way inclined to flattery, but becoming
the Matter and Person that he spoke of, and which breathed forth nothing but
pure affection: withal taking notice of the Goodness of God, who in the midst
of his Judgments had showed mercy to the house of Orange, to which he had
granted a new Offspring (a Son being then born) that the dying hope of that
Noble Family might be revived before him: At length he closed with a Meditation
of Death, an example of which (said he) seeing Young men that are strong, have
before them in a young man snatched from the earth in the flower of his age and
strength, it ought to be often revolved in their minds, and deep thoughts of
approaching death to be entertained, which admits of no return to life: What is
man? (said he) Nothing but flesh, obnoxious to putrefaction? a flower that
springs up to day, and to morrow is cut down: even a vapor that appears for a
little time, and then vanishes away, like the breath that proceeds out of my
mouth. For the cold being great that day, did so condense his breath, that it
might be seen of all to whom he was preaching.

. 4. When the Sermon was finished, he returned home as lively and well as he
had been seen for some years past; nor did he the next day feel any decay of
his former strength. But on Thursday, which was the 27th of December, he began
to complain Anno 1650.
of a pain below his Navel; and refusing to eat any Supper, desired that a
Clyster might be given him; but it was to no purpose, the liquor being driven
back again with greater force than it was injected. That night was passed over
partly in bearing of his sharp pains, and partly in serious discourses. On
Wednesday morning the complaint of his pain was increased, and he desired that
the use of a Clyster might be repeated; which was done accordingly, but with no
better success than the former: Then were two Physicians sent for, and they
suspecting that the former Clysters either had not been skilfully injected, or
else were not strong enough, made trial of the like means once and again; but
with the same success as before: for a glutinous humor had already fast locked
up the passage against all Remedies. On the next day which was Tuesday, they
prescribed Pills of Alloes washed; and on Friday the Infusion of Rhubarb;
either of which did sufficiently agitate his body, but effected nothing,
neither was any way opened for their passage, the expulsive faculty being
weakened and dulled, so that it could give Nature no assistance. The wind shut
up in his bowels tormented the sick man, his Belly was swollen, and he was
afraid to touch either meat or drink, lest thereby his grievance should be
increased. There were no proper means unattempted, nor any kind of help by
Clysters, Fomentations, or Baths, but were made trial of, until by the
stubborn disease that resisted all Remedy, he was brought unto death, the
twelfth day of his sickness; the History of which we shall now prosecute more
at large.

. 5. On the second day after his disease had seized him, he well understanding
the nature of it, declared what the event would be; Not (says he) that I would
neglect Remedies; that I may please my Friends, I will do whatsoever is thought
meet to be done, being secure as to the issue, which I commit to the Providence
of God: Then he asked his Niece, Mrs Mary Moline, what she conceived of his
disease, which he thought would prove mortal: And when she answered, That her
opinion was the same; yet that he had no reason to fear any thing, having been
long prepared to follow God when he should call; that the time of his Life
hitherto had been long, if it were crowned with an happy and Glorious End.

Thou speak right (says he) and I pray thee always address thy self to me
with like speeches; and while my sickness continues, depart not from me day nor
night: Promise me now that thou will keep a cheerful countenance, and that thou will speak nothing to me but what may administer joy and support to me;
although I fear not death, yet I fear the trial of those pains which I have
always had a very sharp feeling of.

Then suddenly turning his speech unto God, he said: Great God! thou art my
Father, thou have given me both Life, and a new Life, thou have taught me from
my youth, and I have declared thy wonderful works, forsake me not now in my old
age: Hitherto through thy peculiar favor thou have preserved me sound in my
body; and my faculties and the functions of my mind have not been impaired; so
that a little before I was oppressed by this disease, I found my self as apt and
ready for the exercise of my Vocation, as in my Flourishing Youth: O Lord God!
if it be thy will that I should longer attend upon thy service, thou can
assuage my disease in one moment: but if thou have decreed otherwise, lo here
is thy Servant; thy will be done: This one thing I beg with most inward
affections, that thou will make me conformable to thy good will: Let not thy
good Spirit depart from me, that in this conflict thy strength may make me a
Conqueror: Accomplish this, O Lord, for thine own sake: And seeing thou have
employed me in thy work, grant that I may die an honorable death, and such as
may be an example unto others: That I may stand fast in that sound Doctrine
which I have taught, and may make a good confession thereof before witnesses,
that thereby thy Church may be both instructed and edified. Let me apply to my
self by a lively Faith all the Promises of the Gospel, and let them put forth
their efficacy in me, unto my joy and eternal consolation, that nothing in the
world, neither affliction, nor distress may separate me from thee, or cause me
to doubt of thy love and favor. Thou know my weaknesses and infirmities;
permit not the grievousness of my pain to cast me into impatience or murmuring:
either make my pains tolerable, or furnish me with fortitude and constancy
sufficient to bear them: That I may not offend with my Tongue, keep thou the
door of my lips.

. 6. The remainder of the day was taken up with pains, the use of Remedies, and
the Visits of Friends: when the night came on, he earnestly entreated Mrs.
Rivet his wife, that she would retire her self into the next Chamber; not only
because she was afflicted with a vehement Cough, but also that he might remove
her from the grievous sight of himself when tormented with his pains; and
because he found his tender affections more moved at the sight of her, than any
other person. So none remained with him but his Niece Mrs. Mary Moline, and two
of the household servants. But who can particularly relate the speeches which
he uttered, and in a manner poured forth that night and the day following?
(which was Thursday December. 29.) with an Affection and Order inexpressible,
breathing from his Heart nothing but Repentance, Faith, Charity, and holy Zeal!
In a word, he implored the mercy of God with the Greatest self-denial, and
abasement of Soul, confessing himself to be a miserable sinner, and casting
away all confidence in any good thing which he had done in his life; yea
speaking of that with great very contempt, he accused his own defects, and
ascribed unto God the Glory of his good works; often repeating such expressions
as these.

It is God that has wrought the work for me: Shall I allege or plead my own
Righteousnesses before him? Far be that from me: If I should justify my self,
my own mouth would condemn me; I will rather open my sin before him, in a most
humble confession of it, and pray that he will increase in me the Grace of true
Repentance; yea let him wear out this body with sorrow, it matters not; so he
give to me a broken and a contrite Heart, which is a sacrifice acceptable to
himself; As for my part, I do most willingly offer up my self: Accept O Lord
this imperfect Sacrifice, and supply the defects thereof by the perfect
Righteousness of that great high Priest who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself unto God without Spot, Let me be accepted as a living Sacrifice, holy,
and well-pleasing unto God, which is our reasonable service. Crucify, O Lord,
this old man, that the body of sin may be utterly destroyed, and I may rise
again unto a new life: The wages of Sin is death, bu^ Romans 6. ult.
the Gift of God is Eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord

Then repeating the word Gift he added: It is mere Grace not of Works, but of
him that calls; Who shall la^ Romans 8. 33.
any thing to the charge of God elect? It is God that justifies Who is he that
condemns? I^ is Christ that dyed, yea rathe^ that is risen again, who is eve^
at the right hand of God, wh^ also makes intercession for us.

Then after a little interruption of his discourse, by a shor^ sleep; he thus
proceeded.

I am God's and he will save me; he has honoure^ me with an holy Calling; and
has not suffered his gif^ to be altogether useless in me as to the Edification
of hi^ Church: As to my self, I can most truly affirm, that I have not served
him for filthy Lucre, but with a sincere heart; and that I was my self first
persuaded of the truth of the Gospel, and experienced the efficacy thereof,
before I preached it to others,

I tasted the good Word of God, which by it is power pierces even to the
dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and is a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart. Thou have known my heart, O Eternal God! thou know
that I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, but have esteemed it my only
honor to serve thee; and that I have delighted my self in the pleasure of
obeying thy will! Such was thy goodness unto me! I truly and humbly
acknowledge, that whatsoever good was in me, flowed from thy Grace; bu^ my
defects ought to be ascribed to my inbred Corruption: Alas! I acknowledg^ this
with humble and serious repentance; how often have I sinned in so holy a Charge
not only by omitting man^ things which I ought to have done, but also by doing
many things amiss! How of have I offended through negligence, and slackness!
Long since had I been cast off, were it not that I had to do wit^ so good a
Lord, who hat^ born with me, and has bee^ so gracious to me as no^ to exact a
severe account o^ my Words and Works! Alas* O Lord my God! Enter no^ into
Judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
Let me be found not having mine own Righteousness, but the Righteousness of thy
Son, for the sake of which, I beg thy favor. Pardon, O my God, Pardon the
Iniquity of thy Servant, who is devoted to thy Fear: I refuse not thy
discipline, I know it is necessary; only this I earnestly beg, that it may turn
to my Salvation: Chasten me, O Lord, but in measure, lest thou bring me to
nothing: Let not my trial exceed my strength, lest I Sin through Impatience,
and become a Scandal to those I should edify. O let me never break out into a
murmuring complaint: O how light is this chastisement, if compared with my
fault! What are these temporal pains, in comparison with those Eternal torments
from which I am redeemed by him that poured out hi^ Soul upon the Cross for me!
For Me! This is the languag^ of Faith, which makes a particular application of
General Promises. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of a^ 1 Timothy 1. 15.
acceptance; That Jesus Christ came into the World to sav^ sinners, of whom I
am Chief Lord, I believe, help tho^ mine unbelief: Turn tho^ me, and I shall be
turned indeed: Seal all thy Promise in my Soul: Cause in the inmost of my heart
a lively perception of those sweet word^ My Son, be of good comfor^ thy sins
are forgiven the^

With such holy Meditation and speeches as these, was the Thursday night passed
over.

. 7. On Friday morning, Dec. 30.
Mrs. Rivet his Wife, put him in mind of sending one to the Hague for his Son:
By all means (said he) that ought to have been done sooner; and then gave order
himself concerning it. About Nine of the Clock he was visited by Renessius a
Doctor of Divinity, and Pastor of a Dutch Church; who in the Latin Tongue
saluted him after this manner: Most excellent man, how do you? To whom he
answered in the same Language: I am yet strong, neither does my Speech fail me;
but that passage in my bowels is not yet opened, and unless that be opened, I
see I must make my passage another way, even that which the Eternal God has
set before me from my Infancy: I should be the most ungrateful of men, if I
should not acknowledge the mercy of God toward me, who has so wonderfully
preserved me even from my Cradle: Then rehearsing his deliverance from a very
dangerous Viz. A fall whereby his life was in graet hazard.
accident that befell him in his Infancy, through the negligence of the Maid;
he added,

From that time my Mothe^ consecrated me unto God and he abundantly blessed me
all my lifetime, and the whole Family: And therefore I place all my hope in
the goodness of God, being ready either to live or to dye. I have always
thought, tha^ either this disease would be my death, or else the Stone, for I
have scarce ever been afflicted with any other distemper: I pray you to
testify unto all men, that I dye in that Faith and Doctrine, which I have
always delivered both in Preaching and Writing: And if perhaps in some things
I have erred, I pray God that he will make perfect all my Imperfections.

The rest of the day was filled up with the Visits of Friends; for he would
have none hindered from coming to him.

Let all that will (says he) have access to visit me; I ought to give an
Example of dying to other men.

With such sayings as these, he filled the by standers both with Consolation
and with Wonder; while he thus proceeded: Come see a man who is an Example of
the Great Mercy of God: What shall I render unto him? All his Benefits
overwhelm me: He has so disposed my Life, that in my whole Course, I have had
an healthful Body; he has heaped upon me both temporal and spiritual
Blessings: And now before I am rendered feeble or morose through Old age, he comes
unto me, and prevents me; he both calls me; and causes me willingly to
follow him at his Call: And now the end of my Life is within my view, he still
affords me the perfect use of my Reason, that I may praise the Holy Name of God
in the Land of the Living, and instruct my Neighbor by my Example: Pray for
me, my Friends, that this Grace may be continued unto me till I draw my last
breath; that he will strengthen my Faith, confirm my Patience, and raise my
Hope; He has already captivated all my affections to his will; I have cast the
care of me, of mine, of life, and all my affairs upon him; Let him do with my
body as pleases him, so it may but be well with my Soul: There is no going
hence without pains; this Flesh must suffer, and fall; It matters not; provided
the Soul obtains new strength; and I arrive at a better Mansion than that made
with hands; It is that I aspire to, I lament not the World: I have lived long
enough, and have had leisure to make trial of all things, and to know that they
are vanity and vexation of Spirit: One thing is necessary; To fear God and keep
his Commandments, for that is the whole duty of man. And now there is nothing
that I am concerned about, neither is my life dear unto me, so that I may
finish my course with joy, and fulfill the Ministry which I have received of
the Lord; which is best done at the last: This is the end, and this the mark
which a Christian ought to aim at: The end of this frail life is the beginning
of Eternal life: O happy change! Truly I fear nothing; Christ is gain both in
life and death; he forsakes me not: If he make heavy my bodily pains, yet he
increases the joy of my Soul: Come, and I will tell you what he has done for
my Soul; I called upon him, and he inclined his ear and heard me; he has
blotted out my sins as a cloud; And as a Father pitieth his Children so the
Lord pitieth them that fear him.

His manner was to let no Minister part from him, before he had prayed with
him; Pray unto God (would he say) now is the acceptable time.

. 8. Toward Evening, when the Gentlewoman his wife could not be prevailed upon
to withdraw, and betake her self to some rest; It troubles me (said he) to see
so dear a person, and one that I honor so much, so far in years, and of so
weak a body, to wear out her self at this rate: But then giving way to her
desire, Seeing thou will have it so (said he) Tarry; It is a pleasure to me to
see thee: The Lord strengthen thee.

The night before Saturday was spent in grievous pains, and in most ardent
Prayers for the Church of God, for the Princes that were Defenders of it, for
the People that lived under their jurisdiction, and for the Pastors to whom the
care of Souls was committed: Speaking particularly of the States, (viz: of the
United Provinces) he said,

O God withdraw not thy protection from these Provinces, neither remove thy
Candlestick away; Let not thine anger burn against them because of that impiety
and profaneness which has made too great a progress; Rather bow their hearts
unto Repentance, and convert men, that they may prevent thy Judgments: Let
them coalesce in one body: especially let them be joined unto thee, without
whom all union is but conspiracy? do thou praeside in that Assembly: bend their
hearts so, that all their decrees may turn to the good of the Commonwealth,
and especially of the Church: Grant unto them, that with due equity, nobleness
and gratitude, they may remember that Prince who only remains of the stock of
his noble progenitors, whom thou have made use of to accomplish thy work in the
midst of them: Indue this child with the Spirit of thy Fear, of Prudence,
Fortitude and Magnanimity; and deliver him from profane men, base flatterers,
and such servants as are enticers unto, and the Instruments of Vices and
infamous pleasures; and grant to him such as are faithful, incorrupt, lovers of
Truth and Equity, that by their means he may learn to distinguish Virtue from
Vice; to shun the one and embrace the other: It is time, O Lord, for thee to
help.

When the night was spent he was exceedingly wearied and tired out, both with
overmuch speaking, and especially by means of abstinence from drink, with which
he was wont to be refreshed: for when through the extremity of his thirst he
was forced to take down a little, immediately his stomach cast it back again,
being like a Vessel filled to the top, that could receive no more. The
Physicians afflicted his body with the use of various Remedies, but he bore all
with an even temper of mind; often saying,

I have told you before, that the use of these things will be to no purpose:
but it is no matter, I must comply with you, do what you please, for your own
Satisfaction.

. 9. That Saturday he was Dec. 31.
mightily enfeebled, and sometimes very drowzy: he spoke but little that
forenoon. Afternoon when diverse friends visited him, and were discoursing among
themselves of the nature of his disease, he heard all that passed between them
in the Chamber (for he was very quick of hearing) and gathered both from their
discourses, and also from his own knowledge of the disease he labored under,
that his distemper was that which Physicians call Miserere mei, which he was
not likely to pass through without very grievous Symptoms: such as, a burning
Fever, Delirium, and vomiting of his excrements: And thereupon he began to be
afflicted with much solicitude, while his mind was intent upon the thoughts of
the grievousness of these Symptoms: and in frequent Ejaculations he sent up
short and ardent Prayers to God about it.

My God (said he) have mercy upon me; deliver me from the opprobry which I
fear: for thou art gracious.

And smiting his belly, he said,

This is a bag of filth, a sink, and collection of griefs: But thanks be to my
God, that he has afflicted me in this more ignoble part; my heart in the mean
time remaining strong, and my brain free and clear, so that I might have
liberty to meditate upon thy power and goodness. This favor, O Lord God (which
is invaluable) reserve for me, That my mouth may utter nothing but what breaths
forth Charity, Praises, and Thanksgivings: O that it may not be defiled with
Viz. The casting up of excrements.
this filthiness. Let this building be brought down where its ruin began,
which let me behold as one set on high with a constant and peaceful mind, even
a mind elevated to spiritual things, which with all earnestness I follow after;
knowing that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither can
Corruption inherit Incorruption.

And in the ensuing night he did often inculcate, Who is mortal man that thou
should so magnify him, and think upon him! He is like to vanity: Flesh, and
a wind that passes away. With how small a thing are the strongest among men
cast down? By a vile excrement, by a little obstruction, which no Remedies can
open! Thou have done this, O thou Eternal one; Thus it pleases thee; and I
would have it so too: Let it be done to me according to thy Word: I am in thy
fatherly and Gracious hands, I fear nothing; Thou art my safeguard; and my
exceeding great reward. Then he repeated in the Hebrew tongue that sentence out
of Lamentat. 3. 24. Thou art my portion, says my Soul. And seethose that stood
by him, were always speaking to him of Good things*

Well done, (said he) cease not to strengthen me, unto that end God will supply
you with matter for discourse, for he is not only present with the sick himself
for his aid, but also with them that are called to succor him; for he is nigh
unto all that call upon him in truth.

Then he again poured forth his prayers for the Church of God; saying,

O Lord, it is thy possession, which thou have purchased with thine own blood:
forsake not thine own work; let an holy jealousy be kindled in thee, lift up
on high the arm of thy power, and bring down the audacious ones, which
tyrannize over thy flock; Rebuke thou the negligent, that heal her wounds
slightly: Reduce into the way those that wander; and strengthen that which is
ready to fall, through division: Gather both the one and the other to thy self
into one body, building them upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Jesus Christ himself being the Ephesians. 2. 20, 21.
chief corner Stone, in whom all the building fitly framed together, grows
into an holy Temple in the Lord. And then making a little pause, he added, I
have been one of those builders; I have brought what I received from the Lord,
that I might put to my helping hand with others toward the building of this
Temple; and I my self shall be a Living Stone in this Spiritual House.

He suffered no day nor night to pass over without his Prayers for the House of
Orange: Tbou have afflicted it, O Lord, (said he) but we beseech thee let it
not be destroyed: Let this The young Prince born but a little before.
Branch grow up, which if it be thy good pleasure, may come to be a fruitful
tree in it is time: Let all acknowledge that good to come from thee; and that
thou alone can give both being and well-being: How great folly is it to put
confidence in man, and in the Son of man, who is nothing: His breath goes
forth, and then his best contrived thoughts perish.

. 10. On the next day, which 1651. Jan. 1. Lord's Day.
was the first of the year 1651. when he first beheld the light he said,

O Lord thou have granted unto me to see the beginning of the year: thou have
measured out my time unto the middle of this Age: Then he asked what hour of the
day it was, and what weather? when it was answered, that the weather was very
sharp and severe, he was afraid it might hinder his Son^ journey to him:
Whereupon he addressed himself to God after this manner.

O my God, bring my Son unto me, that I may see him, embrace him, and bless him
before I dye. Then turning himself to his Wife, he said;

Do think this earnest desire to see him proceeds from some carnal affection?
Nothing less! Truly I love no man any more according to the flesh: I earnestly
desire his eternal Salvation; and I hope to have those discourses with him
which may increase his zeal in adorning his His Son was a Minister.
spiritual Vocation: I have yet spirit, and utterance sufficient for that work.
Let none be hindered from coming to me: It is usual for a man in my station, by
admonishing others, publicly to make confession of his own Faith: not for the
sake of a little vain Glory, O Lord thou know: for it little concerns me to
be approved unto men, provided I may approve my self unto God: but I desire the
Salvation of many, and to give testimony to the truth of those things which I
have publicly taught.

This day also was taken up with the Visits of Friends; and amongst others that
came, there was Colonel Verneuil, and some more Officers in the Garrison, of
which two or three were of Poictou; unto whom he said,

I rejoice that I have opportunity to make a Confession of my Faith before you
that are my Contrymen; And I pray you to keep it i^ memory, and give
testimony of it where it shall be necessary: For you see before you^ eyes a man
(weak indeed but) without guile, who solemnly protests, That h^ has never
published in hi^ Writings, nor taught wit^ his Lips, any thing that di^ not
agree with the sense o^ his heart, and the Doctrine which has been delivered
t^ us by the Prophets and Apostles; which is the same wit^ that which is found
in the Confession of Faith of ou^ Churches, in which I have lived, and in which
I purpose to dye. The Lord God Almighty confirm you in that Faith, so that
nothing may move you from it: For what will it profit a man, if he gain the
whole world, and lose his own Soul? Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and then all other things shall be added to you. Learn
to number your days: And get a wise heart: Look upon me, and let me be an
example unto you: It is but eight days since I preached to you of Man's
frailty, being my self in health, and lively at that time, and now you see the
truth of what I said, in my self: Certainly what is visible to us, and set
before our eyes, has a more persuasive power, than words which only beat the
ears. And then taking his leave of them, he added, The Lord deliver you from
the allurements of the world, and give you an increase of his fear, and of all
spiritual and temporal gifts. A while after there came to hi^ the worthy
Snellen Burgomaster of Breda, unto whom h^ cheerfully gave an account ^ the
nature of his disease, wit^ the causes and consequents there of; and then said,

Praise be to God who hat^ given me to know the en^ of my life: I should be the
most ungrateful of all men, ^ I were not contented wit^ that measure and term ^
Life, which he has afforde^ me; and if I should not acknowledge his great
Goodness, and provident care ^ me in the whole course ^ my life: Especially I
giv^ him thanks for laying ou^ this place for me to pass m^ old age in, amongst
good me^ with whose kindness I have been refreshed, and to who^ for their
multiplied favou^ toward me, I can never make a sufficient return of thanks:
Of your sincere Affection (most worthy Sir) in a special manner I have had
experience, for which I give you my hearty thanks, and in your Person to your
whole Corporation, which I beseech you to signify to them: and to entreat for
me, that they will give me a place of Burial large enough for me, and my wife
who will quickly follow me.

When he had thus expressed himself, he dismissed him with prayers for the
welfare of him and his family.

. 11. About evening he desired to be helped out of his bed, and to sit in a
Chair; where he perceived the swelling of his Belly to reach to the pit of his
Stomach; which gave him apprehension that hi^ end drew near; wherefore sending
for Mr. Dauber an emine^ Civilian, he imparted to hi^ his purpose of adding a
Codicil to his Will: And in orde^ thereto he sent for the Town Clerk and the
two Consuls, an^ having fully declared his min^ to them, the business being
done and sealed; he began to discourse of another settlemen^ by the resignation
of himse^ and his into the hands, an^ unto the care of God; expressing his
assurance of the blessing of God upon his: and the added,

That he did exceedingly rejoice, that he should leave behi^ him a Wife
excelling in virt^ and motherly affection to the chi^dren of her husband; and
also ^ Son that was a good man, a^ studious of peace, who would be a Father to
the The Children of one of his Sons that was deceased.
three little ones, whose Guardian he was appointed by that Codicil.

And for this last office he rendered unto them his thanks, and to the Council
of the City in general; and in particular blessed each of them and their
Families. And when they were departed, he went to his bed again; and seeing no
body stand about him but his little Family, he said to his Niece,

My Daughter, do not depart from me, but persist with me in the duty of Prayer:
do not fear to rehearse all those words to me which God shall suggest unto thy
heart or mouth; this sweet and pleasing communication shall help to pass over
this night with the more ease: And God will be with us, and assist our good
intentions: He will help our weaknesses, and afford us matter of supplications,
and thanksgivings: such discourses are pleasing unto him; he attends unto them
that fear him, when they talk together of those things that belong to the
Salvation of their Souls.

And then as one in a Rapture, he said, My God! thou have drawn me, and I was
drawn! thou have known me from my Mothers womb, with a Merciful and Efficacious
knowledge: thou has^ called me by Name: thou have bored mine Ears, and I was
attentive: I have declared thy message in the Congregation, and thy word was
sweeter than Honey in my mouth. Who am I! O God, but dust and ashes, an earthen
and a frail Vessel, into which notwithstanding thou have been pleased to pour
an holy liquor, and seed of immortality: Thou live, and thou make me to
live; I shall not dye, but live for ever, with that life which is Col. 3. 3.
hid with Christ in God: Blessed and holy is he which has a part in the first
Resurrection: over him Rev. 20. 6.
the second death shall have no power. Behold I am dead; and also raised from
the dead: I live not in my self, but in the life of the Son of God, who loved
me, and gave himself for me. What should I mention more? I can make no return
of thy faithfulness to me, or of the benefits thou have bestowed on me: Thou
had chosen me, before thou gave me a being; and it pleased thee that I
should be born of believing Parents, and especially of a Mother eminent in
Holiness, who dedicated me to thy service from my tender years: With how many
prayers did she stir me up to that holy purpose! With what care and affection
did she instill the seeds of Piety into me! And the Almighty God who works
all in all, gave his blessing to this diligent nurture, and heard her ardent
prayers; and my Ministry has been accepted of him; I am thy servant, O my God,
thou have taught me from my youth; and I have taught thy wonderful works, and
thy grace unto this day; for thy gifts have not been without fruit in me: Thou
usest weak instruments for the accomplishing of thy work: Thou have pardoned,
thou have helped me; thou have accepted the truth and sincerity of my heart:
And now, O my God, seeing it is evident thou will have me retire from this
valley of Miseries, do not thou forsake me in this last and important act: If
it be thy will that I dye; that also is my will: I am ready, my heart is
prepared: I give thee my heart, for that is it which thou requirest; Let this
gift be approved by thee; Receive this gift which is thine own, from him to
whom thou have given all things, who gives himself to thee. O Lord, I give thee
thanks; thou instructest me, thou inlightenest me, thou talkest with my Soul: O
Lord thou imbracest me in the arms of thy mercy! Grant also that I may embrace
thee by a lively Faith, and that I may apply unto my self the Promises of the
Gospel, which I have proposed unto others: let them be Effectual in me, that by
them I may be supported against all pains, yea death it self.

. 12. Then turning his speech to his Niece, he said: That I may not tire thee
with long discourses, Admire thou the Grace of God toward me, and bless him
who fortifies me with patience: Observe my words unto my last breath, and
commit them to writing as fully as thou can, that thereby my dearest Brother,
with others of my near kindred and affinity, as also my friends, may be
Comforted and Refreshed: To which when she returned answer; That she was unable
to retain, and commit to wriing such an abundance of holy speeches as flowed
from him, he Replied;

Fear not; only do thine endeavor, and God will help thee: If God give me
strength, I will write a short Epistle, which shall be for a testimony that
Credit is to be given to thy Relation. (And he was always wont upon the
mention of any thing of this nature, to add,)

Not that I would hereby procure praise to my self; But I would have it known
unto all, That the Religion which I have professed, and taught in the name of
God, is the true Religion, and that alone which leads men unto Salvation: And
particularly, I would have my brother informed of that inestimable Grace which
I have received of God, that he may be abundantly comforted and strengthened in
his expectation of a better life, which I already enjoy: O with how great love
have I loved him, and esteemed him! yea I have loved the gifts of God in him,
and shall love them to the last: I pray God who is the giver of every good
gift, that he will fulfill, strengthen and make perfect his own work in him;
that he will guide him with his Counsel, and at length save and receive him to
his Rest: The same prayers I make for my Nephew his Son Stephen, that he may be
an useful Instrument for the promoting of Gods Glory, a diligent workman that
needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of Truth. O Lord my God, I
pray not only for my Brother, but for all those in France, to whom thou have
committed the conduct and Rule of the Churches: Bless their Persons; pardon
their defects; Sanctify their Gifts: Grant unto them that they may seriously
return unto the simplicitly which is in Christ; and that they detract not from
the Glory of God, to ascribe unto man what belongs to his Salvation; He is
strong and Jealous. If in my writings I have seemed to deal a little warmly
with some of my brethren about their new notions, I protest before God, I was
never moved by envy or wrath against any one in particular, but on the contrary
always accounted the men that favored those novelties, among my friends; And
the more I loved both their Persons and Gifts, the more it grieved me that I
could not reconcile their Maxims with the Word of God: I do most earnestly
beseech God, that he will give them the Spirit of Peace, that they may be of
the same Judgment, and speak the same things: And that the love of God may
constrain them, and gather them into one in Christ; ^ph. 4. 13.
Till we all come unto the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ; That following the Truth in love, we may grow up into him in all
things, who is the head, even Christ.

I would have thee without delay write unto thy Father; he is my Brother in a
double bond, I have always esteemed, and loved him; he has been an useful
Instrument for the Glory of God, and I doubt not but he will thoroughly
accomplish his work in him, to the Glory of his own Name, and his eternal
Salvation: I go before him, in a little time he will follow after me: he is
almost come to the end of his course, and there remains but a little time
before God will Crown his labors with an Eternal Reward.

And here again in an extraordinary transport he brake out into these
expressions: O great and Immense Mercy! who can but be rapt into admiration! He
gives both being, and well-being; He bestows his gifts, he supporteth, he
pardons, he works in us both to will and to do according to his good
pleasure: and when himself has given and wrought all this, yet he gives to us
an Eternal Reward! Amen, Amen. Be it unto me according to thy word, even
according to the faithfulness and stability of thy Promises.

Then turning his discourse to his Niece again; Write also (said he) to thy
Brethren, That I love them, and that I pray for their Salvation. And thou my
dear Niece! I love thee, not because of that near affinity which thou have to
me, but rather because we both have one God, and one Hope. Thou know the
love and affection which I have had for thee, which has been a Paternal love
indeed, for a token of which, take thou the Bible which thou shall find in my
Study: In specicial I recommend to thee my Wife, thy very good Aunt: To thy
power Comfort and assist her: Be unto her instead of a Daughter, and help her
to digest the Sorrow she will have for my absence.

. 13. On Monday Morning Monday, Jan. 2.
he desired to arise out of his bed, that he might write those Letters which he
had made mention of in the Night: and also that he might add something to the
Codicil which was annexed to his Will the Evening before: His Strength was
sufficient to admit the putting on of his clothes, and also his walking into
his Study; where he took the Bible designed for his Niece, and gave it to her
himself: And to Mr Dauber who was then with him, he gave an Arabic new
Testament, and laid by another Book for Mr. Hulsius; and one for his Brother
Rivet, to be immediately sent unto him to Champuer non in France; unto whom
(being returned into his Chamber) he wrote this letter.

My Dear Brother!
I Now write my last to you, with a trembling and dying hand: After the
preaching of a Sermon on Christmas day in perfect health: it is now eight days
since I have been afflicted with a Stubborn Constipation; and the expulsive
faculty is wholly exstinct in me: Wherefore I am determined by the Grace of God
to dye with courage and constancy: By the obstinate continuance, and pains of
my distemper, I am quite worn out; and the day of my dissolution draws near. My
Niece Mary Mouline shall write unto you an account of my last Hours, and of
that tranquillity of mind which God affords to me: I expect the coming of my
Son, to whom I may commit my Nephews and affairs; He shall give you an account
of all. Farewell my dearest Brother! But keep me in remembrance the residue of
thy life, who have loved thee and thine with a great Charity; Love mine again,
as thou do: I pray God to bless thee, and all thine: Once again Farewell!

Dated at Breda, Jan. 2. 1651.

He wrote also to Mr. Mouline, his brother by Affinity, in these words.

My Dearest Brother,
IT so pleases God, that yo^ should remain alive after me* I now write being
upon the borders between life and death, after a Sermon preached on Christmas
day, which was followed with ^ pertinacious retention, faecium in alvo
induratarum, and of the retaining of that load, the Dissolution of the body
with grievous pains is the necessary consequent. Your Daughter which ministers
to me in this agony, has undertaken to write to you of my constancy, and the
Grace which God affords to me. Live unto the Glory of his Name, remembering me
and mine, who dye

Your most Affectionate, etc.


. 14. When he had written these Letters, he found himself exceedingly wearied,
and desired to be had to bed again. All this day was spent in receiving his
Friends, especially the Pastors who were of diverse Nations: unto whom he
discoursed largely of surrendering up himself into the hands of God, and recited
to them a Confession of his Faith, and exhorted them to proceed cheerfully in
that work which the Lord had committed to them: He gladly received those
consolations whereby they endeavored to assuage his pains, and heard their
Prayers for him with like joy, always adding, That he was much refreshed by
them. All this day the time seemed very long to him, while he expected the
coming of his Son.

How fraid am I (said he) that I shall not see my Son! It is the only thing I
desire in this life.

When he was wholly given up by the Physicians, and now for many days had
neither received nor voided any thing, a little after Noon, a good man that was
touched with our Affliction said unto us, That it seemed a very wonderful and
strange thing to him, that we would suffer a man of so great merit, who was yet
strong and hearty, to go out of the world without trying of any Remedies:
adding, That he knew a person that was held with the same disease, that was
helped by Baths prescribed by a Chyrurgeon in the City, who was indeed very
skilful in his Art. This person therefore was immediately sent for, who when he
came, finding the sick man strong enough to abide the use of that Remedy,
without delay prepares a Bath, by which he found himself much eased, and his
pains assuaged; and that Monday Night, he had a better Night of it than
ordinary.

15. The next day in the Tuesday. Jan. 3.
Morning they repeated the Bath, after which a Clyster was injected, which
seemed to have begun its work: All that were about the sick man rejoiced, and
bad him be of good courage, promising his recovery from his distemper; And, to
say the truth, himself began, if not to hope, yet at least to think, it might
be so. In the following Evening the Bath was repeated again, after which being
had to bed, he began to sleep sweetly: but had scarcely rested half an hour,
before he was awaked by the pain of his side, and a greater tention of his
Belly than before, and the access of a Fever. Nothing was left unattempted for
his relief, by fomentations an^ unctions; but all was to ^ purpose: The
complaint of the sick man was increased, an^ he tired out and afflicted wit^
extraordinary restlesness. An^ then his Niece perceived tha^ there was
something else troubled him more than the pain of his Body; for he remaining
silent, groaned forth most bitter sighs, whereas before the more he was
tormented with pain, the more ardently did he use to pour out his prayers to
God: It was Supper time when she was left with him alone, and then with a
mournful voice he asked,

Who is there, is any Stranger present?

And when his Niece had told him, No: she asked him, Whence does this unusual
disquietude proceed? you seem to me to suffer something extraordinary; what is
become of that cheerfulness through which you were wont to pass through your
pains with the greatest Joy?

Alas! (said he) He is departed from me that made glad my Heart: I have grieved
that Holy Spirit the Comforter, who had filled my Soul with Peace and Joy; I
have been so wretched and unhappy as to give ear to those who spoke unto me of
my returning into this World: I have been tickled with the desire of living:
And how could such a thing possibly be, after the fruits of the Heavenly Canaan
had been tasted by me, and I had by faith taken hold of Supernatural good
things? What is now necessary to be done? Whither shall I go^ If I speak, he
answers not; ye^ he has taken from me the power of speaking: Ah, sad change!
An holy fire had kindled my meditation, but now vain thought^ hurry me: I
cannot get out of my mind an old Satyr, and suc^ like trifles. Thus while I am
^ deaths door, I go backwards.

And here casting his arm^ about her neck, he thus proceeded:

My Dear Niece, help ^e continue to discourse of Go^^ things with me: Call upon
the Comforter to return, and rene^ that excellent work which h^ had advanced in
me. O Return! Return! Confirm me wit^ thy strength, before I go hence, and be
seen no more.. 16. Then she suggested to him those places of Scripture which by
the Divine aid were brought to her mind; in answer to which, every moment he
interposed those words, as made it evident that his Soul which before was
sinking under its burden, began to gather strength and Comfort again. He had
scarce been a quarter of an hour in that Conflict, before he fell into a Swoon;
which occasioned the hasty calling in of his Son, who was come to him but that
Morning; and when this sinking fit was over, there appeared in him again the
same Tranquillity and Cheerfulness of Countenance as formerly: And seeing those
of his own Household, with some Friends that used to assist him, and watch with
him by turns, in the next Room, he attentively fixed his eyes upon each of
them; and first Addressing himself to his Wife:

Farewell (said he) my dearest Yoke Fellow! We have lived together in Peace for
thirty Years; and I thank thee for thy help, which has been a great Comfort
unto me; for I did cast all Domestic cares upon thee: Continue I beseech thee
to They were his Children by a former Wife, for he had none by her.
love my Children with that Pious Affection which hitherto thou have had for
them.

Then turning his Speech to his Son, he said, And thou my Son! Love and Honor
this dearest Companion of my Life, the Partner of all my Joys and Sorrows,
which has done the Duty of a Mother toward thee; this I desire of thee, and
this I command thee, as thou expectest a blessing from God upon what I have
gotten by my labor, divide it between you without quarrelling or contention,
according to what is just and right; Manage all thy Affairs with all Lenity and
Christian Prudence; especially pursue Peace, O Frederick! (for that was his
Sons Name, to which he alluded) Be rich in Peace.

Then taking hold of both their Hands, and joining them together:

Promise me, (says he) that you will maintain an holy and mutual friendship
with each other.

Which when they had both most solemnly Promised to do.

I believe you (said he) for I have no cause to doubt of your Sincerity; I know
that you fear God, and that my last Commands will be of great weight to you;
even as I pray God that he will make my Blessing effectual upon you:

Then turning to his Wife, he said:

The Lord Bless thee my dear Love, and strengthen thee; he i^ an Husband to the
Widow, an^ a Father of the Fatherless.

And to his Son,

The Almighty Father bless thee, my Son, guide thee in al^ thy ways, enrich
thee with all Christian Virtues, and plentifully make thee to abound in all
Spiritual and Temporal Blessings; regard not the world nor its deceitful hopes
for the world passes away, and the Lust thereof; place all thy Felicity in the
Blessing of God: be strong in Faith, and prepared unto every good work. Let the
Peace of God dwell in thee, and make thee Peaceable and kind: Those Infants
which I commend unto thee, and commit to thy trust, will be proper Subjects for
thee to exercise thy Charity upon. I appoint and set thee over not only that
little Portion which I leave them, but especially their Persons, that thou
may take care of their Instruction and Education in Piety and Virtue; that
they may be fitted for that Service of God, which their Nature and Ingenie
renders them capable of, and especially may apply themselves to the Worship of
God.

And then taking hold of the hand of the eldest of the Children, he said,

Farewell dear Child, the Lord make thee a good and a Pious man, that thou
may fill up the place of thy Father and Grandfather: He bess thee
abundantly, and make thy Studies prosperous unto his Glory; which he will do if
thou diligently call upon him, and if thou Study to be Diligent, Sober, Modest,
and humbly Obedient unto God and thy Superiors, thy Uncle in particular, which
will be instead of a Father to thee. Give due Obedience and Honor unto thy
Mother; Love thy Brother and Sister, and withdraw thy self from the Company of
young Persons who will entice thee unto Vice.

And unto his Niece he thus spoke:

Farewell my dear Niece, the Lord bless thee! We have a Kindred in the Heavens
which will endure for ever.

. 17. Now when we thought this night would be his last, the principal of his
Friends were called to him, and amongst them Mr. Hulsius, and as they stood
about his Bed, he attentively beheld them, and discoursed of his Departure at
hand, and his disposition to give up himself to the Will of God, with a joyful
and free Soul. He exhorted each of them according to their respective Condition
in regard of Age, Sex, or Quality, and blessed each of them and their Families.

Then again speaking to his Son, he said,

My Friend! Thou losest at the same time both a Master and a Father; but if the
Fear of God bear rule in thee, God will supply the place of both: Far be it
from me to distrust his Grace for the future: I cast all my Cares upon him, and
give up my self and mine, my Life and affairs into his hands.

Then he uttered in French Meter the words of the Psalmist to this sense.

Unto whom shall I go for help, O Lord, and in whom is my hope? truly in thee.

I am full of days: I desire to be Dissolved and to be with Christ. It is
enough, O Lord! Receive now my Soul: I commit this Body to the Earth, but I
commit my Spirit into the hands of God who gave it.

And in a Paroxysme of Pain he said,

My God, I know this Tabernacle cannot be dissolved without pain, yet my heart
is lively, and I have still strength to bear my pains. O Lord, help mine
Infirmities; depart not far from me in the day of my Sorrow: Say unto my Soul,
I am become thy Salvation.

This last he rehearsed in the French Meter, and then repeated in Hebrew, from
Psalm. 16. 5.

The Lord is the Portion of my Inheritance.

. 18. From that Night forward it was observed, when any one discoursed to him
of Repentance, and of the Grace of God in forgiving sins, he was wont to answer:

As to this point, I am assured that I am reconciled, and cleansed from my sin,
by the precious blood of my Redeemer; God has spoken, and made known to me
already that my Sins are blotted out; I now taste this blessedness, Blessed is
the man Psa. 32. 1.
to whom the Lord imputes not Sin: There is no Condemnation Romans 8. 1.
to them that are in Christ Jesus: He is come unto me according to his great
Mercies, and draws me, and I willingly follow him; He lessens my bodily
Pains, by increasing the joy of my Soul; he satisfies my thirst for him with
the dew of his Grace: Behold I am satiated, I am enriched; Man lives not by
bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God: The
Kingdom of God is not Romans 14. 17.
Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace and Joy through the Holy Ghost: I
am fed by my Savior, whose Flesh is Meat indeed, and his Blood is drink
indeed; and as he is the true quickening Bread which came down from Heaven, so
he that eats him, shall live by him: And therefore I live: It is now two
days since I have lived not an Animal Life, but I live that Life which I shall
eternally Live in the Heavens.

That night he made a long and ardent Prayer, the greatest part of which is
slipped out of our Memory: In general he Prayed for all men, and bewailed the
Corruption of Mankind.

Alas! O Lord (said he) this is the last time; there is scarce any Faith in the
Earth; Men of Veracity are hardly to be found: One speaks to another, yea to
his Friend, fraudulently and with a double heart. Alas! Woe is me, that I dwell
in the Tents of Kedar, with those that hate Peace. Thou have made Peace in thy
high places; Thou give Peace, but not such as the World gives; Wherefore my
Heart is not afraid: The Spirit which thou have given me, is the Spirit of
Power, of Love, and a sedate mind.

. 19. On the Wednesday Wednesday, Jan. 4.
morning he found himself much wearied and enfeebled, partly by the Pains he
had endured, and partly by his much and earnest speaking. Both we that were
about him, and himself, were all of the mind that his last hour was
approaching; for which reason he spoke as follows.

Again I bid you Farewell, my Friends; Observe me, and continue to strengthen
me with your Prayers and Exhortations; when my speech shall fail, I will
endeavor by signs to let you know my Faith and Perseverance; My mind cannot be
shaken, he that preserves me is in the Heavens.

When he had again blessed his Family and all that stood by him, his Speech
wholly failed him for a time, so that we expected nothing less than to see him
draw his last Breath; but being recovered out of this sinking fit, he began to
speak again, and when he saw the Chamber full of People, he said:

How am I Tired out! will they allow me no time of repose? wherefore is there
such a Company about me? have not I spoken enough? why am I not allowed a
little Relaxation, and one moment o^ Solitude, that I may Converse with my God?

Therefore every one withdrew according to his desire, and we were afraid to
com^ near to him, lest we should molest him; but when we heard his Groans, his
Niece went in softly to him, and said, Reverend Sir, Would you be without my
Company, does it not please you that I should any longer attend upon you.

Alas (said he) I desire nothing more; do not go from me, but be thou a Witness
of my last hours: continue with me even to the end. It is a great comfort to me
to enjoy quietness; I cannot bear the sight of so great a Company, especially
of those that come out of mere Curiosity: I have omitted nothing of what was
incumbent on me to say or do: I leave nothing behind me that is matter of
regret to me; I have Prayed for the Peace of mine after my departure, and I
believe Peace shall dwell among them, and that thou will do thy endeavor that
it may, for I know thou art of a peaceable Spirit: I am satisfied and at rest:
I have no more to do here below, I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord.

She asked if it would please him to have his Son come to him?

Yea, (said he) I bless God, and rejoice that I have seen him and blessed him
before I dye.

When he came near to him, he stretched out his hand and received him kindly,
and then repeated to him what he had before said concerning his Brother,
affirming,

That he was a very good man, and one furnished with Gifts that are rather
solid and useful, than conspicuous and ornamental; now shall he be the Crown of
my Fathers Family: I bless God that there remains a man therein to Praise him
both in word and work. The Blessing of the God of our Father has been
eminently on that Branch of our Family from whence we are sprung; there have
been found therein many good Men who feared God: As for these little Nazarens,
I recommend them to God.

And after a little stop, he continued his Speech unto his Son:

My Son, I now know thee no longer according to the Flesh; my Carnal affections
are mortified and swallowed up in the Love of God: My love toward my Wife and
Children is now wholly Spiritual; I have Prayed unto God that he will
Sanctify, make thee perfect and glorify thee: My Son! Is not my happy
departure joyful unto thee? what could thou with more earnestness have
desired for me than a glorious and happy end after a long and prosperous Life?
Bless God, through whose bounty I am now filled with Joy and Peace. Fear God my
Son, for this is the whole Duty of man. In all thy Actions love Righteousness,
Sincerity, Peace, and Truth, that my Blessing may remain effectually upon thee
and thy Nephews.

. 20. This whole day was past over much to his ease and quiet, none being
admitted to disturb him with their Visits: He lay still, and was inclined to
Sleep; and when he observed us to look upon him as if he had been asleep; I
sleep (said he) but my heart waketh. And when we asked him sometimes how he
did, Very well (said he) I feel no pain; I am filled with the Grace of God; I
am not sensible of cold or heat; I fear no more the inconveniences of temporal
Life; the Spirit of God strengthens me, and affords me abundant Consolations; I
have no doubt of my Salvation; He has set me on high: He has hid me in his
hiding place: He has fenced me round about, and has perfected whatsoever
concerns me: I cannot be troubled any more; I am like a Vessel filled with pure
Water, which no agitation troubles. It is God that Justifies; who shall
Condemn? it is Christ that dyed, yea rather who is risen again: The moments of
my time are in his Power. I am wholly taken up in the expectation of the
decreed hour, when he will say, Come thou good and faithful Servant, enter into
the Joy of thy Lord! O my God, I thank thee that thou have given me the Spirit
of Humility, Sincerity and Truth! I have not been as a tinckling Cymbal: O Lord
thou have known the secrets of my Soul, and my in most Thoughts! Thou have
taught me in the School of true Doctrine, and I have above all sought the Glory
of thy Name: I have not thought any Virtue or Knowledge to be of my self,
knowing that all my Sufficiency is from thee alone: I have slighted that
Mystical Theology which is nothing but Canting, and have adhered to that clear,
pure and saving Truth which is contained in the Holy Scriptures. One word of
the Son of God who requires the Heart, is of more worth than all those humane
Vanities, which are good for nothing else but to trouble the Purity of the
Divine Fountains. Suffer not, O Lord, the improbity of men to obscure the
Clearness of thy Word, which has been a Lamp unto my Feet and a Light unto my
Path; yea, it still affords a Light unto me, and guides me in the dark Paths
of the Shadow of Death. O Lord, I have been jealous for thee, and have mourned
in secret for the Wickedness of some, and the audacious Hypocrisy of others,
who have Assembled themselves to pull down what thou had built up by thy
Mercies. There yet remain Pious Souls who love the Peace of Zion, and mourn
under these Confusions; hear their Prayers: In particular have Mercy on those
most flourishing Islands where so much of the Blood of thy Martyrs has been
shed; turn the People in them to thy self, and to their King; give thy
Judgments unto that poor Prince, and make him worthy to have his just Prayers
heard; Give the Spirit of Moderation and Wisdom to his own Nation, who have
sent for him, that they may require nothing of him, but what is weighed in the
Balance of Justice.

These Discourses being began toward Evening, were continued till it was
Night; which he perceiving and wondering at himself, said,

And am I yet alive, and thus able to speak? God has done it, he endues me
with new Strength that I may glorify him, and extol his holy Name. O Lord, I
wait for the moment which thou have determined, I believe, I persevere; I am
not troubled: The Spirit of God witnesses with my Spirit that I am a Child of
God: O Lord thou have known me thoroughly; I am thy Servant; help all mine
Infirmities; perfect thy work in me: Patience and Hope make not ashamed; the
Love of God is in me, even that Love whereby I earnestly desire the Salvation
of all, yea of those which have offended me without Cause; I forgive them, and
Pray for them; There is no bitter Gall in me, for God has caused all
bitterness to pass from me, and has given true Peace in me; for I roll my self
upon him.

. 21. On Thursday morning Thursday, Jan. 5.
turning his eyes toward the light, he said,

It is day light: Shortly I shall no more know the difference of Day and Night;
I am come to the Eve of that great and eternal day, and am going unto that
Place where the Sun shall no more give light: God will be an everlasting Light
unto me and already O Lord thou sendest the Rays of that Light into my Soul,
and openest mine eyes that I may perceive them. O how powerfully do thou work
in me! while this Old man dies and decays, thou put on me the New man,
which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him who Creates it; that is
lively, sees, hears and walks with enlarged steps; it desires nothing more
than an outlet into perfect Liberty: Deliver me from this Prison, that I may
celebrate thy Name; Yet neither do I so contemn this Body, as not to think of
its Restoration; for I know thy dead shall live, yea, my dead Body: It is sown
in Corruption, it shall be raised in Incorruption; It is sown a vile body, but
it shall rise again in glory; It is sown in weakness, but it shall be raised
again in power: In a word, It shall be conformed to the glorious boof our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is become the First Fruits of them that sleep: I shall see
him in my flesh: My own eyes shall see him; I shall behold his face in
righteousness, and shall be satisfied with his likeness when I awake. He loves
me with an entire affection; he kisseth me with the Kisses of his Mouth: He
has removed all fear far from me, and has filled me with Peace and Joy in
Believing. He often repeated that sentence, Amor meus Crucifixus est; that is,
My Love is Crucified; adding,

O Love incomprehensible! what I conceive of him is beyond all expression.
Blessed be the Lord, who has directed my heart into the Love of God, and the
patient waiting for Christ.

. 22. This whole day was spent in like holy discourses, and the Prayers of
Ministers that came to him, with the Visits of other Friends. Toward Evening
he found himself very weak, and had two or three fainting fits, but his speech
did not wholly fail in them; sometimes he would say,

My strength is quite spent: I am going hence, Lord meet me; do not tarry; take
thy Creature.

Toward the middle of the Night, his strength being a little recovered, he
reached forth his hand to Mrs. Rivet his Wife, and said,

Embrace me once more, my dear Love! I love thee no more after the flesh, but
after the Spirit; as I have always loved thy Better part: I have lived with
thee in holy Concord these thirty years: Thou have born mine Infirmities, and
have been an help to me; and God has blessed us together: I have taken notice
of thy good Infirmities, conjoined with great Piety; and thy Faith, which is
not perfect, but sincere and true. Thou know (my Love) that God is not a
severe Judge, but merciful and Gracious; he chiefly requires from us, a
recumbence on his Mercy: He is kind and full of Love. Behold in me an Example
of Mercy and Kindness, and from thence gather Confidence that he will follow
thee with the same Grace; We have an Alliance in Heaven; Thither the Lord takes
me, and he will take thee thither also, and so we shall be together with the
Lord for ever. While thou art waiting for that blessed hour, he will be thy
Husband, Father, Comforter and Defender; and finally will make thee to
experience the sovereign Effects of his Love. Rejoice therefore (my dearest
Love) I have prayed for thee. Thy Faith shall not fail; God will succor thy
infirmities, which savor of nothing but goodness. It is that I love in the
Children of God, that they acknowledge themselves to be imperfect before him:
God will completely perfect thee, doubt not.

Then turning to his Son,

My Son (said he) keep for thy self what is thine; Call upon God as thy Father,
for he is the Father of Eternity: Let his fear wholly possess thee, for that is
the principal thing: Seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness; and
all other things shall be given in over and above unto thee. Take care of my
little Children; see to their pious Education and Instruction in their tender
years; Let them not frequent evil Company: My Son, I put confidence in thee,
and assure my self thou will observe my commands with all thy power. Let Truth
be in thy Heart, Equity and Sincerity in all thy Actions; and cherish Peace and
Friendship among Friends.

. 23. Then taking many Friends by the hand that stood by him, he said, I pray
you love my Son:

And then turning to his Niece,

Farewell (said he) my dearest Niece! God will bless thee; yea he has blessed
thee already; thou have ministered to thy afflicted and sick Parent, and in so
doing thou have served the Public: Let my blessing remain upon thee: I know
and am sure that thou shall be with me in the Heavenly Paradise, where God has
prepared places for us, before the Foundation of the World was laid: Thou have
helped me, and God will help thee: Fear not, Persevere with me in the close of
my last hours.

Then seeing Mr. Fayan le Coq: Are you there (says he) my dear Cousin? The
Lord bless you abundantly, and grant that in the whole course of your life, you
may walk in his fear; you belong to an honorable Family, which have laid many
Obligations upon me; I pray you write to your honored Mother an Account of my
happy Departure; and also to your Brethren, whom I pray God abundantly to
bless, and give them Peace, and that they may not trust in the perishing good
things of this World. As for my self; it is long since I have turned from
corruptible things, and adhered to those that are prepared and laid up in
Heaven. Every good and perfect Gift comes down from the Father of Lights, with
whom there is no variableness nor shadow of turning. My God, my desire is to
thee; My Soul thirsts for thee as the parched ground: When shall I enter in,
and present my self before the face of God! Come Lord Jesus; Come! I am in thy
Bosom; I am ready when it pleases thee; My Heart is prepared, my Soul is
ready: All delay seems long to me till Christ come; for whom notwithstanding I
wait without impatience. You see through the Grace of God I am not tired; I wait,
I believe, I persevere: Patience is much better than Knowledge; though it delay
my Joy, yet it sets me in the way to it. The sense of divine Favor increases
in me every moment: My pains are tolerable, but my Joy is inestimable; I am no
more vexed with earthly cares: I have now no desires but after heavenly things:
I remember when any new Book came out, how earnestly I have longed after it,
till it came to my hands, being always desirous of learning something New: But
now all that is but as dust: Thou art my All, O Lord! My good is to approach
unto thee. O what a Library have I in God! in whom is hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge: I shall no more behold things afar off and darkly; I
shall no more know in part; but I shall be filled with the Knowledge of God as
the Sea is covered with waters. Thou art the Teacher of Spirits; I have learned
more Divinity in these ten days that thou art come to visit me, than I did in
fifty years before: Thou have brought me to my self, before I went astray, and
was in the world; but now I am conversant in the School of my God, and he
teaches me after another manner than all those Doctors, in Reading whom I
spent so much time: What Obscurity is there, and what Conjectures? yea what
Vanity in all those things that proceed from an humane Spirit? What vast spaces
must a man pass over before he find any fruit in them? But thy Doctrine, O my
God, is perfect, and full of good fruits: My Soul is filled as with marrow and
fatness. With my whole heart I renounce all other Knowledge; and cleave to this
alone; Jesus Christ and him crucified: I give thee thanks, O Lord, that thou
have hid these things from the haughty-wise, and have revealed them to the
humble. This Body is feeble, but the Spirit is strong and enriched.

. 24. Then turning again to his Son, he said, My Son! God bless thee more and
more; How greatly do I rejoice when I behold in thee the Grace of God! It was
my great desire to see thee from the first day of my sickness. Thou art the
youngest of my Sons, and thou only art left alive to me upon the Earth: Thou
shall be my Benjamin; and God will bless the Charge I have committed to thee;
and will be present with thee for thy help therein. The Almighty God give unto
thee and thy Nephews blessings in Israel, and especially spiritual Blessings,
for temporal Blessings follow upon Spiritual. Praised be God that has made
thee a Spectator of my last Conflict: It is a Conflict, but yet sweet, because
of the Consolations of the Spirit of God, which abound in me. Thou have strove
enough, O my Soul, rest in God who is thy Savior.

Then hearing the Clock strike, he asked what hour it was? which when he knew,
he said: The Time passes away, and we pass away with the time; howbeit we are
confirmed and strengthened by the Grace of God every hour.

Then smiting upon his Breast, he said:

There is Joy within by the habitation of the Spirit of God in me. O Good God!
who am I, that thou should vouchsafe to come and dwell under my poor roof! So
it has pleased thee, O Lord, that thy Spirit should dwell in me to the end;
and therefore I have cause of rejoicing in earnest.

. 25. Thus was the Thursday Friday, Jan. 6.
night passed over: The poor sick man was wearyed, and exceeding thirsty, yet
durst not drink: He seemed to be breathing out his Soul every moment, and
panted for deliverance; but the end of his Conflict was not yet come; there
remained still above twenty four hours to be undergone, and those very sharp.
His Son had betaken himself to some rest in the morning; and after a while
coming into the Chamber again, his Father said to him,

A good day to you, Son! I am glad you have taken some rest: Help me a little.
Which being done, he added,

My Son, this duty will be pleasing to God; I should have reckoned my self
happy if in any thing I could have helped my Father; he was a good and a pious
man: I had also an holy Mother, which deserved very well of the whole Family;
there was in her an holy Ambition and ardent Charity. My Son, how do I rejoice
to see thee! I have yet many things to say to thee; Remember that thou speak to
the Illustrious Princesses Dowagers, and tell them that I dye devoted to them
in all dutiful affection, and that I recommend unto them the utmost I can the
Institution of the illustrious College in this Town; which is indeed the
honor of the house of Orange, and of his memory who founded it, unto whom in
my own particular I am laid under very great Obligations.

That great Prince who first called me to his service in his house, heaped his
benefits upon me, and (without vanity I speak it) honored me with his
friendship; of which he could give no greater Testimony than by committing to
me the first education of his only Son; who indeed was snatched away from us in
the flower of his age, when both his Fathers house, and the Commonwealth had
most need of him: Truly he was a Prince adorned with many gifts, and disposed
to receive good things, and to Piety; I believe that God was merciful to him;
and that his goodness is not wholly withdrawn from this noble house, to which
he has raised up a Son that may supply his Fathers place; The Almighty God
bless and Preserve that Branch, and Bless his Education; and make him to grow
in Age, and in Gifts and Graces, that he may be an Instrument of promoting his
Glory, and an instance of his Grace and Favor. I beseech him also to bless the
Princesses, his Mother and Grandmother, that their Concord may turn to the Good
of the Child and of the State: The Lord guide them in all things with the
Spirit of his Fear, strengthen them in the Faith, and encourage them unto every
good work: I hope they will keep in mind my service and Zealous Affection for
the good of their noble Family; But if not, my trust is in God.

. 26. After half an hours silence or thereabouts, he thus continued his
discourse:

Hear the prayers which thy Servant offers unto thee (O God) for that Child,
let him be blessed and sanctified from his tender years, that the corruption of
the Age. may not pervert him; Let him live before thee: Let Integrity and
Righteousness preserve him.

He also prayed for the Lady Electress of Brandenburg and her Sisters, That God
would adorn them with all Christian and moral Virtues; and b^ with them to the
end of their Lives.

But now his oppression was so much increased, that we could not take the
texture of his Meditations; only by his countenance and gesture we might see
that he prayed continually; and sometimes he uttered some words, whereby we
understood that others had preceded in his Meditation; a^ for instance,

Yea Lord: I believe: thi^ is my joy: God will perfect his work above all: ^
have no more part in thos^ things that are done under the Sun, but I desire the
Peace of the Church every where.

Then he repeated in French Meter the 18. verse of Psalm 51. which is in English
Meter,

"Lord unto Zion turn thy Face;
"Pour out thy mercies on thy Hill:
"And on Jerusalem thy Grace:
"Build up the Walls and love it still.
I am of that Zion: have pity on me, and deal graciously with me. I am
suffocated, I can hardly breath: The Lord brings me down: but he calls my
Spirit to himself: The greatest thing by far is, I have no doubt of my
Salvation; the Lord upholds me miraculously, to the end that I may edify
others by my example in this last close of my life: I am well pleased, O my
God. Far be it from me that I should murmr. How small are these pains in
comparison of that Grace through which I bear with a quiet mind whatsoever it
pleases God to lay upon me; Thou allayest these short bitternesses, with
inexpressible consolations; Thou speak unto my Soul with that sweet voice
which ^ understand, because I am of thy Sheep; My sheep, says the chief
Shepherd, hear my voice, I know them and they follow me: To this purpose he
began to recite the 23* Psalm in Hebrew; The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not
want; and desired one that stood by to rehearse the rest of the Psalm* And the
last clause he pronounced himself from the Original; viz: I shall dwell in the
house of the Lord for ever. And when he saw many attending him; he said,

You have no cause to wonder; I am able to do nothing of my self: The Lord
works all in all, that we may be humbled: This is the School of humility;
Look upon me, and remember the Grace of God in me; Consider how he brings me
down by his mighty hand, that he may exalt and Glorify me in due time: The
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory
that shall be revealed in us: This is my joy to glorify God in my death; sweet
Death! that is a passage unto life eternal. O God strengthen the Soul of thy
Servant, that he may abide constant and invincible unto death: I hope the
Combat will not continue long; Bring to pass, O Lord, that the End may Crown
the Work.

. 27. Amongst the many Physicians that had attended on him, there was one Dr.
Crucius a Roman Catholic, who came this Morning to visit him, and asked him,
if he still continued to be of good courage.

Yea verily (said he) for I am in God, and God is in me: The Cross which God
has sent is small; Every one must bear his Cross, that he may follow Christ,
who has suffered so great things for me, though he deserved no such suffering:
This Cross increases my hope: The Lord is Gracious, who enters not into
Judgment with his poor Servant: Christ has dyed for my Sins, and is risen
again for my Justification.

A while after Mr. Wickelmans a Dutch Minister came, and spoke to him in the
Latin tongue, to whom he answered in the same Language,

God Strengthens me, and he will preserve me from all evil: I give thanks unto
my God for that unspeakable goodness which he has poured upon me: he succors
me in this work; he has been always present with me, even to this Extremity.

Then the Minister repeated to him the words of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness; At which words he
cried out,

O welcome Crown! there is nothing else that I wait for: God dwells in me by
his holy Spirit, which shall never be taken away from me: Grant, O Lord, that I
may keep thy Commands!

Again, when beholding hi^ pains, he exhorted him to patience; he answered,

We cannot, we ought no^ to resist the will of God: O Eternal Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, I give the^ thanks for thy exceeding great benefits, That it
has please^ thee, that I should declare thy Praise even unto very Old Age; and
that thou make me able to persist therein unto the last breath of my life.

. 28. At another hour when the same Minister visited him again, and said, You
are still fighting the Good fight; he answered,

In hope and patience, I am wholly Gods, and Jesus Christ's my Savior: I
believe that he will keep what I have committed to him against that day: Even
so come, Lord Jesus!

And when this Minister had prayed with him, he returned him thanks in these
words:

I give you thanks for your holy Prayers; I doubt not but God will hear them:
God bless you; I beseech him to make you a very powerful Instrument of his
Glory.

He also added,

God has fulfilled all his Promises in me; I have seen them afar off, I have
believed them, I have embraced them; I wait for nothing more but to breathe
forth my last breath; God possesses me already, I feel that: there is nothing
wanting, but that he will give me the wings of an Eagle that I may fly to the
Carcass.

Immediately he subjoyned a verse or two out of one of Beza's French Poems, to
this sense:

"O Holy Word!
"With all my Heart
"To thee I fly.
. 29. Toward Evening the Pangs of death increased upon him; The extreme Pains
of his bowels, his sudden fainting, a^^ and other grievous Symptoms, were the
indications of approaching death: But in this state, and utter decay of the
strength of nature, his exercis^ of Faith was strengthened s^ much the more,
and his patience confirmed: Mourn no^ for me, (said he;) These last hours have
nothing terrible in them; The body indeed suffers; but the Soul is Comforted
and filled abundantly: The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall want nothing: His Rod
and his Staff shall lead me safely through this short valley of the Shadow of
death: This little cloud hinders me not from beholding that Heavenly Light,
which already enlightens my Soul. O Lord thou give me light, thou warmest me,
thou liftest me on high, and I gladly follow thee, being carried aloft upon the
wings of Faith: The sharper my pains are, the nearer I am to deliverance. My
wound is grievous, but I was silent because thou did it. Have mercy on me, O
Lord! O my God, deliver me! I am impatient of delay: I know that God is
faithful, and with the temptation he will give a way of escape, that I may be
able to bear it.

When he looked toward his Wife, she thus addressed her self to him:

My dear! I bless God, and rejoice for thee, that I have seen so much of the
Grace of God in thee. To which he replied,

Thou do well (my dear Love;) The Lord confirm and strengthen thy joy; Mine
is solid: I rejoice that thou see the end of my Conversation: Thou have known
me, and thou know that I hate Ostentation; and that more has been
attributed to me by others, than I have believed of my self: for I have been
conscious of mine own infirmities, and that whatsoever good might be in me, was
not of my self: The Glory is to be ascribed to God alone; he has done the
work: Perfect, O Lord, and Crown thine own work! I complain not of my pains; I
have not flattered my self in my disease; for when I was first seized by it, I
was aware that God called for me: Is it not time, my dearest love? Afflict not
thy self: I go before; thou shall follow e're long: Thou have afforded me help,
and have kindly succored me; God will bless thee, and save thee, doubt it not:
It has been grateful to me, and I most kindly accept it, that thou have had so
great a Love for this little Boy (pointing to his Grandson,) make proof of thy
love to me by loving him; it is a Child void of malice, and I have good hope of
him, if he be well guided.

Then calling the Child, he said,

Give me thy hand, my Son! See thy Grandfather upon his deathbed: Thou have
already lost thy Grandfather by Mothers side, who was a pious and upright man;
Now thou losest thy Grandfather by Fathers side; but thou have a Grandfather in
Heaven on both sides, that will never be wanting to thee; I hope my blessing
will redound upon thee.

Then taking him between his hands;

My little Child (said he) Pray to God! If thou do this diligently, thou shall
be like a tall and beautiful Tree planted by the Rivers of waters: Have thou
fair branches, and be fruitful; that is, Fear God: Then shall thou bring forth
Wisdom, Prudence, and Understanding. Be thou Good and Beneficent, shunning evil
company, and God will bless thee, thou shall not be forsaken: Behold thy Uncle,
which shall be to thee instead of a Father; Be obedient to him, and also to thy
Grandmother, and Mother, whom I pray God abundantly to bless with her other
Children; that her little Posthumous Son that bears my Name may in time
Represent me, yea exceed me.

. 30. These holy speeches were sometimes interrupted by a short sleep, and
sometimes on occasion of the Prayers or Exhortations of the Ministers that came
to him; He received them all most Cordially; and most willingly heard the
Consolations that were suggested by them; And he would also return Consolations
to them: He heard their prayers with attention, and when they had done, was
wont always to say, That he found himself much relieved. And then dismissed
them with thanks, giving his blessing to each of them as was proper to their
Condition. Toward Supper time, he remembered the noble Virgin Anna Maria a
Schurman, and said,

She is a person to whom I have always devoted my Affection and sincere Love:
she has honored me with her holy friendship, and has called me Father; In
testimony of my paternal Love, I give her my little Bible without Points, of
Plantines Edition, which you shall find in such a Place in my Study (directing
to the place;) If I had any strength left, I would have written a Letter to her
with my own hand, whereby I would have testified to her how much I Honor her,
and esteem those admirable gifts of God wherewith he has adorned her. But you
(my Son) shall supply this defect, and inform her of my happy Departure; and
that I have prayed to God that he will Strengthen her in her supernatural
Calling, and bestow upon her the blessings of a long and prosperous Life.

What remains? Have I not said all? I have no more to do, but to give up my
Soul into the hands of God: Is it not time? O my God, let it suffice! Receive
my Soul unto thy self, O Lord! I yield it into thy hands; thou have Redeemed
it, O God of Truth: Thou art my hope, and my Confidence from my youth: No care
afflicts me; God has removed from me the Opprobry which I feared; (meaning the
Vomiting of his excrements, a symptom usual in his Distemper;) He will perfect
(and that quickly) whatsoever belongs to his Glory, and my Eternal Salvation:
If he make any stay, if he defer my deliverance, he does it for your
Edification and Salvation; Let not my Sorrows be grievous to you, but rather
bless God who gives me a desirable plume, and makes my heart joyful in the
midst of my pains: Rejoice therefore; and Pray with me.

. 31. When he had asked what a Clock it was, he said to his Wife and his Son,

I pray you take some food; I am not yet fully come to the end of my Work, I
want nothing, and my Niece shall tarry with me, and take something here to
refresh her.

They withdrew therefore into the next Room, and one brought an Egg to his
Niece, which he desired her to take.

As for me (said he) my Meat is to do the will of God, and happily to run out
the course of my life: I am refreshed with holy and heavenly food: My Father
feeds me with that Food which he lately offered to me at his holy Table; I did
eat, and was filled: The true feeding is the feeding of the Soul, that which
sustains the true Life: As for Corporal meats they are for the belly, but God
will destroy both it and them.

Then reaching out his hand to his Niece, I Love thee (said he) with a Love
wholly Spiritual, a love of true Charity and Affection: We will pass this Night
together in holy Meditations, and speaking to one another in Psalms and Hymns,
and Spiritual Songs, Singing and making melody in our Hearts unto the Lord: I
feel my Swelling to ascend: I fear that in a little time I shall be able to
speak no more: do not depart from me; but continue speaking to me whatsoever
God shall bring to thy Heart and Lips, lest in my utmost weakness my Memory
should fail me; and I assure thee, God will suggest those things to thee which
which shall be for my help and Comfort in the time of need: for out of the
abundance of the Heart, the mouth speaks,

His Wife and Son being returned into the Chamber;

Pray ye (said he) for me; what a joy is i^ to see these holy Souls with me!

. 32. Often times through the bitterness of his pains he brake forth into Cries,
or rather ardent Prayers unto God; and that frequently, in the words of the
Psalms in the French Meter: as Psalm. 141. 1.

"Jehovah, upon thee I call,
"O hasten unto me!
"Lend to my Voice thy Gracious Ear,
"When I cry unto thee,
Then adding from Psalm. 25. 18. Look upon mine Affliction, and pardon all my
sins.

And upon the mention of any Text that speaks of the Remission of sins, he
would immediately subjoyn,

It is done; He has caused mine iniquity to pass away from me: O Lord, abate
and shorten my Miseries; Now is thy time.

And then repeated from Psalm. 118. 24.

"This is a joyful day indeed,
"Which God himself has wrought:
"We will be glad and joy therein,
"With all our Heart and Thought.
How great is my anguish! but how much greater is my refreshment!

"An high place and a Refuge sure
"I find the Lord to me;
"In day of my distress he me
"Relieves, with rich bounty.
They continually suggested to him places of Scripture; unto which he would
return such answers as did abundantly manifest his Godly Ardor, Faith, and
Patience; as for instance, when it was said to him, God is nigh to all that
call upon him in Truth; Smiting upon his breast, he replied,

Here he is; here he dwells in me, and works powerfully according to his good
pleasure.

Then that place was alleged, 1 Cor. 15. Death is swallowed up in victory: and
he added the following words,

Thanks be to God, who has given us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Again from Romans 8. 30.

Moreover, whom he did predistinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also Glorified:

Even so it is! (said he) Grace upon Grace! O lovely Chain! This is a Golden
Chain indeed! there wants but the last link to complete the whole in me. O Lord
make perfect, and Crown thy work; That I may dye the death of the righteous,
and see those good things, which eye has not seen, neither have they entered
into the mind of man; Thou give me a foretast of these sweetnesses and
refreshings, which no words can express.

. 33. Then Mr. Hulsius being present, asked if it would be acceptable to him
that he should go to Prayer?

Yea (said he) Pray; The time requires it.

When he had ended his Prayer, he gave him thanks; saying,

You have helped me; while you called upon God, I found some ease of my
infirmity: Encourage me! the Race is short: I even touch the bound of my Race;
I go on: I gather new Strength: I touch the Prize, I take hold of Eternal Life.
This body faints: this Tabernacle is destroyed; But there is reserved for me
an house in the Heavens, not made with hands: There is reserved for me in the
Heavens an incorruptible Inheritance, that can neither be defiled, nor fade
away.

About Midnight his pains increased exceedingly, which caused him to break
forth into bitter cries, calling upon God for his help.

Come, Lord Jesus! Come! I can bear no more; yet is not my patience lost, but
the desire of my Soul toward thee, is like that of the dry and thirsty Ground.
As the Heart pants for the brooks of water, so pantetli my Soul for thee, O
God! O when shall I come and appear before God! My Strength fails me more and
more, but my Soul is strong and joyful.

Presently upon this he fell into a great fainting (which Physicians call
Lipothymia) on which occasion Mr. Martin Lydius a Dutch Minister was instantly
called in. He was one that Dr. Rivet had a great affection for, and he was
daily with him during his sickness; And therefore what passed between them two,
we will set down in Lydius his own words, which are as follow.

. 34. This Reverend Father in Christ required that I should be often called to
him in the time of his sickness, having formerly been his Scholar at Leyden.
When I came first to him, he exhorted me with sweet words to proceed as I had
begun: saying, that it greatly rejoiced him to understand the Affection which
the Church at Breda had for me; Wherefore, I pray thee (said he) Give me thy
hand; Go on to adorn the service thou have undertaken. Then he uttered an
excellent Confession of his Faith with a strong Voice: in which he showed on
what stays the Protestant Religion, which he had hitherto propagated both by
Preaching and Writing; leaned, for the obtaining of that Consolation both in
life and death, which the miserable Papists cannot have.

And when I recited some select places of Scripture to him out of the Old or
New Testament, he would rehearse them again either in Hebrew or Greek. I said,
that I doubted not but with Stephen the Protomartyr he did already see Heaven
opened, etc. To which he replied with a cheerful Countenance and Voice, O I
have seen that a good while.

I excused my self, that I could not pray to God with him, because I was a
stranger to the French Tongue, and the bystanders understood not the Latin
Tongue; but he said, Pray in that Tongue which both thee and I understand;
which when I had done, and prayers were ended, he gave me thanks: saying,

The Spirit of God has spoken by thy mouth, and thou have exceedingly
strengthened me: I desire thou will always remember me in public prayers in
the Church. The next day being exceedingly ill, he commanded that none should
be admitted to him; But when Mrs. Moline heard my Voice, she brought me to the
bedside, and he received me with a cheerful Countenance; I am glad (said he)
that thou art come. I told him, the present time required that he should cast
all his cares upon God, and be no more solicitous about any thing: He answered,
Yea truly: There is nothing that I am any more Solicitous about; I only desire
the coming of my Savior, yea his speedy coming, that I may be loosed from this
body of Sin, and be with Christ who is gain unto me both in life and death; I
embrace Christ by Faith; I am eve^ pressed down, but I am i^ the hand of my
Shepherd: I embrace my Savior Jesus Christ; and do now wholly pant after my
God.

When he had spoken these, and other things of like nature, I bid him Farewell:
but he again desired me to pray with him: which being done, with a sigh he
said, O how sweet is this!

When the fatal day was come, about two a Clock in the Morning, he would have
me called, and when I drew near to his bed, he took hold of my hand, to whom I
said, Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come. He answered; And
why does he not come? And immediately added, Yea, he is come already.

This I Testify, Martinus Lydius Preacher at Breda.

. 35. About three of the Saturday Jan. 7.
Clock in the Morning his Wife came near to him, and beholding in his
Countenance the Image of death, she cheerfully said:

Farewell my dear* Go rejoicing into eternal life.

Thou say true (said he) I go unto my God and your God* We are all Gainers:
Amen! Amen! Farewell my Son! Farewell my dear Niece! Fear not, I have prayed for
you; Ye shall be happy. Persevere to the end, that none get away your Crown: I
go before you, and ye shall follow me; you have no cause to doubt of it: We
shall be caught up together to meet the Lord i^ the Air, and so we shall for
ever be with the Lord: I have no more to say or do, I am ready, I am prepared;
Come Lord Jesus, Come! receive thy Creature; I aspire I hope, I knock at the
Gate; Open O Lord! Open unto thy poor Servant.

His Oppression was manifestly discerned to increase upon him, and also a
mortal Sopor or drowsiness, and Rotling came upon him: The Chamber was filled
with company; but most were of the mind it was not meet to weary him any longer
with discourse; seeing nothing could be added to that abundant Testimony of his
Faith which they had already: Therefore about five in the Morning they all
departed, except Mr. Lydius, who silently waited the last season of praying to
God for him when he should be drawing his last breath. But when it was past
eight of the Clock, and he discerned but little change, and found his Pulse
much the same, he thought he might abide in that Agony until Evening;
therefore he departed, promising to return as soon as they should send for him.
Only those of his own house remained with him, who feared to molest him by
speaking, and were also uncertain whether he could speak, or not, because of
his extreme oppression, and his lying with his Mouth open. Friends at length
prevailed with his Wife to withdraw from the sight of his last Agony; and only
his Son and Niece stood by the Bed, expecting his last breath; yet neither did
they think that had been so near, as it was. About half an hour after Eight the
Color of his Face was wholly changed, and Convulsive motions came on: Then his
Niece asked him, if he yet had his understanding. Alas (said he) speak: (as
complaining of their silence:) Then said she, I pray you do you still feel the
sense of inward Joy? To which he replied intelligibly enough, Yea: My
Confidence is firm in me. Then making a sign, That he would be raised a little;
His Son and his Niece on each side enfolding their arms about him, lifted him
higher: Then fixing his eyes a while upon them, he said, Help me; I am going.
Accordingly, the Lord bringing to their mind many choice Scriptures apt for the
occasion, they by turns proposed them to him; And he received them with great
joy; adding So it is: and Amen. Often also he would pronounce himself the last
words of that Portion of Scripture which they were rehearsing to him; as in
Psalm. 36. How excellent is thy loving kindness O God! Therefore do the Sons of
men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings: Thou will abundantly
satisfy them with the fatness of thy House, and make them to drink of the
Rivers of thy Pleasures; which last sentence he rehearsed himself in the French
Meter. And the same he did from Psalm. 65. 4. Blessed is the man whom thou
choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts:
We shall be abundantly Satisfied with the goodness of thy House, even of thy
holy Temple.

. 36. Then his Son said, I am sorry that we are alone.

I am not alone (said he) God is with me. Be you then an Evangelist to your
self, (said his Son) forasmuch as you have received the Ministry of
Reconciliation, deliver the tidings of peace to your own Soul.

That I do (says he) my Soul believes. Then fear nothing;He that believes in
Jesus Christ shall never perish: He added, But shall have Eternal Life. While
prayers were making for him in this last Combat with the pains of Death, at the
end of almost every sentence he would interpose some word or words, expressing
the sense of his mind with respect to those petitions. As thus,

O great God, send thy Spirit of Consolation; [he is already come:] and give
unto thy Servant the sense of thy love, [that he has done;] Give unto him the
Garment of Salvation, [he has given it;] All is well, enter therefore thou
good Servant into the Joy of thy Lord, he calls thee. [At which words he
raised up himself and stretched forth his Arms:] Also O Lord strengthen more
and more the Faith of thy Servant in this last agony, let him see, let him hear
thy voice, let him raise up himself, and take hold on Eternal Life, [Yea! I am
of good Comfort.] Let us go to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy,
[It is done:] Leave therefore with a joyful mind this body to the Earth, and
yield up thy Spirit into the hands of God, [who has given it:] Take hold of
the Shield of Faith; yea put on the whole Armor of God: [I have it.]

Then he began himself to recite those words, I have fought a good fight, etc.
And when one had repeated what follows, and came to those words, which God the
righteous Judge will give; he added, He will do it. And when one said; Behold
the last moment of deliverance! O God give Wings unto thy Servant; open thy
Paradise unto him; Let him be received unto the beholding of thy Face! He
added, With the Spirits of just men made perfect. Let him receive the white
Stone, and the hidden Manna; and let him bear his part in that New Song which
none understands but he that sings it. To which he said, Amen!

In these last Moments there came in some of his Friends who were witnesses of
his happy Departure: But the Ministers above named, viz: Lydius and Hulsius,
came too late to hear him speak any thing. Howbeit a short Prayer was made for
him; after which when he had abode a while with his Eyes fixed, and his hands
lift up toward Heaven; One of the standers by said; I am persuaded this man
does already enjoy the Vision of God; whereupon he earnestly endeavored to
utter the Word Yea! And almost in the same moment sweetly breathed forth his
Soul, about half an hour after Nine of the Clock on Saturday morning, being
Jan. 7. After he had lived seventy eight years, six Months, and five days.

AN APPENDIX: WHEREIN A CHRISTIAN 's Triumph over Death is Illustrated by some
more memorable Examples.
1. THE Jewish Masters have a saying recorded in their Talm. Hierosol. which
Buxt. Adag. Hebraic.
Buxtorf thus translates: Non facienda sunt Monumenta justis (sc. defunctis):
Verba ipsorum sunt monumenta ipsorum. That is, Monuments are not to be erected
to the Righteous, when deceased; Their Words are their Monuments: They need not
the help of Art to perpetuate, or to embalm their Names, who have lived and
dyed eminent Examples of Piety and Holiness; For they shall be had in
everlasting remembrance: The Memory of the Psalm. 112. 6.
just is blessed: but the Name of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10. 7.

As for that worthy and holy person whose triumphant passage* through Death into
the Joy of his Lord, we have already had a Relation of; It may be questioned,
whether his most fruitful and learned works while he lived, or his gracious
speeches and demeanor when he dyed, have contributed most to the Eternizing of
his Name; But it is beyond all Question, that both the one and the other have
raised unto him a Monument Aere perennius; and as in both he has been an
eminent Instrument of Glorifying God in the World, and strengthening the Faith
of his Brethren; so his Name will be remembered with Honor, and Thanksgiving to
God on the account of both, from Generation to Generation. We have beheld in
him what Bernard tells us he saw in dying Gerardus; viz. Hominem in morte
exultantem, and insultantem morti. i. e. A man greatly rejoicing in death, and
insulting over death; which teaches us that the Apostles holy Triumph, O death
1 Cor. 15. 55.
where is thy Sting! O Grave where is thy Victory! is no vain flourish of
words, or empty Speculation; but a Truth sealed to, in the Experience of a
Christian, who with a Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, can join with him in
the Agonyes of Death, in his following Song of Praise; Thanks be to God, which
gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 57.


In such instances as these, we have a very valuable Evidence of the Truth and
Excellency of the Christian Religion, and the Certainty of a future State, and
blessed Immortality: Those things must needs be real in themselves, whose
Efficacy is so great upon the Soul of a man in such an hour; Death is no Fancy;
neither can Fables, with what Art or Cunning soever they are devised, relieve a
man against the bitter pangs of it: The proud boasts of the Atheist and
Debauchee are soon quelled by this King of Terrors; the very thought of whose
approach surprises them with Consternation and guilty fears; But the lively
hope of Pardon in the Blood of Christ, the Smiles of a reconciled God, and
foretastes of heavenly Joy, make the true and sincere Christian more than a
Conqueror in this Conflict: He can fear no evil because God is with him, whose
presence makes his Sickbed easy, and gives him Prospect of the greatest Gain
in the loss of this Temporal Life. He can say as the holy 'Apostle, To me to
live is Christ, to dye is Gain, Phil. 1. 21.

The holy Life of the Righteous is abundantly recommended to our imitation by
their blessed Death; The advantage of whose End made Balaam say, Let me dye the
Death of the Righteous and let my last End be like his! And certainly it is no
small. Honor that God has put upon the Profession of the Protestant Religion,
by affording to many of the most Zealous Assertors thereof, such an abundant
entrance into the everlasting 2 Pet. 1. 11.
Kingdom of their Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; according to whose pure Word
they have reformed themselves, and in whose Merits alone they have Trusted. Not
only the constant and triumphant death of thousands, who by the cursed Tyranny
and Cruelty of Papists have been brought to Seal their Profession with their
Blood; but also the placid and most Christian End of others that have dyed in
their Beds, has left great Convictions upon the Minds of Beholders (though
before Enemies to their Religion) that there has indeed been (...), an
heavenly Excellency in it which they knew not of. This caused a Physician of
the Popish Religion, that attended upon Dr. Ames in his last sickness at
Rotterdam, when he observed what an extraordinary spirit of Faith and Holiness
breathed in him to the last, to express himself after this manner: Siccine
moriuntur Reformati! i. e. Do Protestants dye at this Rate! And well indeed may
they be surprised with wonder at such Examples, because the Principles of that
Religion which they profess afford no such Consolations, or any firm ground for
them, to those that live and dye therein. When they come to dye, they find
their Debaucheries to be more than Venial Sins, and the Guilt of them such as
will not be expiated by any of those Means which they have trusted to while
living under the strength of Papal delusions; and the most refined and
Superstitious Devoto's in that Religion are in no better case, when by Death
summoned before the dreadful Tribunal of Divine Justice, at whose Bar their
own Righteousness (though patcht up with a thousand humane Inventions) will stand
them in no stead: To say nothing of those Idolatries which they are taught to
practice as the most effectual means of meriting Heaven, and which accordingly
they principally place their Confidence in: But O how sadly disappointed will
they be, when Death arrests them, who have no better Antidote against its fatal
Sting, than Popery can furnish them with! They must, if their Consciences be
awakened, leave the World with trembling Horror, and breathe out their last
with a sad complaint of the wretched Cheat of that pretended Religion, which
fails them in their greatest Extremity. Well may they then take up the dying
words of * Joannes Semeca, who about An Eminent Civilian in Germany.
the Year 1267. is reported to have left the World with this doleful
Reflection. In our Lifetime we had those who would frequent the Quire for us,
who would till our Lands; Melch. Adam.
who would say Mass, and pray the Canonical Hours for us: But where now shall
we find any one that will descend into Hell for us, and deliver us?

. 2. But it is time to return from this digression, and to prosecute our
purpose, which is to present the Reader with some more eminent Instances of the
Grace and Mercy of God toward, and the Efficacy of a lively Faith in, others
of his Servants in their last Hours; who have been zealous Professors and
Propagators of the True Religion and Faith of Christ while they lived, and have
left this World with an holy Triumph in the full Assurance of Eternal
Blessings, when they dyed. My design is, only to single out a few Instances,
from many that might be with equal advantage pitched upon, were it not for
swelling this little Tract beyond its due bounds.

And the first I shall mention Mr. Rollock.
is, that memorable Example of a Christian and happy End, which some account of
the last Hours of Mr. Rollock may furnish us with, who departed this Life at
Edinburgh, Feb. 8. Anno 1598. being the Forty third year of his Age.

. 3. He was while living an eminent and very useful Instrument in the
Reformation of the Church of Scotland, which he sought to promote by
Evangelical Means, in the exercise of all Diligence in the Ministry of the
Word, by his Learned and pious Writings, and most of all by a singular Example
of Holiness and practical Religion in his Life and Conversation; which rendered
him a burning and a shining Light in his day. Besides his extraordinary Labors
on special Occasions, he had for some years before his death the principal
Charge and Presidency over the then newly erected Academy of Edinburgh
committed to him, which he administered to the great advantage of those under
his care, and indeed of the whole Church; and in the faithful discharge of his
duty in that great Trust, his Lord found him when he came to call him from this
evil world into his Heavenly Kingdom and Glory; and how great his Affection was
toward the service of his Lord, and what his care for the peace of Jerusalem,
and the flourshing of true Religion, when himself was leaving this World, will
be abundantly manifest in many passages during his last Sickness, which shall
be recited in their proper place and order.

When he found his distemper prevail, according to his wonted Prudence he set
in order what might concern his Family when he was gone, and prepared himself
for a ready and cheerful submission to the Will of God. And when two of his
special Friends came to visit him (that were Persons of some note and Eminency)
he besought them that they would go to the King (who was then Young) and exhort
him, as from him, to abide constant and unmovable in the Profession of the
True Religion to the end, and by no means suffer himself either by the hopes of
enlarging his Kingdom, or the secret arts of Wicked men to be moved therefrom.
The esteem and reverence he had for the Ministers of Christ, he expressed after
this manner,

This Ministry of Christ, though mean and abject in the account of men, shall
at length shine with illustrious Glory.

. 4. Afterward the Ministers of Edinburgh came to him and when they were set
down he addressed himself to them in a copious and very solemn speech, wherein he
tells them; That being worn out with his sickness, he breathed after and hoped
for the close and Period of this life: And (says he) I have not so learned or
taught Christ, but that in him I should feel comfort under these Sorrows. The
thread of my life will shortly be broken off, and I must pass unto that country
which I have long and earnestly desired after.

Then he proceeds to a Pathetical recommendation of the University to their
care; and makes a most solemn Protestation (as in the presence of God, before
whose Tribunal he must immediately appear) of his integrity and faithfulness in
his Trust, both as a Pastor, and Rector of the University; That he had never
suffered himself to be biased by any corrupt or sinister end, nor had any
burden upon his Conscience with respect thereto: He professed the great care
he had always taken of the public peace; but added,

Yet neither did the love of Peace so bewitch me, as that I should not
distinguish betwixt genuine and adulterate Peace; nor did my Affection toward
my Prince seduce me, so as that to pleasure him I should bring the least spot
upon my Conscience: But the Candor of my actions will shine when I am dead.

He exhorted them to mutual peace and love; telling them* There was nothing
more unseemly than that the Preachers of Peace should be rent with strife and
discord amon^ themselves; especially at suc^ a time when the common Enemy (the
Papist) lay i^ wait for their ruin.

And after Exhortations to render all dutiful respect and Obedience to their
Prince; he dismissed them with this Benediction.

The God and Father of Jesus Christ enrich you with all blessing, and
strengthen you with all might unto the vigorous discharge of your Ministry.

. 5. When the Night came on, death seemed to be hastening, which he perceiving,
entered into such discourses of Heavenly things as seemed to the bystanders so
much above the rate of humane capacity to conceive and utter, that they were
all filled with a joyful astonish^ent in hearing of them.

The Physicians came and endeavored (but in vain) by proper Medicines to
assuage the force of his distemper; whereupon turning his speech to God, he
said, Thou O God shall heal me: And then poured out his prayers with a most
ardent Zeal for the Remission of his sins through the Merit of the one and only
Sacrifice of Christ; professing that he esteemed all things (though in
appearance never so great) to be but dung, for the excellency of Christ Jesus;
earnestly calling upon God that he would bring him to an happy and triumphant
period of thi^ Life, and grant that being covered with the Wings of Mercy, he
might sweetly sleep i^ the bosom of Jesus, and enjoy that sight of Gods face
which with frequent pantings he thirsted for.

I have seen thee darkly (said he) in the glass of thy Word; O grant me the
long and much desired fruition of thy Countenance!

He discoursed at that rate concerning the Resurrection, and Eternal Life, as
if he had already forsaken the earth, and been translated into Heaven; with so
great sense, and Life of Affection did he speak of these things: And then
taking each one by the hand that was present with him, like the Patriarchs of
old, he blessed them with words full of Gravity and Holiness; closing his
Benediction with suitable Exhortations to every one. That Night beyond
Expectation he got a little rest.

And the day following the Magistrates of the City, with many other persons of
quality came to visit him: To whom he made a very grave discourse, in which he
earnestly recommended the University to their favor and care, and nominated a
fit person to them for his Successor therein: And as to his private concerns,
he affectionately recommended to them also his dear Wife (who was then big with
Child) greatly praising her love and tenderness toward him in all his
weakness, and Afflictions; adding,

I ingenuously profess to you, I have not laid up two Pence out of all my
Stipends; for these worldly things were not my care, nor did I ever set my
heart upon them.

Those present solemnly promised to answer his desire, i^ all that he had
mentioned t^ them; whereupon he exhorte^ the Professors of Philosophy t^
persevere in their work, an^ yield due obedience to his Successor. And then he
said, ^ thank my God, that my memory, sight, hearing, and the rest of my senses
are as strong and lively as ever; But m^ heart is estranged from thi^ world;
and why, O Lord Jesus should not thou enjoy m^ Heart, who only have a righ^
thereto? This has been my endeavor all my Life long, to dedicate and
consecrate my heart to thee; take it to the self, I beseech thee, that i^ may
remain with thee.

. 6. After he had spoken ^hese things, a gentle sleep came upon him, out of
which when he awaked, he expressed a most ardent breathing to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ.

Come Lord Jesus (said he) break off the thread of this miserable Life! Make
have, O Lord, Tarry not! Jesus has Redeemed me, that he might grant to me (not
this frail, but) eternal Life. Come Jesus! Grant me that life for which thou
have redeemed me!

And when those that stood about him lamented the great loss they should have
of him, he said;

I have passed through all the Steps of this life; and am now come to the last,
why should I go back again? By the aid of thy presence, O Lord Jesus, I shall
happily measure this Step also: Lead thou me into that Glory which I have only
seen through a Glass: O that I were conversant with thee!

Upon occasion of some one signifying to him, that the next day was the Sabbath
day, he thus expressed himself.

Let thy Sabbath, O Lord, begin mine eternal Sabbath: Let my Eternal Sabbath
receive the pledge of an happy beginning from thy Sabbath.

Toward the middle of the Night he got a little rest, which the strength of
his disease soon interrupted; and he supposing his last hour to draw near, sent
for Mr. Walter Balcanquel, unto whom, when he was come in, he thus addressed
himself:

Forasmuch as you have for a long time had a Pastoral charge at Edinburgh, and
our friendship is of no late date, I took care to have you sent for, that I
might make manifest unto all the Reverence which from my Cradle I have had for
the Ministry of Christ: I have indeed, according to the measure of my gift,
already poured out my Prayers into the bosom of God; and now I entreat you to
pray for me, I will join with my Heart and Affection; only desire not the
protracting of this Life.

Whereupon all that were present, falling on their Knees, Mr. Balcanquel
prayed; but among other things he earnestly desired that it might please God to
spare so worthy a man with them for some longer time, seeing both the Church
and Commonwealth had so great need of his service; whereupon Mr. Rollock
interrupted him, saying,

I have enough of this Life; the only thing I desire is that heavenly Life,
which is hid with God in Christ.

When prayer was ended, he brake forth into an earnest commendation of the
Efficacy of the Word Preached.

The Word (said he) is both Life, and Death: nor can any 2 Cor. 2. 16.
be saved without the Word. Believe me! It Is no trifling matter to preach the
Word: It is not like the interpreting a Text of Plato or Aristotle; or the
making an Oration embellished with the alluring Ornaments of speech: The
Preaching of the Word consists in Holiness, Humility, and the powerful
demonstration of the Spirit: How great my esteem of it has ever been, God is
Witness!

Then turning his discourse into Prayer, he said; Come Lord Jesus! break
asunder the Nerves of these Eyes, and give me other Eyes! I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with thee; Hasten thy coming, O Lord Jesus, and defer no
longer! Let this faint life go forth, that the better Life of God may enter in:
Lord Jesus put forth thy hand into this body, and take out this Soul unto thy
self.

. 7. From that time till the Sabbath day morning he kept silence, when again
the longings he had after his Fathers House, were breathed forth in these words.

Come Lord, and tarry not, I am wearyed with the loathing of day and night;
Come Lord Jesus, that I may come to thee! O sweet and happy divorce from this
Life: Come Lord, who art my sweetness, and set this Soul at liberty that it may
enjoy thee it is Husband; break this Heart of mine in two, that it may fly to
thee it is Head.

To this one replied, Hitherto Christ has possessed your whole heart, and he
will take it whole unto himself. To which he returned answer,

I desire the breaking in two of this Heart, that this natural Life may be let
out, and it may be wholly replenisht with the Life of Christ.

Then one of the bystanders said; Let no anxiety trouble you; your Lord is now
hastening.

Those (said he) are welcome tidings unto me; I would my Funeral was to be to
morrow.

Another said, Happy is that Soul which is so near to the Lord as yours is. To
which he replied,

There is nothing in me which I account not as dung, that I may win Christ:
Christ is the only matter of my Comfort; my own Righteousness is a menstruous
cloth.

Being asked, if he desired to speak with any of the Ministers; he said, he
would not give them trouble now they were just preparing themselves to preach.

Let me (said he) chatter with my Lord like a Crane. Being informed that Sermon
was begun. Lord (said he) grant that I may see what others now hear!

About noon, when one comforted him with the remembrance of his unwearied pains
and diligent endeavor to promote the Glory of God all his life time; he
replied,

I have nothing to Glory in but the Mercy of God in Christ Jesus: All other
things I count but loss!

After a little rest, a person of considerable rank visiting him, he again took
the occasion of an earnest recommendation of what might tend to the promoting
of Religion to his care in his Station: And in the following Night he was
observed to say; I have a peaceful mind in a sick body; I am not perplex't with
the fear of Death, Sin, or Satan, they have no Dominion over me: yet so great
is the weight of my distemper, that it is much beyond expectation that I
subsist to this hour. He bruises me as with a Pestle in the Mortar of
Affliction, that he may form me for his own Kingdom.

. 8. On the next day being Monday, he said to those about him,

It may seem strange, seeing I am so sorely handled with my disease, that my
life should be protracted thus long: But with patience I wait for the good
pleasure of the Lord: Let him do with me what pleases him, I will not dispute
it with him: What is man that he should dare to contend with God! yea though he
should thrust him down to Hell, he must obey, and not reply upon God: Be
gracious unto me, O Lord, for Christ Jesus sake: I am not ashamed to profess
that I never before attained to so high a pitch of the Knowledge of God, as I
have done in this sickness. O what a fearful thing is it to fall into the hands
of the Lord! But Mercy is laid up for me in Christ. Why art thou Sorrowful, O
my Soul? why art thou cast down within me? thou shall by and by obtain a most
pleasant sight, and congress.

Toward evening, he told his Friends that he experienced in himself the truth
of the sixth Psalm, and repeated some Passages therein; as verse 2. Have mercy
upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones are vexed: To
which he added, Christ will bear my burden, and I will follow, him being
unheld by his Grace.

When those that were about him, observing the bitterness and extremity of his
disease, brake out into Tears and Lamentation for him.

Lament not my case (said he) but weep for your own sins; seeing none are free
from sin, none want occasion of weeping; but as for me, I shall quickly see the
end and consummation of all.

The care of his Funeral he recommended to two of his entire Friends present,
and when he had finished his Directions about what he would have done therein;
he said,

Why should I not take care of this body, seeing that also shall be glorified,
and made conformable to the glorious body of Christ: (and looking upon his
hands) These very hands shall shine with excellent Glory.

After this he was not able to speak much; but to the very last what he did
utter was with a wonderful savor, still expressing the inward joy and peace of
his Soul, and a most assured Confidence of a complete and glorious Victory in
this last conflict; and in a few hours he finished his course; and sweetly
slept in Jesus.

Before I pass to another Story, I cannot but mention one thing more that
happened a little before this holy man drew his last breath; And it is this.

One of his kindred coming in to see him, and perceiving that he was nigh to
death, being himself a Stranger to Religion and Piety, yet convinced that it
could not but be well with so holy a man as Mr. Rollock, entreated of him, That
when he came to Heaven, he would Mediate for him and the rest of his Friends
here below. But how grievous this ignorant and impious request was to the Soul
of this blessed Saint, will be easily guessed by those, that as he did, love
the honor of Christ more than their own lives; Though before he lay as one
ready to give up the Ghost, at the hearing of this, his Zeal was so stirred in
him, that he raises himself upright, and with a great fervency replies, I
refuse that Office: Christ is the only Mediator. And so deep was the impression
of trouble this made upon his Spirit, that a while after, when his elder
Brother came to visit him, he left this charge upon him.

Do you (said he) rebuke that Kinsman of ours, and admonish him that he take
another course, otherwise there is no Salvation for him, but most certain
ruin.

. 9. The next instance I shall touch upon, is that of Mr. John Oecolampadius.
Oecolampadius, who while he lived was also an eminent Instrument in the
Reformation of Religion, and one of the first (with Zuinglius and others) whose
labors it pleased God to succeed for the accomplishing of an happy beginning
of that great work in Basil, and other of the Svisse Cantons: He was a person
very considerable both for his Learning and Piety; but for nothing more to be
commended, than for his Peaceable temper, and Christian Moderation, in those
controversies with which the reformed Churches were then exercised among
themselves in the business of the Lords Supper: For though he was both free in
declaring, and constant in asserting that truth which the Lord had made known
to him, yet his great care was, (...), to speak the truth in love; and to
manage the defense thereof without bitterness toward, or Provocation of, those
that did in that point dissent from him. And as he was a man studious of Peace
in his life, so it pleased the Lord to guard his Soul with a Peace that passes
all understanding, and to fill his Heart with Spiritual and Heavenly joy when
he came to dye.

After he had for some considerable time labored in the Ministry of the Word
at Basil, it pleased God there to visit him with his last sickness, in the
Forty ninth year of his Age, which he presently apprehended would prove mortal
to him, and accordingly gave warning to his Friends that they should expect no
other: But so far was he from being terrifyed by the approach of death, that on
the contrary he expressed the greatest longings after that Heavenly light, and
Crown of Glory which he saw ready prepared for him, so soon as the earthly
house of this Tabernacle should be taken down: He waited not for the
Consolations of others in this last conflict, but was ready to Minister
Consolation to all that were about him; insomuch that his most Christian and
comfortable End, was no less for the Confirmation and encouragement of the
Godly in their Holy profession, than his Doctrine and blameless Life had been.
He was an example of dying well, as he had been before of living well: of which
abundant testimony is given by those worthy men that familiarly and almost
constantly conversed. with him in these his last hours. Among whom Simon
Grynaeus, a man whose praise is in the Reformed Churches, was one; who has
left us the account of the following discourse that this pious Servant of
Christ made to him and the rest of the Ministers of the Church, a little before
his departure; which alone is sufficient to justify all that has been before
said of the frame of his Spirit upon his dying bed. It is as follows.

. 10. You see Brethren what the business is: The Lord is at hand, he comes,
and is now about to take me hence: and therefore I was desirous to call you
first, and with my dearest Friends to satiate this Soul of mine with a sincere
Joy in the Lord, and true consolation. What shall we say then in this last
Embrace, O ye Servants of Christ, whom the same Love to their Lord, the same
Study, and the same Doctrine has most closely knit together! Salvation is
obtained; It is obtained (I say) by Christ; and we have all Confidence of the
Kingdom of God: Our Doctrine is certain, and light is prepared for our feet: It
is meet that all Sorrow, all fears of Life or Death, all doubting and error
should be banished far away: Only this (my Brethren!) this only remains, that we
constantly and faithfully persevere in those footsteps of Christ which we have
already entered upon, by maintaining Purity of Doctrine in the first place, and
then by a Life in all things conformed to the true Word of God: Other things he
will take care of who is Mighty, and of his own accord watches his own, even
Christ our Lord: He will defend his own Church: Let us see to it therefore
(Brethren!) that our light so shine that God the Father may be glorified in us,
and the Name of Christ rendered illustrious through the light of your Sincerity
and holy Life. See that you love one another in Truth; and lead your whole Life
as under the Eye, and in the sight of God: It Is to no purpose to press Piety
with words only; The light of Truth and Holiness in Life, with the true and
Heavenly Spirit of the Mind, are necessary, if we would vanquish Satan, and
convert the World to our Lord Christ. For (O my Brethren!) What clouds are
there arising, and what a tempest draws near! what alienation of men, and what
impiety is at the door! But Brethren! It behooves you to stand fast, and to
abide it: The Lord himself will be present with you in his Concerns: O that my
Lot were to undergo these dangers with you! and that I could often spill this
Life for the Truth! But however Love is undivided, and the bond in Christ
indissoluble; all things are common to the Godly among themselves.

These things he uttered with respect to the common Cause of Religion; And as
to what concerned himself he told them,

I matter not the scandal which some have imputed to me, as if I had corrupted
the Truth: Through the Grace of God, I am now going to the Tribunal of Christ
with a good Conscience: There it will be manifest that the Church has not been
seduced by us. And of this Solemn Protestation I leave you my Witnesses, which
I also confirm with my last breath.

The next day (which was the fifteenth from his first sickness) he caused his
Children to be brought before him, and first took them by the hand, then
stroaked each of them, and calling them by their Names said,

Thou Eusebius, thou Irene, and thou Alethea, my dear Children! see that you
love God.

And because by reason of their age, they were not yet capable of attending to
the Charge of their dying Father (the Eldest being but about three years Old)
he turned him to his Wife and the rest of his Relations present, and said,

It is you that I have bound by this charge to do your Endeavor, that
according to my desire and what they now hear, my Children may be Pious,
Peaceable, and Faithful. This he spoke with allusion to the signification of
their Names: And their Mother with the rest, signifing their acceptance of this
charge; he desired them to take a way the Children again.

The Last night he lived here being come, his inward Joy did no way abate, but
rather increase as death drew nearer to him. One of his intimate friends
coming, in he asked him, what News he had brought; his Friend told him, None:
Why then (said he) I will tell you news; I shall in a little time be with the
Lord Christ.

A while after, when they asked, If the light did not offend him; touching his
breast, he said, Abunde lucis est! Here is abundance of Light!

The next morning his fatal hour came on, before which, he prayed with an
ardent Affection for the Remission of Sin, repeating the 51 Psalm, from the
beginning to the end; And then after a little pause and breathing, he renewed
his prayer in these words: Christ Jesus save me! which were the last he
uttered, and then sweetly breathed forth his pious Soul into the bosom of his
Redeemer. He changed this Life for an Heavenly, on the first day of December in
the year 1531. And as Mr. Rollock professed upon his deathbed, that he had
laid up nothing of this World in his Life; so it is observed of this good man,
That he made no Will, because he had nothing to dispose of:

So far were these first Reformers from seeking great things for themselves!
Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but Righteousness delivers from death:
Pro. 11. 4.
To be rich toward God, to have Luke 12. 21
an Heart filled with Grace and Spiritual Comfort, and the testimony 2 Cor. 1.
12
of a good Conscience, that with simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our
conversation in the World; will prove the best portion when we come to dye; and
afford such ease to us upon a sick bed, as all the Treasure under Heaven cannot
procure the like.

. 11. The Jewish Writers, from that Passage of the Psalmist: Psa. 41. 3.
The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou will make all
his bed in his sickness; have a Proverbial saying in Tract. Nedar: to this
sense; Majestas divina sedet ad caput lecti aegrotantis: i. e. The divine
Majesty sits (or abides) at the sick man's bedshead. His sick bed is turned
into a Sanctuary, by the Gracious presence of God with him. This we have seen
verified in the former Examples, and shall yet meet with a further Confirmation
of, in the experience of Joachimus Curaeus, Curaeus.
a Learned and Pious Doctor of Physic in Germany; and a Zealous Protestant;
who finished his course in the year 1573. being the Forty first current of his
age. He was a person that esteemed Religion to be his greatest concern while he
lived, and continually exercised himself in a diligent and serious practice
thereof; And as he would by no means be diverted from working out his own
Salvation with fear and trembling, by fervent Prayer, and all manner of Holy
Conversation in the World, so it pleased God when he called him out of the
World, to afford him such an abundant Enjoyment and sense of his love in
Christ, as carried him through the Agonies of death with a more than ordinary
Triumph and rejoicing. In his last hours it was most convincingly manifest,
that Christ had given unto him a large draught of that water of Life, which was
in him a well of water springing up unto Eternal Life; from which blessed
Fountain he poured forth abundant Consolations to all that were with him in
that Conflict, if so happy a departure, and so sweet a sleep, as death was made
to him, may yet be called a Conflict.

When he found his sickness had prevailed over Nature so far, as that his
dissolution must needs be hastening on, he wholly applied himself to ardent
Prayers and Supplications unto God, making use of that exercise for the ease
and support of his Soul in sickness, which had been his delight and Comfort in
his health; And several times in one day, causing his his Wife and Children to
come to him, he did with an inexpressible Zeal and Affection exhort them to
Piety and Virtue; and then in a solemn manner recommended both them and his
last charge to them, to the blessing of God; who in this also heard the Prayers
of his Servant; and raised up two of his Sons after him, to be eminent examples
both of Piety Virtue and Learning in their Generation; thereby making good his
word, That the Generation of the upright shall be blessed.

. 12. Being taken away in the midst of his years, at that age which was the
ripest for Service, he would often repeat the mournful complaint of Hezekiah; I
have cut off like a Weaver my life, etc: But then his perfect acquiescence in
the will of God, and rejoicing in his Salvation, was as frequently expressed, in
the following words, which are some of those holy sayings which plentifully
issued from his pure Heart in this last sickness: viz.

I am broken, O Lord! but it satisfies me that thy hand has done this, not the
Devil. The Body indeed suffers because of Sin, but thou Comfortest my Soul with
a most sure Hope, and expectation of eternal Life. I believe, O Lord! I
believe; but do thou help mine unbelief: I have received a Message of death,
but I will wrestle with thee O Lord Jesus, after the Example of thy holy
Pilgrim Jacob, until the Morning beams of thy light break up, arise, and shine
upon me; neither will I let thee go unless thou bless me, and my Soul be saved;
Therefore O Jesus Christ, thou will bless me, and save my Soul, giving unto me
a Believer, Remission of Sins, Righteousness and Life! Come Lord Jesus, and let
all that love thee say, Come! And he that loves thee not, let him be Anathema
Maranatha: Thou know, O Lord, who art the searcher of Hearts, That I love
thee; And thou love me, yea thou love me in Truth, and art my Redeemer by
thy Merit and Efficacy. Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my Spirit, for thou
have Redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth.

And then reflecting upon the time of his sickness, (for he dyed January 21.)
he proceeded in further expressions of his assured Confidence in God, and
inward Joy, through the lively hope and foretast of the blessings of that
Kingdom he was going to, after this manner:

I shall be with thee in the beginning of this new Year; I shall be satiated
with the sight of thee, O Lord! I shall drink with thee at thy Table the New
Juice of Eternal Joy, even in thy Fathers house, where there are many Mansions;
there is a place for me also; and there shall I sit at thy Table. Refresh me, O
Son of God, with thy Spirit, and with thy quickening presence. I come unto
thee, Jesus Christ; Receive thou me according to thy Promise, which is the only
repast, and Recreation of my Soul. Iam meum pectus ardet conspectu vitae
eternae, cujus vere sentio in me initia. i. e. Now does my Heart burn, through
the sight of Eternal Life, the Beginnings of which I truly feel in my self: And
this is Life Eternal, to know thee the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent. Through thy goodness I have learned, and I have taught others,
rightly to acknowledge thee: Do thou again acknowledge me, O Son of God, and
embrace me with thy Saving Grace, even with thy Holy Spirit; do thou present
this Soul to thy Eternal Father, who will readily receive it from thy hand; My
desire and rejoicing is to come unto him; and because I am not yet come, all
delay seems long unto me; O thou Sun of Righteousness, light me into Eternal
light and Righteousness: I desire, with thine Apostle, to be dissolved, and to
be with thee; Loose me, that I may be with thee: I am greatly wearyed, and I
wait for the entertainment which thou have shown me. As the Traveller in his
Journey, at Night time desires the Sunrising; so do I desire after the clear
light, even the sight of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. When my voice and
speech shall fail me, Grant, O Merciful Savior, that thy Holy Spirit may speak
unto thee in my Heart, and make intercession for me with groanings that cannot
be uttered: Let his motions spring up in my breast, and move thy Heart unto
Mercy toward me. Lord Jesus Christ, who sit at the right hand of thy
Eternal Father, receive my Spirit.

. 13. These were the Meditations, and this the exercise of this Holy man upon
his dying bed: He felt this Tabernacle to be falling, but knew he had an house
not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens; and his pious Soul was filled with
Heavenly triumph, in the certain expectation of a Glorious Resurrection of that
same body of his, which was now ready to be sown in corruption, which with an
admirable sweetness and comfort, he thus expressed:

I shall see thee my Savior, in my flesh, which thou have exalted to the right
hand of the Eternal Father; and I will give thee thanks in the presence of thy
Father, for all the Good things which thou have communicated unto me. Yea thou will place thy Holy Angels to be the Guardians of my Body, that they may keep
my dust, which has been, and to all Eternity shall be, the dwelling place of
thy Holy Spirit. It is impossible that this flesh of mine, which is the Temple
of the Holy Ghost, this Mass of my body, which is quickened by the effusion,
and communication of the Spirit of Christ, and so inserted into the flesh of
Christ, should be reduced unto nothing, or abide in death, and ever remain dust
and ashes: But thou who art the Author of Life, will remand from the Earth this
thine own Image, even out of the smallest Crumbs of dust and ashes that are
there; By sending forth thy breath thou will again build up my body alive and
Glorious, which shall be the habitation of the whole Divinity, dwelling therein
to all Eternity. There shall we follow the Lamb whithersoever he shall go; O
Guide truly fair and Divine! There shall we sing a New Song: Let us rejoice!
Hallelujah!

O Come, let us go forth to meet our Savior: Our (...)
Right as Citizens is in Heaven; but in this Life we must begin Eternal Life,
and follow the order which Christ has appointed; We shall be clothed upon, if
so be that we be not found Naked: That most lovely Lamb of God which takes away
the sins of the world, will lead us unto the Fountains of living Waters, and
wipe away all Tears from our Eyes. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither
have entered into the Heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love him. This Earthly Life is Death, but that Life which Christ begins in
me, is Life indeed; Now it is no more I that live, but Christ that lives in
me; therefore let him be praised. O happy Soul, in which thou Jesus Christ
sit as the Guide and Rector of all its actions and Motions. I see Heaven
open unto me! Now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, O Lord, for mine
Eyes indeed have seen thy Salvation! Thou, O Christ, art the Resurrection and
Life; How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord! O Christ my Redeemer, carefully
watch my Soul, that it suffer no detriment by the horrible and infernal Dragon,
the Devil. Let my Soul be bound up in the bundle of Life; and let this my
passage hence be happy; let it be to me the way to those that live an immortal
and Heavenly Life.

. 14. After, this he again most affectionately prayed for his Wife and
Children, but in terms arguing such a nearness to God and Holy Familiarity with
him, as if a man had been speaking to his Friend, and devolving a care upon him
that he knew most assuredly he would willingly take upon himself and see to; He
mightily Comforted himself with the thoughts of Christ's sympathy and
compassion, who (says he) will certainly hear me in all these things. And when
one exhorted him to be of good hope, for God would help him; he answered,

It Is right: The Lord will certainly help me, by a final deliverance; according
to that; Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord: In the Lord then do I dye,
who is my Life; I dye in the acknowledgment, Faith, and Confidence of Christ
the Mediator, who is my Shade of defense, and my Brother, who cloatheth me with
the garment of his Righteousness; I shall therefore be happy, I shall be
Righteous; O sweet Blessedness! sweet Righteousness! O sweet change and
Translation from Sin to Innocence, from Darkness into Light, from Death to
Life.

Many Prayers also he put up for the Church of God, especially that the pure
Doctrine of the Gospel might be transmitted without corruption to Posterity;
and with Tears bewailed the wickedness of those who by their corrupt Notions
were an hindrance to its course. And once more (a little before his Soul
departed) his Friends being about him, he solemnly recommends himself to
Christ, and repeats the Confession of his Faith; expressing great thankfulness
to God for the Reformation, and for those that he had used as Instruments
therein.

I am now dying (said he) and dismissed as that Servant of God holy Simeon; I
also being the Servant of God, and Holy; I dye in the Confession of the
writings of the Prophets and Holy Apostles; and of the Ancient Creeds; and also
adhering to the Augustane Confession; I give thanks to God, That of his
Infinite goodness he has dispelled the darkness, and restored to us the Light
and Purity of his Gospel.

At length, in the midst of his Prayers and earnest breathings after God, he
yielded up his Soul into the hands and bosom of his Redeemer, where he rests
from his Labors, and his works follow him.

. 15. Another Instance worthy of our Remembrance and imitation, I shall give
you, in Mr. Matthew Wesenbeck, an eminent Civilian; who after he had run the
course of an Holy Life, from his first Conversion to the fifty fifth year of
his Age, departed this Life at Wittenburg, in the year 1586.

The means by which God first awakened him to seek after and embrace the
knowledge of the Truth, was this.

While he was studying the Law at Lovane, it fell out that there was a poor man
in the City, who being blind made it his business to visit the Sick, and to
instruct and comfort them as he could with Texts of Scripture, (in which he was
well versed;) in recompense of which pious office, those that were well
disposed, would relieve his Necessity with a piece of Bread and Cheese: After
some time, this poor man was accused of Heresy, and committed to Prison; near
this prison, Wesenbeck with his fellow Students were wont to recreate
themselves with the Ball; on which occasion they often heard this blind man
with a clear voice singing the Psalms of David according to Luthers Metaphrase;
and this Holy exercise the good man performed with so much Devotion and
Affection, as wrought in them a more than ordinary attention to him, although
it was not without some danger to themselves; And it pleased God so to work
upon Wesenbeck, by this example of Christian constancy and Zeal, together with
the matter which he heard, that thenceforward he began diligently to search the
Scriptures, and also to read the Writings of those of the Reformed Religion; by
which means he became not only fully convinced of the Truth, but also received
it in the Love thereof, and abode most constant in the Faith and Practice of it
to his dying day; being an eminent example of Zeal and strict Piety in his
whole life: He had an extraordinary Affection to the Holy Scriptures, but
especially the book of Psalms and the New Testament were most dear and
delightful to him: And notwithstanding the necessary course of his Studyes, and
(for some time also) great Practice in the Law, he usually spent at fit seasons
no less than five hours in a day in Prayers and retired communion with God; He
was not like many that can ^^d no leisure for Religion, that is, cannot attend
to work ^ut their own Salvation: but made Conscience to steer his whole course
as a man resol^ed for Heaven: And his Righ^eousness and Charity toward men was
not inferior to his Piety toward God; He ever ^bhorr'd those Artifices which
^re too common with practitioners in the Law; his Candor, ^aithfulness, and
Justice in his practice, made his Name precious to all that knew him; And as it
pleased God to bless him with a plentiful Supply of the good things of this
world, so Religion taught him not to ^rust in uncertain Riches, but ^o be rich
in good works; His way was to give a charge ^o all his Servants, that they
should never turn away the Poor from his door without relief; And when they ha^
not presently regarded the poor nor listened so soon as they ought to their
cry, himself would open his Window and throw down Money to them.

Thus did this good man spend his Life and his Substance in the Fear of God,
and working Righteousness; and accordingly his latter end was Peace; for when
he lay upon his death Bed he was filled with the Consolations of God: He would
often repeat that of the Apostle Paul, Romans 7. O wretche^ man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the Body of this death! I thank God through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

And that; 2 Cor. 1. He has sealed us, and given the earnest of his Spirit in
our Hearts, by which we cry, Abba, Father.

Another time with great re^oycing he told those that were with him,

That now God had shown to him a place of Eternal Joy, unto which he should
immediately come; and the only thing he desired, was that his coming thither
might be hastened.

He would often rehearse diverse passages out of the Psalms; as, The Lord is
nigh to all that call upon him in Truth: He will fulfill the desire of them
that fear him, he will hear their prayer and save them.

And immediately before he gave up the Ghost, he professed; That he was in
Covenant with the Lord Jesus Christ: which words were his last.

. 16. In these experiences we see that they which believe in Christ, never dye;
i. e. th^^ never feel the S^ng of death nor fall under its power, but are
enabled by the Faith of the Son of God perfectly to vanquish (...) King of
Terrors; yea though death assail them in his most affrighting shape, yet is he
not able to remove them from their stedfastness, or to abate their Joys; we
have innumerable proofs of this in the End of those Holy Martyrs, who though
they have been called to seal their Witness for God by violent, yea by most
cruel kinds of death, have notwithstanding finished their course with a most
Glorious Peace, and rejoicing in the hope of their calling: Howbeit I shall not
here insist on any of those instances; But to let you see that death in it is
darkest dress is welcome to a man assured of his Interest in Christ, and Peace
with God, take the story of one Sebaldus Munster a Civilian, that flourished
about the year, 1540. Whom it pleased the Lord to visit with the Plague, of
which he dyed at Wittenberg, in a time when a general sickness raged there.
This person, when some of his Friends came to visit and Comfort him a few hours
before his death; he showed to them the Swellings and pestiferous Ulcers which
were broken out in his Hand and Arm; saying,

And how do these Bracelets and precious Gemms wherewith my Christ has adorned
me, please you?

At which words when they brake forth into Tears, he farther said,

Let not these by any means seem loathsome unto you; for with this
Wedding-apparel am I going to enjoy that Heavenly Feast which I shall have with
my Christ for ever. Thus shall I pass to that everlasting Council of most
Excellent and holy Souls; and thus shall I be acceptable to God my Redeemer.

Thus triumphing and full of Joy did he leave the World, having got a clear
sight of a better, that is an Heavenly Country. And though to dye of the
Plague may seem to Sense very dismal, yet as Austin has well observed; lib. 1.
de Civitate Dei: cap. 11. Mala mors putanda non est, quam bona vita
praecesserit, etc: i. e. No kind of Death is to be esteemed evil, which has
been preceded by a good Life: for nothing makes Death evil, but that which
follows Death: Therefore they that of necessity must dye once, need not be
Thoughtful by what accident they may come to dye, but rather whither they must
go when they dye. It Is an excellent saying of the Author of the Book of Wisdom:
chap. 4. 7. The Righteous man though prevented by Death, shall be in rest. The
most terrible or sudden stroke can make no breach upon his happiness to whom
to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. They are always safe that have made
their Calling and Election sure; and on the contrary, such are always in
danger that live without God in the World. I Remember upon occasion of that
passage before cited from the Book of Wisdom, Mr. Forbs in his Instr. Histor.
Theolog. makes mention of a very memorable Story of a pious and learned man
that dyed suddenly in his Study; and when some were scandalized at it, rashly
interpreting this Providence as a Testimony of Gods displeasure against him; it
so fell out by the wise and Gracious ordering of God (for their Conviction and
a testimony to his servant) that he was found sitting with a Book open before
him, and his finger pointed to these words, Justus quacunque morte preoccupatus
fuerit, in refrigerio erit. i. e. By what Death soever the Righteous man is
prevented, he shall be in rest.

. 17. These things may suffice as to my present design; And therefore I will
close all, with the Addition of but one Story more, which for the remarkable
circumstances of it, may be neither unprofitable nor ungrateful to those
Readers which have not access to it in the Latin tongue, for whose
accommodation and service the whole of this little Tract is intended. The Story
I intend, is related by the excellent Dr. Rivet, in an Epistle written not long
before his Death to his Brother, De bona Senectute: Of a good Old Age: And it
is this:

Jacobus Faber a great restorer both of Polite Learning and Religion in France,
being a most Faithful and eminent Minister of the Gospel there, did in a time
of very hot Persecution Fly with others; and for his security retired to
Albret in Gascoign to the Queen of Navarre, a zealous Professor and Protectress
of the Reformed Religion, with whom he was in Great esteem: On a certain day
the Queen did advertise him, That she purposed to come and dine at his House;
and in order thereto invited some Learned men with whose Conference she was
much pleased, to accompany her there. While they were at Dinner, Faber began to
be exceeding sad, and now and then to break out into tears. At which the Queen
complained, and desired him to tell the cause of such heaviness, when she was
come to dine and be merry with him: At last he answered,

And how can I (most Serene Queen) be cheerful my self, or make others
cheerful, who am the most wicked man that the Earth bears.

And what wickedness so great (says she) can you be guilty of, who from your
Youth have been esteemed to lead so holy a Life.

I am (said he) now of the age of an hundred and one years, and am free from
the touch of any Woman in all this time; neither do I remember ought that
burdens my Conscience, or should make me afraid to leave the World, except one
sin, which I believe too is pardonable.

And when she pressed him to declare what it was, he could not speak a while
for the abundance of tears; but at length said:

How can I stand before the Tribunal of God, who have purely and sincerely
taught many the Holy Gospel of the Son of God, who following my Doctrine have
constantly endured a thousand torments, and death it self; when I my self an
unconstant Teacher, did flee? and though I had lived long enough, and should not
have feared Death, but rather coveted it, yet I withdrew my self, and cowardly
transgressed the Command of my God.

Whereupon the Queen (as she was very eloquent, and full of Divine Sayings)
discoursed largely to him, and did by many Examples show, that the same thing
had happened to many Good and Holy men who were now in the Kingdom of God; and
therefore he ought not in any wise to despair of the Goodness and Mercy of God
toward him. And many things to the same purpose were added by others present.

Upon which he was comforted, and became cheerful again; but said,

Now therefore nothing remains, but that I go from hence to God, as soon as I
have made my Will; I have that Impression, that I must defer no longer, for I
perceive God calls me.

Then fixing his eyes on the Queen; Madam (said he) I appoint you my Heir; and
to your Preacher Mr. Gerard I bequeath all my Books; my Clothes, and whatsoever
else I have, I give to the Poor. Other things I commend to God.

At this the Queen smiling, asked, What then shall I have James out of the
Inheritance? The care (said he) of distributing this to the Poor.

It is well, (said she) I solemnly profess, this Legacy is more acceptable to
me, than if the King of France my Brother had named me his Heir.

After this his Countenance was cheerful; and he said; O Queen, I have need of
some Rest; Be ye cheerful, and in the mean time Farewell. So he left them at
Table, and laid him down upon a Bed that was near, where as they thought, he
lay sleeping, but was indeed fallen asleep in the Lord, without the least sign
of any previous distemper; for when they went to awake him they found him dead,
to their great admiration. Such was the end of this Holy man; which as Rivet
observes, leaves to us an Example of the Mercy of God ^o this his Servant, in
awaken^ng such a Gracious sense of ^is former weakness in him, and applying his
Pardoning Grace in Christ to him before he was called hence; and also a serious
Warning unto all, to get their Accounts for another World cleared before they
come to dye; That being well assured of the Favor of God in Christ, and of the
Soundness of their Faith and Repentance, they may expect their Change in Peace:
Conscience is a tender thing, and what we count but small while we live, may
make a Dying-bed very uneasy to us; And therefore as we tender our own Peace
and Comfort when we come to Dye, it most nearly concerns us to be Serious while
we Live, and as the Apostle says, To walk circumspectly, not as Fools, Ephesians.
5. 15, 16.
but as Wise; Redeeming the Time, because the Days are evil.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by Benjamin Alsop at the Angel and Bible in the
Poultrey.
SIxty one Sermons preached upon public occasions by Dr. Adam Littleton: in
fol.

Dr. Mantons Sermons on the 119 Psalm. Fol.

Some Discourses, Sermons and Remains of the Reverend Mr. Jos. Glanvile, late
Rector of Bath, and Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty. Quar.

Melius Inquirendum; in Oct: Vtrum Horum, or the thirty nine Articles of the
Church of England at large recited, and compared with the Doctrines of those
commonly called Presbyterian on the one side, and the Tenets of the Church of
Rome on the other: by Henry Care: Octavo.

The History of the Popish Sham plots from the Reign of Queen Elizabeth to this
very time: Oct.

Mr. Baxters defense of the Nonconformists Plea for Peace: Octavo.

The Holy War, By John Bunyan: Octa.

Divine Meditations, with a daily directory: by Sir William Waller: Octa.

A Discourse of the Covenants that God made with men before the Law: by Nehemia
Cox: Octa.

The Glory of Free Grace displayed: by Stephen Lobb: Oct.

A discourse of Temptations to Atheistical and Blasphemous Thoughts, Self
Murder, Despair, and Presumption: by Dr. John Collings: in Octa.

A Reasonable Account why some Pious Nonconformists Ministers Judge it sinful,
for them to perform their Ministerial Acts by the prescribed forms of others:
with a Supplement and defense: All three being Replies to Dr. Faulkner.

The Scholars daily Task, or Grammar illustrated: By N. S. a lover of
Learning: Octavo.

A Treatise of Scandal, together with a Consideration of Christian Liberty and
things indifferent: Octavo.

The Way of good men for wise men to Walk in: Octavo.

Divine Love, or the willingness of Jesus Christ to save sinners: By Vav. Powel.

The Security of Englishmens Lives: or the Trust, Power and Duty of the Grand
Juries of England.

Youngs English Scholar, being the most plain and easiest method to learn Youth
(to spell, read and write true English) Extant, many having by the help of this
twelve-peny Book saved their Parents the charge of some Years Schooling.

Stitcht Books in Quarto.
The mischief of Impositions, being an Answer to Dr. Stillingfleets Sermon of
Separation.

Two Funeral Sermons: the one at the Interment of a Young man: the other at the
burial of a Young Gentlewoman: Both Preached by John Shower.

An Argument for Tolleration; by a Country Gentleman.

The History of the Parisian Massacre.


