XVI REVELATIONS OF Divine Love, Showed to a Devout Servant of our Lord, called
MOTHER JULIANA, AN Anchorete of NORWICH: Who lived in the Days of KING EDWARD
the Third. Published by R. F. S. Cressy.

Accedite ad Deum and Illuminamini. Psalm. 33. v. 5. Printed in the Year, MDCLXX.

Permissu Superiorum.



To his most Honored Lady, the Lady Mary Blount, of Sodington.
Madam,
THe just and grateful Resentment which I have of the unmerited kindness, and
friendship of your late most Worthy and Noble Husband Sir George Blount, of
your Ladyship, and your whole Family, obliged me, impatiently to desire an
occasion, to make a public Acknowledgement thereof. Permit me therefore here,
to offer to your Ladyship this small Present, in which notwithstanding, I can
challenge no Interest or Right, but only the Care of publishing it. The Author
of it, is a Person of your own Sex, who lived about Three Hundred years since,
intended it for You, and for such Readers as your self, who will not be induced
to the perusing of it by Curiosity, or a desire to learn strange things, which
afterward they will at best vainly admire, or perhaps out of incredulity
contemn. But your Ladyship Will, I assure my self, afford Her a place in your
Closet, where at your Devout Retirements, you will enjoy her Saint-like
Conversation, attending to her, whilst with Humility and Joy, She recounts to
you the Wonders of our Lords Love to Her, and of his Grace in Her. And being
thus employed, I make no doubt but you will be sensible of many Beams of her
Lights, and much warmth of her Charity, by reflection darted into your own
Soul. Now that such may be the effects of this Book, is the desire of

(Madam) Your Ladyships most Humble, and most Obliged Servant in our Lord, H.
CRESSY.

To the Reader.
Devout Reader,
WHatsoever benefit thou may reap by The V. R. F. Jo. Guscoyn L. Abbot of
Lambspring.
this Book, thou art obliged for it to a more Venerable Abbot of our Nation, by
whose order and liberality it is now published, and by consequence sufficiently
Approved.

I conceived it would have been a prejudice to the agreeable simplicity of the
Style, to have changed the Dress of it into our Modern Language, as some
advised. Yet certain more out of Fashion, Words or Phrases, I thought meet to
explain in the Margin.

I was desirous to have told thee somewhat of the happy Virgin, the Compiler of
these Revelations: But after all the search I could make, I could not discover
any thing touching her, more than what she occasionally sprinkles in the Book
it self. The Postscript acquaints us with her Name, Juliana: As likewise her
Profession, which was of the strictest sort of Solitary Livers; being Enclosed
all her life (alone) within four Walls: whereby, though all Mortals were
excluded from her dwelling, yet Saints and Angels, and the Supreme King of
both, could, and did find Admittance. Moreover, in the same Postscript we find,
that the Place in a high manner dignified by her abode, and by the access of
her Heavenly Guest, was the City of Norwich. The Time when she lived, and
particalarly, when these Celestial Revelations were afforded her, she her self
in the beginning of the Book informs us, was in the year of Grace MCCCLXXIII.
that is, about three years before the death of the famous Conqueror, King
Edward the Third: At which time she her self was about Thirty years of age. And
to conclude, in the last Chapter of the Book she signifies, that more than
Fifteen years after these Revelations had been showed her, how for resolution
of a certain Doubt of hers touching the meaning of one of them, Our Lord
himself was pleased to answer her Internally in Ghostly understanding.

As for the Manner of these Revelations, it was the same of which we read
innumerable Examples, both among Ancient and Modern Saints. The Objects of some
of them were represented to the Imagination, and perhaps also to the outward
Sight; sometimes they were represented in Sleep, but most frequently when she
was Awake. But those which were more pure, in time and withal more certain,
were wrought by a Divine Illapse into the Spiritual part of the Soul, the Mind
and Understanding, which the Devil cannot counterfeit, nor the Patient
comprehend, though withal it excluded all Doubt or Suspicion of Illusion.

But the principal thing which I desire to recommend to the Reader's
Consideration, is the preceding Occasion, and Subsequent Effects of these
Divine Favors bestowed by Almighty God on his Humble Devout Handmaid.

She was far from expecting, or desiring such unusual Supernatural Gifts.
Matters stood thus with her: She thought her self too much unmortified in her
Affection to Creatures, and too unsensible of our Lords Love to her. Therefore
to cure the former, she requested a Sickness in extremity, even to death, in
her own and others Conceit; a Sickness full of bitter pain and anguish,
depriving her of all outward Refreshments, and of all inward Comforts also,
which might affect the sensual Portion of the Soul. And for a remedy to the
Latter, she begged of our Lord, that he would Imprint in her Soul, by what way
he thought best, a deep and vigorous Conception, and Resentment of those most
violent Torments, which he in his infinite Love suffered for her on the Cross,
to the end she might be even forced to return to him a suitable affection.

Yet in making these Requests, she expressed a perfect Resignation (as to the
manner) to his Heavenly Will. The only graces that she did, and might, and so
may we, desire absolutely, without any Condition, were a true Spiritual Hatred
and Contempt of her self, and of all worldly, or sensual Contentments; a
perfect Sorrow and compunction for Sins past; and a Cordial Love, and
Reverential Fear of Almighty God. These were the Gifts she desired: And as for
the means of procuring these Graces, she proposed the best to her seeming: yet
so, as being assured that God knew what was best for her, she left them to his
Divine pleasure.

It was, no doubt, by Divine Inspiration, that she at first made such
Petitions, both for the Substance and Manner, and therefore God granted them as
she desired; yea, in a manner more extraordinary than she durst pretend to, as
the Reader may observe. And how wonderful the Effects of them were, the whole
contexture of her Discourses upon each Revelation will excellently demonstrate.

And now, since she her self professes, that the Lights and Torches which God
was pleased to give her, were intended not for her self alone, but for the
Universality of God's true Servants, for whose benefit also she wrote them, the
Devout Reader will, I hope, think himself obliged not to content himself with a
fruitless admiring, but will, after her example, aspire to alike affectuous,
operative Contemplation of the mere Nothingness of Creatures, of the
inconceivable ugliness of Sin, of the infinite tenderness and indefectibility
of God's Love to his Elect, and of the Omnipotency of Divine Grace working in
them; to which Grace alone all Good in us is to be ascribed.

XVI. REVELATIONS OF LOVE.
Here begins the First Chapter.
THis is a Revelation of Love, that Jesu Christ our endless Bliss made in xvi.
Shewings: of which,

The first is of his precious Crowning of Thorns, and therein was contained
and specified the Blessed Trinity, with the Incarnation and the uniting between
God and man's Soul, with many fair Shewings and Teachings of endless Wisdom
and Love: in which all the Shewings that follow be grounded and joined.

The second, is of the discoloring of his fair Face, in tokening of his dear
worthy Passion.

The third is, that our Lord God Almighty, all Wisdom and all Love, right also
verily as he has made all things that are right, also verily he does and
works all things that are done.

The fourth is, scourging of his tender Body with plenteous Shedding of his
precious Blood.

The fifth is, that the fiend is overcome by the precious Passion of Christ.

The sixth is, the Worshipful Thanking of our Lord God, in which he rewards
all his blessed Servants in Heaven.

The seventh is, oftentimes feeling of weal and woe: feeling of weal is
gracious touching and lightning, with true i e. security.
sikernes of endeles joy: The feeling of Woe is of Temptation by Heavines, and
Wearines of our fleshly living with Ghostelie understanding, that we be kept
also verelie in love, in woe as in weal, by the goodness of God.

The eighth is, the last pains of Christ and his cruel dying.

The ninth is, of the i. e. pleasure.
liking which is in the Blessed Trinity of the hard Passion of Christ after his
rufull and sorrowful dying: in which joy and liking he will that we be in
solace and Mirth with him, till that we come to the Glory in Heaven.

The tenth is, our Lord Jesu Christ by Love his blessed Heart even cloven in
two.

The eleventh is, an high Ghostly showing of his dear worthy Mother.

The twelfth is, that our Lord God is all Sovereign being.

The thirteenth is, that our Lord God will that we have great regard to all the
Deeds which he has done in the great Nobletie of all things making, and of
the Excellency of Man's making, the which is above all his Works, and of the
precious amends that he has made for Man's sin, turning all our blame into
endeles Worship. Than means he thus, Behold and see, for by the same Might,
Wisdom and Goodness that I have done all this, by the same Might, Wisdom and
Goodness I shall make well all that is not well, and thou shall see it. And in
this he will that we keep us in the Faith and Truth of Holy Church, not
willing to i e. know
wit his privities, not but as it longs to us in this Life.

The fourteenth is, that our Lord God is the Ground of our i. e. desire.
beseekinge. Herein was seen two fair properties, that one is rightful prayer:
that other is very trust, which he will both be one like large, and thus our
Prayer likes him, and he of his Goodness fulfilleth it.

The fifteenth is, that we should soudeinlie be taken from all our Pain, and
from all our Woe, and of his Goodness we shall come up above, where we shall
have our Lord Jesu to our i. e. reward.
meed, and for to be fulfilled with joy and bliss in Heaven.

The sixteenth is, that the blessed Trinity, our Maker in Christ Jesu our
Savior, endleslie dwells in our Soul, worshipfullie rewarding and
commanding all things, us mightily and wisely saving and keeping for Love,
and we shall not be overcome of our Enemy.

The Second Chapter.
THis Revelation was made to a simple Creature unlettered, living in deadly
Flesh, the Year of our Lord, a Thousand three Hundredth lxxiij, the xiiij th.
day of May: Which Creature desired before three Gifts by the Grace of God.

The first, was i. e. feeling.
mind of the Passion.

The second, was bodily Sickness.

The third, was to have of Gods gift three Wounds: For the first, me thought I
had some deal feeling in the Passion of Christ, but yet I desired to have more
by the Grace of God. Me thought I would have been that time with Magdalen, and
with other that were Christ's Lovers, that I might have seen bodily the Passion
that our Lord suffered for me, that I might have suffered with him as others
did that loved him; and therefore I desired a bodily sight, wherein I might
have more knowledge of the bodily pains of our Savior, and of the Compassion
of Our Lady, and of all his true Lovers that were living that time, and saw his
Pains: For I would have been one of them, and have suffered with them. Other
sight nor showing of God desired I never none, till when the Soul were
departed from the body, for I believed to be saved by the Mercy of God. This
was my meaning; for I would after because of that showing have the more true
mind in the Passion of Christ: For the second came to my mind with Contrition
freely, without any seeking, a i. e. earnest.
wilful desire to have of Gods Gift, a bodily sickness. I would that that
sickness were so hard as to the death, that I might in that sickness have
undertaken all the Rights of Holy Church, my self weening that I should have
died, and that all Creatures might suppose the same that saw me: For I would
have no manner of Comfort of fleshly, ne earthly Life in that sickness. I
desired to have all manner of Pains, Bodily and Ghostly, that I should have
if I should have died: All the Dreads and Temptations of fiends, and all manner
of other Pains, saving the out-passing of the Soul. And this meant I, for I
would be purged by the Mercy of God, and after live more to the Worship of God
because of that sickness. For I hoped that it might have been to my reward when
I should have died, for I desired to have been soon with my God and Maker.

These two desires of the Passion, and of the sickness that I desired of him was
with a Condition: For me thought this was not the common use of Prayer.
Therefore I said, Lord thou know what I would: and if that it be thy will,
that I might have it; and if it be not thy will, Good Lord, be not displeased,
for I will not but as thou will.

This siicknes I desired in my Youth, that I might have it when I were thirty
Years Old.

For the third, by the Grace of God and teaching of Holy Church, I conceived a
mighty desire to receive three Wounds in my Life, that is to say, the Wound of
very Contrition, the Wound of kind Compassion, and the Wound of willful
Longing to God.

Right as I asked the other twain with a Condition, so asked I this third
mightily without any Condition. These twain desires before said, passed from
my mind, and the third dwelled continually.

The Third Chapter.
ANd when I was thirty years Old and a half, God sent me a Bodily sickness,
in which I lay three Days and three Nights, and on the fourth Night, I took
all my i. e. Sacraments.
Rights of Holy Church, and i. e. thought.
went not to have Liven till Day. And after this I lay two Days and two
Nights, and on the third Night I weened oftentimes to have passed, and so
weened they that were with me, and yet in this I felt a great loathness to die,
but for nothing that was in Earth that me likes to live for, ne for no pain
that I was afraid of, for I trusted in God of his Mercy: but it was, for I
would have lived to have loved God better: and a longer time, that I might by
the Grace of that living have the more knowing and loving of God in the bless
of Heaven: For methought all that time that I had lived here so little and so
short in regard of that endless bliss, I thought, good Lord, may my living be
no longer to thy Worship?

And I understood in my reason, and by the feeling of my pains that I should
die: and I assented fully with all the will of mine heart to be at Gods will.

Thus I endured till day, and by then was my body dead from the mids
downwarde, as to my feeling.

Then was I helped to be set upright, undersett with help for to have the more
freedom of my heart to be at Gods will, and thinking on God while my life
lasted.

My Curate was sent for to be at my ending, and before he came I had set up my
eien, and might not speak. He set the Cross before my face and said, I have
brought the Image of our Savior, look thereupon and comfort thee therewith.
Me thought I was well, for my eien were set upright into Heaven, where I
trusted to come by the Mercy of God.

But nevertheless I assented to set my eien in the face of the Crucifix, if I
might, and so I did; for me thought I might longer dure to look even forth
than right up. After this my sight began to fail, it waxed as dark about me
in the Chamber as if it had been Night, save in the Image of the Cross,
wherein held a common Light, and I wist not how; all that was besides the
Cross was uglie and fearful to me, as it had been much occupied with fiendes.

After this the i e. upper.
over-parte of my body began to die, so far forth that i. Scarce
unneath I had any feeling, my most pain was shortness of Breath, and failing
of Life.

Then went I verily to have passed, and in this case sodenlie all my pain was
taken from me, and I was as i. e. thought.
whole, and namely in the over-part of my body as ever I was before. I
marvailed of this sudden change: For me thought that it was a privy working
of God, and not of i. e. nature.
kind. And yet by feeling of this ease, I trusted never the more to have lived;
ne the feeling of this ease was no full ease unto me: for me thought I had
rather have been delivered of this World, for my heart was wilfully set
thereto.

Then came sodeinlie to my mind, that I should desire the second Wound of our
Lords Gift, and of his Grace, that my body might be fulfilled with mind and
feeling of his blessed Passion, as I had before prayed. For I would that his
pains were my pains with compassion, and afterward longing to God.

Thus thought me, that I might with his Grace have the Wounds that I had before
desired. But in this I desired never no bodily sight; ne no manner showing of
God, but Compassion, as me thought that a i. e. loving.
kind Soul might have with our Lord Jesu, that for Love would become a i. e.
mortal
deadly man with him. I desired to suffer living in my i. e. mor-
deadly body, as God would give me Grace.

The First Revelation, the iiij. Chapter.
ANd in this, sodeinlie I saw the Red blood running down from under the
Garland, hott and freshly, plenteouslie and livelie, right as it was in the
time that the Garland of Thorns was pressed on his blessed Head, right so both
God and Man the same that suffered for me. I conceaved truly and mightily
that it was himself that showed it me without any mean.

And in the same showing, sodeinlie the Trinity fulfilled my heart most of
joy: And so I understood it shall be in Heaven without end to all that shall
come there. For the Trinity is God. God is the Trinity, the Trinity is our
Maker, the Trinity is our Keeper, the Trinity is our everlasting Lover, the
Trinity is our endless Joy and our Bliss, by our Lord Jesu Christ, and in our
Lord Jesu Christ: and this was showed in the first sight, and in all: For when
Jesu appears, the blessed Trinity is understood as unto my sight.

And I said, Benedicite dominus. This I said for Reverence in my meaning with a
mighty Voice, and full greatly was I astonished for wonder and marveile that
I had, that he that is so reverent and so dreadful will be so i. e. familiar.
homely with a sinful Creature living in this wretched Flesh.

Thus I took it for that time that our Lord Jesu of his courteous Love would
show me comfort before the time of my temptation: For me thought it might well
be, that I should by the sufferance of God, and with his keeping, be tempted of
fiends before I should die.

With this sight of his blessed Passion, with the Godhead that I saw in my
understanding, I knew well that it was strength enough to me, yea and to all
Creatures living, that should be saved against all the fiendes of Hell, and
against all Ghostly Enemies.

In this he brought our Lady Saint Mary to my understanding; I saw her
Ghostelie in bodily likeness, a simple Maiden and a meek, young of age, a
little i. Grown
waxen above a Child, in the stature as she was when she conceived.

Also God showed me in part the Wisdom and the truth of her Soul; Wherein I
understood the Reverence beholding that she beheld her God that is her Maker,
marvailing with great Reverence that he would be born of her that was a simple
Creature of his making.

For this was her marvailing, that he that was her Maker would be born of her
that was made.

And this wisdom and truth knowing the greatness of her Maker, and the
litlehead of her self that is made, made her to say full meekelie to Gabriel,
Lo me here Gods Hand-Maiden.

In this sight I did understand verily that she is more than all that God made
beneath her in worthiness and i. e. excellency.
fullhead; for above her is nothing that is made but the blessed Manhood of
Christ, as to my sight.

The v. Chapter.
IN this same time that I saw this sight of the head bleeding, our good Lord
showed a Ghostly sight of his i. e friendly.
homely loving: I saw that he is to us all thing that is good and comfortable
to our help.

He is our Clothing, that for Love wrappeth us, and windeth us, i. e. embraces.
halseth us, and all becloseth us, hangs about us for tender Love, that he
may never leave us. And so in this sight I saw that he is all thing that is
good, as to my understanding.

And in this he showed a little thing, the quantity of a Hasel-Nutt, lying in
the palm of my hand, as me seemed, and it was as round as a Ball. I looked
thereon with the eye of my understanding, and thought, What may this be? and it
was answered generally thus.

It is all that is made. I marvelled how it might last. For me thought it might
sodenlie have fallen to naught for litlenes.

And I was answered in my Understanding, It lasts, and ever shall: For God
loves it. And so has all thing being by the Love of God

In this little thing I saw three Propeties.

The first is, that God made it. The second is, that God loves it. The third
is, that God keeps it.
But, What beheld I therein? verily the Maker, the Keeper, the Lover: For till
I am substanciallie united to him, I may never have full rest, ne very
bliss; that is to say, that I be so fastened to him, that there be right
naught that is made between my God and me.

This little thing that is made, me thought it might have fallen to naught for
litleness.

Of this needs us to have knowledge, that us likes naught all thing that is
made, for to love God, and have God that is unmade.

For this is the cause which we be not all in ease of Heart and Soul: For we
seek here rest in this thing that is so little, where no rest is in: and we
know not our God that is all Mighty, all Wise, and all Good, for he is very
rest.

God will be known, and him likes that we rest us in him.

For all that is beneath him, suffices not us.

And this is the Cause why that no Soul is in Rest till it is i. e: emptied.
naughted of all things that are made: When she is wilfully naughted for love
to have him that is all, then is she able to receave Ghostly rest.

And also our good Lord showed, that it is full great pleasure to him that a
seely Soul come to him naked, plainly, and homely: For this is the kind
dwelling of the Soul by the touching of the Holy Ghost, as by the
understanding that I have in this showing: God of thy goodness give me thy self,
for thou art enough to me; And I may ask nothing that is less, that may be
fully Worship to thee; and if I ask any thing that is less, ever me wants:
But only in thee I have all.

And these words of the Goodness of God be full love-some to the Soul, and
full nere touching the Will of our Lord; for his Goodness fulfilleth all his
Creatures, and all his blessed Works without end.

For he is the endless head, and he made us only to himself: and restored us
by his precious Passion, and ever keeps us in his blessed Love; and all this
is of his Goodness.

The vj. Chapter.
THis showing was given to my understanding, to learn our Soul wisely to
cleave to the Goodness of God, and in that same time the custom of our Prayer
was brought to my mind, how that we use, for unknowing of Love, to make many
means. Then saw I verily that it is more worship to God, and more very
delight that we faithfully pray to himself of his Goodness, and cleave thereto
by his Grace with true understanding and steadfast belief, then if we made all
the means that heart may think.

For if we make all these means, it is too little, and not full Worship to God:
But in his Goodness is all the whole, and there fails right naught.

For thus as I shall say, came to my mind in the same time: We Pray to God
for his Holy flesh, and for his precious Blood, his Holy Passion, his dear
worthy Death, and worshipful Wounds, for all the blessed kindenes and the
endless Life that we have of all this, it is of the Goodness of God; and we Pray
him for his sweet Mothers Love that bare him; and all the help that we have of
her it is of his Goodness: And we Pray for his Holy Cross that he died on,
and all the help, and all the virtue of that we have of that Cross, it is of
his Goodness.

And on the same wise, all the help that we have to special Saints, and of all
the blessed Company of Heaven, the dear worthy Love, and the Holy endless
Friendship that we have of them, it is of his Goodness.

For the means that the Goodness of God has ordained for to help us, be full
fair and many.

Of which the chief and principal mean is the blessed i. e. humanity.
kind that he took of the Maiden, with all the means that went before, and
come after, which be longing to our Redemption and to our endless Salvation.

Wherefore it pleases him, that we seek him, and Worship him by Means,
Understanding, and knowing that he is the Goodness of all.

For to the Goodness of God is the highest Prayer, and it comes down to us to
the lowest party of our need, it quickneth our Soul, and makes it live, and
makes it to wax in Grace and Virtue, it is nearest in kind and readiest in
Grace.

For it is the same Grace that the Soul seeks, and ever shall till we know
our God verily that has us all in himself beclosed.

A man goes upright, and the Soul of his body is i. e. Enclosed.
sparred as a purse full fair, and when it is time of his necessity, it is
opened and sparred again full i e. seemly.
honestly.

And that it is he that does this, it is showed there where he says, He comes
down to us to the lowest part of our need. For he has no despite of that he
made, ne has he no disdain to serve us at the simplest office that to our
body longs in kind, for love of the Soul that he made to his own likeness.

For as the Body is cladd in the Cloth and the Flesh in the Skinn, and the
Bones in the Flesh, and the Heart in the bulk, so are we Soul and Body cladd
and enclosed in the Goodness of God: Yea, and more i. e. truly.
homely: for all they vanish and wast away, the Goodness of God is ever whole
and more nere to us without any comparison.

For truly our Lover desires that the Soul cleave to him with all the
mightes, and that we be evermore cleaving to his Goodness: for of all thing that
heart can think it pleases most God, and soonest speedeth.

For our Soul is so preciouslie loved of him that is highest, that it
over-passeth the knowing of all Creatures:

That is to say, There is no Creature that is made, that may wit how much, and
how sweetly, and how tenderly that our Maker loves us. And therefore, we may
with his Grace and his help, stand in Ghostly beholding with everlasting
marvailing in this high over-passing, unmeasurable Love that our Lord has to
us of his Goodness.

And therefore, we may ask of our Lover, with Reverence, all that we will: for
our i. e. natural.
kindly Will is to have God, and the Goodwill of God is to have us: And we may
never cease of willing, ne of loving till we have him in fulhead of joy.

And then we may no more will, for he will that we be occupied in knowing and
loving, till the time comes that we shall be fulfilled in Heaven.

And therefore was this Lesson of Love showed with all that follows as you
shall see; for the strength and the ground of all was showed in the first
sight: for of all things, the beholding and the loving of the Maker, makes the
Soul to seem least in his own sight, and most fills it with reverent dread
and true meekness, and with plenty of Charity to his even Christian.

The vij. Chapter.
ANd to learn us this as to my understanding, our good Lord showed our Lady
Mary in the same time, that is to mean, the high Wisdom and Truth that she had
in beholding her Maker.

This Wisdom and Truth made her to behold her God so Great, so High, so Mighty,
and so Good. This greatness and this i. e. nobleness.
Noblety of her beholding of God, fulfilled her of reverend deed: And with this
she saw her self so little and so low, so simple and so poor, in regard of her
God, that this reverend Dread fulfilled her of meekness. And thus by this
ground she was fulfilled of Grace, and of all manner of Virtues, and passes
all Creatures.

And in all the time that he showed this that I have now said in Ghostly sight.
I saw the bodily sight, lasting of the plentuous bleeding of the head, the
great drops of Blood fell down from under the Garland like Pellots, seeming as
it had come out of the Veins: And in the coming out they were brown red, for
the blood was full thick, and in the spreading abroad, they were bright red;
and when it came at the i. e. forehead.
Brows, there they vanished.

And notwithstanding, the bleeding continued till many things were seen and
understanded; nevertheless, the fair head, and the lively head continued in the
same beauty and liveliness.

The plentuous head is like to the drops of Water that fall off the evesing of
an House after a great shower of Rain, that fall so thick, that no man may
number them with any bodily Wit. And for the roundness, they were like to the
Seal of her Ring in the spreading of the forehead.

These three things came to my mind in the time, Pellets for the roundhead in
the coming out of the blood; the Scale of Herring, for the roundhead in the
spreading; the dropps of the evesing of an House, for the plentuous head
unnumerable.

This showing was quick and lively, and hideous, and dreadful, and sweet, and
lovely. And of all the sight that I saw, this was most comfort to me, that our
good Lord that is so reverent and dreadful, is so homely and so courteous: And
this most fulfilled me with liking and sickness i. e. in
of Soul.

And to the understanding of this, he showed this open example. It is the most
worship that a solemn King or a great Lord may do to a poor Servant, if he will
be homely with him; and namely, if he show it himself of a full true meaning,
and with a glad chere both in private and openly. Then thinks this poor
Creature thus: Lo, what might this Noble Lord do more Worship and Joy to me,
than to show to me that am so little: This marvelous himeliness, verily it is
more joy and liking to me, than if he gave me great gifts, and were himself
strange in manner.

This bodily example was showed so high, that this man's heart might be
ravished, and almost forget himself for Joy of this great homeliness.

Thus it faireth by our Lord Jesu, and by us, for verily it is the most joy
that may be as to my sight, that he that is highest and might, nobliest and
worthiest, is lowest and meekest, homliest and courtesiest. And truly and
verily, this mavelous joy shall he show us all when we shall see him.

And this will our good Lord, that we believe, and trust, joy, and like comfort
us, and make solace, as we may with his Grace and with his Help, into the time
that we see it verily; for the most fulhed of joy that we shall have as to my
sight, is this mavelous courtesy and homeliness of our Father that is our
Maker in our Lord Jesu Christ, that is our Brother and our Savior.

But this marvelous Homlliness may no man know in this Life, but if he have it
by special showing of our Lord, or of great plenty of Grace inwardly given of
the Holy Ghost, but Faith and Belief with Charity deserve the meed, and so it
is had by Grace.

For in Faith, with Hope and Charity, our Life is grounded; the showing is made
to whom that God will plainly teach, the same opened and declared with many
privy Points belonging to our Faith and Belief, which be worshipful to be known.

And when the showing which is given for a time is passed and hid, then Faith
keeps it by Grace of the Holy Ghost unto our Lives end.

And thus by the showing, it is none other than Faith, no less, no more, as it
may be seen by our Lords meaning in the same matter, by than it come to the
last end.

The viij. Chapter.
ANd as long as I saw this sight of the plentuousness of bleeding of the Head,
I might never stint of these Words, Benedicite Dominis. In which showing, I
understood six things.

The first is, the Tokens of the blessedful Passion, and the plentuous shedding
of his precious Blood.

The second is, the Maiden that is his dear worthy Mother.

The third is, the blessedful Godhead that ever was, and shall be all Mighty,
all Wisdom, and all Love.

The fourth is, all thing that he has made: for well I wot that Heaven and
Earth, and all that is made is great, large, fair and good: but the cause why
it shows so little to my sight, was, for I saw it in the presence of him that
is the Maker; for a Soul that sees the Maker of all thing, all that is made
seems full little.

The fifth is, that he that made all thing that is made for Love, and by the
same Love it is kept, and shall be without end, as it is before said.

The sixth is, that God is all thing that is good, as to my sight; and the
goodness that all thing has, it is he.

And all this our Lord showed in the first sight, And gave me space and time to
behold it; and the Bodily sight stinted, and the Ghostly sight dwells in my
understanding. And I abode with reverent dread, joying in that I saw, and
desiring, as I durst, to see more if it were his will, or longer time the same
sight.

In all this I was much stirred in Charity to mine even Christian, that they
might all see and know the same that I saw; for I would that it were comfort to
them, for all this sight was showed in general. Then said I to them that were
with me, It is this Day, Doomsday with me.

And this I said, for I went to have died: for that day that Man or Woman
dies, is he deemed particularly, as he shall be without end, as to my
understanding.

This I said, for I would they should love God the better, for to make them to
have mind that this Life is short, as they might see in example; for in all
this time I weened to have dyed, and that was marvel to me, and wonder in
party; for methought this vision was showed for them that should live: All that
I say of me, I mean in person of all my even Christian; for I am learned in the
Ghostly showing of our Lord God that he means so.

And therefore, I pray you all for God's sake, and counsel you for your own
profit, that you leave the beholding of a Wretch, that it was showed to, and
mightily, wisely and meekly behold in God, that of his courtesy, love, and
endless Goodness, would show it generally in Comfort of us all: for it is Gods
will that ye take it with a great joy and liking, as Jesu Christ has showed it
to you.

The ix. Chapter.
FOr the showing I am not good, but if I love God the better, and in as much as
ye love God the better, it is more to you than to me.

I say not this to them that be wise, for they i e. know
wit it well, but I say it to you that be simple, for ease and comfort; for we
be all one in Love: for verily it was not showed to me, for that God loves me
better than the least Soul that is in Grace: for I am sure, there be many that
never has showing ne sight but of the common teaching of Holy Church, that
love God better than I: for if I look singularly to my self, I am right naught;
but in general I am I hope in i e. unity.
one-head of Charity with all my even Christian; for in this one head stands
the life of all mankind that shall be saved; for God is all that is good as to
my sight.

And God has made all that is made, and God loves all that he has made; and
he that generally loves all his even Christen, for God he loves all that is.

For in mankind that shall be saved, is comprehended all; that is to say, all
that is made, and the Maker of all; for in Man is God, and in God is all; and
he that loves thus, he loves all.

And I hope by the Grace of God, he that beholds it thus, shall be truly
taught, and mightily comforted, if him needs comfort: I speak of them that
shall be saved, for in this time God showed me none other.

But in all thing I believe as Holy Church Preaches and Teaches; for the
Faith of Holy Church which I had before hand understanding, and as I hope by
the Grace of God will fully keep it in use and custom, stood continually in my
sight, willing and meaning never to receive any thing that might be contrary
thereto. And with this intent, and with this meaning I beheld the showing with
all my diligence; for in all this blessed showing, I beheld it as in Gods
meaning.

All this was showed by three parts; that is to say, by bodily sight, and by
words formed in my understanding, and by Ghostly sight; but the Ghostly sight I
cannot, ne may show it as openly, ne as fully as I would; but I trust in our
Lord God Almighty, that he shall of his Goodness, and for your Love, make you
to take it more Ghostly and more sweetly than I can or may tell it.

The Second Revelation. The x. Chapter.
ANd after this, I saw with bodily sight, in the face of the Crucifix that hung
before me: In the which, I beheld continually a part of his Passion; despite,
spitting, sulloing and buffeting, and many languring Pains, more than I can
tell; and often changing of Color: and one time I saw how half the face,
beginning at the Ear, over i e. covered.
yede with dry Blood, till it closed into the mid-face: And after that, the
other half be closed in the same wise: And the whiles, it vanished in this
party even as it came.

This saw I bodily i e. obscurely.
sweinly and darkly; and I desired more bodily light to have seen more clearly,
and I was answered in my reason, If God will show thee more, he shall be thy
light, thou need none but him.

For I saw him and sought him: for we be now so blind and so unwise, that we
can never seek God till what time that he of his Goodness shows him to us.
And when we see ought of him graciously, then are we stirred by the same Grace,
to seek with great desire to see him more blessedfully: And thus I saw him and
sought him, and I had him and wanted him: And this is and should be our common
working in this life, as to my sight.

One time my Understanding was little down into the Sea-ground; and there saw I
Hills, and Dales green, seeming as it were most begrowing with Wrake and
Gravel: Then I understood thus, that if a Man or Woman were there under the
broad Water, and he might have sight of God, so as God is with a man
continually, he should be safe in Soul and Body, and take no harm, and i e.
exceedingly.
over-passing, he should have more solace and comfort than all this World may
or can tell.

For he will that we believe that we see him continually, though that us think
that it be but little, and in the belief he makes us evermore to get Grace; for
he will be seen, and he will be sought, and he will be abiden, and he will be
trusted.

This second showing was so low, and so little, and so simple, that my Spirits
were in great Travail in the beholding, mourning, dreadful, and longing; for I
was sometime in a fear, whether it was a showing or none; and then diverse times
our Lord gave me more sight, whereby that I understood truly, that it was a
showing.

It was a Figure and a Likeness of our foul black deeds, which our fair bright
blessed Lord bare for our sin. It made me to think of the Holy i e. Veronica.
Vernacle of Rome, which he protraid with his own blessed face, when he was in
his hard Passion, wilfully going to his Death, and often changing of Color, of
the brown-head, and the black-head, rewlyhead and lean-head.

Of this Image many marvelled how that might be standing, that he protraid it
with his blessed face, which is the fairest of Heaven, Flower of Earth, and the
fruit of the Maidens Womb. Then how might this Image be so discolored and so
far from fair-head, I desire to see as I have understood by the Grace of God.

We know in our Faith and in our Belief, by the Teaching and Preaching of Holy
Church, that the blessedfull Trinity made Mankind to his Image and Likeness: In
the same manner wise we know, that when man fell so deep and so wretchedly by
Sin, there was none other help to restore man but through him that made man.

And he that made man for Love, by the same Love he would restore man to the
same bliss and over-passing.

And right as we were made like to the Trinity in our first making, our Maker
would that we should be like to Jesu Christ our Savior in Heaven without end
by the virtue of our own making.

Then between these two he would for Love, and for Worship of man, make himself
as like to man in this deadly Life, in our foul-head, and in our wretchedness,
as man might be without guilt: Whereof it means as is before said, it was the
Image and the Likeness of our foul black deeds, wherein our fair bright blessed
Lord hid his Godhead.

But verily I dare say, and we ought to believe, that so fair a man was never
none but he, till what time that his fair Color was changed with Travail and
Sorrow, Passion and Dying.

Of this it speaks in the Second Revelation, and in the xviijth. Chapter,
where it speaks more of the same likeness. And there it says of the Vernacle
of Rome, it means by diverse changing of Color, and either sometime more
comfortable and lively, and sometime more ruful and deadly, as it may be seen
hereafter; and this Vision was a learning to my understanding, that the
continually seeking of the Soul pleases God much; for it may do no more than
seek, suffer, and trust.

And this is wrought in every Soul that has it by the Holy Ghost.

And the clearness of finding it, is of the special Grace, when it is his will;
the seeking with Faith, Hope and Charity, pleases our Lord; and the finding,
pleases the Soul, and fulfilleth it with joy.

And thus was I learned to my understanding, that seeking is as good as
heholding, for the time that he will suffer the Soul to be in Travail. It is
God's Will that we seek into the beholding of him; for by that shall he show us
himself of his special Grace, when he will.

And how a Soul shall i e. behave.
have her in his beholding, he shall teach himself, and that is most Worship to
him, and most profit to the Soul, and most received of Meekness and Virtues,
with the Grace and leading of the Holy Ghost; for a Soul that only resigneth
him to God with very trust, either in seeking or in beholding, it is the most
Worship that he may do, as to my sight.

These be two Workings that may be seen in this Vision: That one is seeking,
the other is beholding: The seeking is common, that each Soul may have with his
Grace, and ought to have discretion and teaching of Holy Church.

It is God's Will that we have three things in our seeking of his Gift. The
first is, that we seek i e. seriously.
wilfully and busily without sloth, as it may be with his Grace, gladly and
merrily, without unreasonable Heaviness and vain-sorrow. The second, that we
abide him steadfastly for his Love, without grudging and striving against him
into Lives end, for it shall last but a while. The third is, that we trust in
him mightily of full and true Faith: For it is his will that we know, that he
shall appear suddenly and blessedfully to all his Lovers.

For his Working is privy, and he will be perceived; and his appearing shall be
sweet, sudden; and he will be trusted, for he is full i e. familiar.
homely, courteous: Blessed mote he be.

The Third Revelation. The xj. Chapter.
ANd after this, I saw God in a Point; that is to say, in my understanding: By
which sight I saw that he is in all thing. I beheld with advisement, seeing and
knowing in that sight, that he does all that is done. I marvelled in that sight
with a soft dread, and thought what is sin: For I saw truly, that God does all
thing, be it never so little. And I saw verily, that nothing is done by happ, ne
by adventure, but all by the aforesaid Wisdom of God; if it be happ or
Adventure in the sight of man, our blind-head and un-fore-sight is the cause.
For those things that be in the foresaid Wisdom of God, been fro without
beginning, which Rightfully and Worshipfully continually he leads to the best
end: As it comes about falling to us suddenly, our unwitting. And thus by our
blindness, and our unforesight, we say these things be by happs and Adventure.

Thus I understand in this showing of Love: For well I wot in the fight of our
Lord God, is no happ, ne Adventure. Wherefore me behoved needs to grant, that
all things that are done, are well done; for our Lord God does all: For in this
time the Working of Creatures was not showed, but of our Lord God in the
Creatures; for he is in the mid Point of all things, and all he does. And I am
sure that he does no sin.

And here I saw verily that sin is no deed; for in all this, sin was not
showed. And I would no longer marvel in this, but beheld our Lord what he would
show.

And thus as it might be for the time, the rightfulness of God's Work was
showed for the Soul.

Rightfulness has two fair Properties. It is right, and it is full: And so be
all the Works of our Lord. And thereto needs neither Working of Mercy ne
Grace: For they be all rightful, wherein fails right naught. And in an other
time, he showed for beholding of sin naked as I shall say. After when he uses
working of Mercy and of Grace: This Vision was showed to my understanding: For
our Lord will have the Soul turned truly unto the beholding of him, and
generally of all his Works, for they be full good. And all his i e. judgment.
Dooms be easy and sweet, and two great eyes bringing the Soul that is turned
from the beholding of the blind deeming of man, into the fair sweet deeming of
our Lord God. For man, he holds some deeds well done, and some deeds evil:
And our Lord beholds them not so, for as all that has being in kind is of
God's making, so is all thing that is done in Property of Gods doing: For it is
easy to understand, that the best deed is well done, and so well as the best
deed that is done, and the highest, so well is the least deed done: And all in
the Property and in the Order that our Lord has it ordained tofore without
beginning: For there is no Door but he.

I saw full truly, that he changed never his purpose in no manner of thing, ne
never shall without end: For there was nothing unknown to him in his rightful
Ordinance fro without beginning. And therefore all thing were set in order ere
any thing was made, as it should stand without end; and no manner of thing
shall fail of that Point; for he has made all thing in fulhead of Goodness.

And therefore the blessed Trinity is ever full pleased in all his Works: And
all this showed he full blessedly, meaning thus: See I am God: See I am in all
things: See I do all things: See I never left my hands of my Works, ne never
shall without end: See I lead all thing to the end that I ordain it to; for
without beginning, by the same Might, Wisdom, and Love, that I made it with,
How should any thing be amiss? Thus mightily, wisely, and lovingly was the Soul
examined in this Vision. Then saw I verily that me behooves needs to assent
with great Reverence and Joy in God.

The Fourth Revelation. The xij. Chapter.
ANd after this I saw beholding the body plentuously bleeding, in seeming of
the scourging, as thus: The fair Skin was broken full deep into the tender
flesh, with sharp smitings, all about the sweet Body: The hot blood ran out so
plenteously, that there was neither seen Skin, ne Wound, but as it were all
blood. And when it came where it should have fallen down, there it vanished:
Notwithstanding the bleeding continued a while, till it might be seen with
advisement. And this was, so plentuous to my sight, that me thought if it had
been so in kind and in substance for that time, it should have made the Bed all
on blood, and have passed over all about.

Then came to my mind, that God has made Waters plentuous in Earth to our
service, and to our bodily ease, for tender Love that he has to us: But yet
likes him better, that we take full holsomely his blessed Blood to wash us
from sin, for there is no Liquor that is made that likes him so well to give
us: For it is most plentuous, as it is most precious, and that by the virtue of
the blessed Godhead, and it is our own kind, and blessedfully overfloweth us by
the virtue of his precious Love. The dear worthy blood of our Lord Jesu Christ,
also verily as it is most precious, as verily it is most plentuous. Behold and
see the virtue of this precious plenty of his dear worthy Blood: It descended
down into Hell, and brake her Bonds, and delivered them all that were there
which belongs to the Court of Heaven. The precious plenty of his dear worthy
Blood overfloweth all Earth, and is ready to wash all Creatures of sin which be
of Good Will, have been or shall be. The precious plenty of his dear worthy
Blood ascends up into Heaven in the blessed Body of our Lord Jesu Christ: And
there is in him Bleeding, Praying for us to the Father, and is and shall be as
long as us needs. And evermore it flows in all Heaven, enjoying the
Salvation of all Mankind that be there, and shall be fulfilling the number that
fails.

The Fifth Revelation. The xiij. Chapter.
ANd after, or that God showed any words, he suffered me to behold him a
conveniable time: And all that I had seen and all the understanding that was
therein, as the simpleness of the Soul might take it.

Then he without voice and opening of Lips formed in my Soul these Words,
Herewith is the fiend overcome: This Word said our Lord, meaning his blessed
Passion, as he showed before. In this our Lord showed a part of the fiends
malice, and fully his unmight, for he showed that the Passion of him is the
overcoming of the fiend. God showed that the fiend has now the same malice
that he had before the Incarnation; and also sore he travelleth: And as
continually he sees, that all Souls of Salvation escape him Worshipfully by
the virtue of his precious Passion, and that is his sorrow, and full evil is he
ashamed: For all that God suffers him to do turns us to joy, and him to
shame and pain. And he has as much sorrow when God gives him leave to Work,
as when he works not; And that is, for he may never do as ill as he would,
for his might is all locked in God's hand; but in God may be no wrath as to my
fight: For our good Lord endlesly having regard to his own Worship, and to the
profit of all them that shall be saved with Might and Right, he withstandeth
the reproved, the which of malice and of shrewdness busy them to contrary, and
do against God's will.

Also I saw our Lord scorning his malice, and naughting his unmight: And he
will that we do so. For this fight I laughed mightly, and that made them to
laugh that were about me, and their laughing was a liking to me: I thought that
I would that all my even Christen had seen as I saw, then should all they have
laughed with me; but I saw not Christ laughing: But well I wot that sight that
he showed me, made me to laugh: For I understood that we may laugh in
comforting of our self, and joying in God, for the fiend is overcome. And there
I saw him scorn his malice; it was beholding to my understanding into our Lord;
that is to say, an inward showing of i. e. truth
sooth fastness without changing of cheer: For as to my sight it is a
worshipful property that is in God, which is durable.

And after this I fell into a sadness, and said, I see three things, Game,
Scorn, and Earnest. I see Game, that the fiend is overcome: And I see Scorn,
that God scorneth him, and he shall be scorned: And I see Earnest, that he is
overcome by the blessedful Passion and Death of our Lord Jesu Christ, that was
done in full great earnest, and with sad Travel. And there I said that he is
scorned; I meant that God scorneth him, that is to say, for he sees him now as
he shall do without end; for in this God showed that the fiend is damned. And
this meant I, there I said he should be scorned: For I saw he shall be scorned
at Doomes-day generally of all that shall be saved, to whose Salvation he has
had great envy; for then he shall see that all the Woe and Tribulation that he
has done them, shall be turned into increase of their joy without end: And all
the Pain and the Sorrow that he would have brought them to, shall for ever go
with him to Hell.

The Sixth Revelation. The xiv. Chapter.
ANd after this our Lord said, I thank thee of thy Service, and of thy Travel
of thy Youth. And in this my understanding was lift up into Heaven, where I saw
our Lord God as a Lord in his own House, which Lord has called all his dear
Worthy Friends to a solemn Feast. Then I saw the Lord taking no place in his
own House; but I saw him royally Reign in his House, and all fulfilleth it with
Joy and Mirth, endlesly to glad and solace his dear worthy Friends, full homely
and full courteously with marvelous Melody in endless love, in his own fair
blessedful Cheer: Which glorious Cheer of the Godhead fulfilleth all Heaven of
joy and bliss. God showed three degrees of bliss that each Soul shall have in
Heaven, that willingfully has served God in any degree in Earth. first is, the
Worship and Thanks that he shall receive of our Lord God when he is delivered
of Pain: This Thanks is so high and so worshipful, that him thinks that it
fills him, though there were no more; for methought all the Pain and Travel
that might be suffered of all living men, might not have deserved the
worshipful thank that one man shall have that wilfully has served God. For the
second, that all the blessed Creatures that be in Heaven, shall see the
worshipful thanking: And he makes his Service known to all that be in Heaven;
and in this time this Example was showed. A King, if he thank his Subjects, it
is a great worship to them, and if he make it known to all the Realm, then
their worship is much increased. third, that as new, and as liking as it is
undertaken that time, right so shall it last without end: And I saw that i e.
friendly.
homely and sweetly was this showed, that the Age of every man shall be known
in Heaven, and be rewarded for his wilful Service, and for his time; and namely
the Age of them that wilfully and freely offer their Youth to God passingly is
rewarded, and wonderfully thanked; for I saw that when or what time that a man
or woman be truly turned to God, for one days service, and for his endless
will, he shall have all these three degrees of bliss. And the more that the
loving Soul sees this courtesy of God, the i e. more willingly.
levir she is to serve him all her life.

The Seventh Revelation. The xv. Chapter.
ANd after this, he showed a sovereign Ghostly liking in my Soul: In this
likeing, I was fulfilled of everlasting sureness, mightily fastened without any
painful dread. This feeling was so glad and so Ghostly, that I was all in
peace, in ease and in rest, that there was nothing in Earth that should have
grieved me. This lasted but a while, and I was turned and left to my self in
heaviness, and weariness of my life, and irkeness of my self, that ie scarce
unueth, I could have patience to live: There was no comfort, ne none to ease
my feeling, but Faith, Hope, and Charity: and these I had in truth, but full
little in feeling.

And none after this our blessed Lord gave me again of the Comfort and the Rest
in Soul, likeing and sureness, so blessedfully and so mightifully, that no
dread, ne sorrow, ne no pain bodily, ne Ghostly that might be suffered should
have diseased me: And then the pain shows again to my feeling, and then the
joy and the liking: And now that one, and now that other diverse times; I
suppose about twenty times. And in the time of joy, I might have said with
Saint Paul, Nothing shall depart me fro the Charity of Christ. And in the pain
I might have said with Saint Peter, Lord save me, I perish.

This Vision was showed to learn me at my understanding, that it is speedful to
some Souls to feel on this wise. Sometime to be in Comfort, and sometime to
fail, and to be left to themself; God will that we know that he keeps us ever
in like sure, in woe, and in weal. And for profit of man's Soul, a man is
sometimes left to himself, although his sin is not ever the Cause; for in this
time I sinned not, Wherefore I should be left to my self, for it was so sudden:
Also, I deserved not to have had this blessedful Feeling, but freely our Lord
gives it when he will; and suffers us in Woe sometime, and both is one Love.
For it is Gods Will that we hold us in Comfort with all our Might, for Bliss is
lasting without End, and Pain is passing, and shall be brought to naught to
them that shall be saved. Therefore it is not Gods Will, that we follow the
Feeling of Pains in Sorrow and Mourning for them, but suddenly pass over, and
hold us in the endless liking that is God.

The Eighth Revelation. And the xvj. Chapter.
AFter this, Christ showed a part of his Passion, near his Dying: I saw the
sweet face as it were dry and bloodless, with pale dying, and dead pale
Languring, and then turned more dead into blew, and after in brownblew, as the
flesh turned more deep dead. For his Passion showed to me most properly in his
blessed Face, and namely in his Lips: Therein I saw these four Colors; those
that were before fresh and ruddy, lively and liking to my sight. This was a
pitiful Changing, to see this deep dying; and also his most * cloggering
together and dried to my sight: And the sweet Body waxed brown and black, all
changed and turned out of the fair, fresh, and lively Color of himself, into
dry dying; for that same time that our Blessed Savior dyed upon the Roode, it
was a dry sharp Wind, wonder could, as to my sight: And what time that the
precious Blood was bled out of the sweet Body that might pass therefro, yet
there was a moisture in the sweet flesh of Christ, as it was showed. Bloodshed
and pain dried within, and blowing of the Wind and Cold, coming from without
met together in the sweet Body of Christ: And these four dried the flesh of
Christ by process of time. And though this pain were bitter and sharp, yet it
was full long lasting, as to my sight. And the pain dried up all the lively
Spirits of Christ's flesh. Thus I saw the sweet flesh dry in my sight, part
after part drying with mavelous pain; and as long as any Spirit had life in
Christ's flesh, so long suffered he. This long Pain seemed to me as if he had
been a sennet dead, dying at the point of out-passing, always suffering the
great Pain: And there I saw it seemed as he had been a sennet dead: It
specifieth, that the sweet Body was so discolored, so dry, so clongen, so
deadly, and so piteous, as he had been sevenight dead, continually dying: And
methought the drying of Christ's flesh was the most Pain, and the last of his
Passion.

The Ninth Revelation. And the xvij. Chapter.
ANd in this drying, was brought to my mind this word that Christ said, I
thirst: For I saw in Christ a double Thirst, one Bodily, and another Ghostly.
This Word was showed for the bodily Thirst: And for the Ghostly Thirst was
showed as I shall say after. And I understood by the bodily Thirst, that the
Body had feeling of moisture; for the blessed Flesh and Bones was left all
alone without blood and moisture. The blessed Body dried all alone long time
with wringing of the Nails and weight of the Body; for I understood that for
tenderness of the sweet Hands, and the sweet Feet, by the great hardness and
grievousness of the Nails, the Wounds waxed wide, and the Body settled for
weight by long time hanging, and pearcing and raising of the Head, and binding
of the Crown, all baken with dry blood, with the sweet Hair clinging the dry
flesh to the Thorns, and the Thorns to the flesh drying: And in the beginning
while the flesh was fresh and bleeding, the continual setting of the Thorns
made the Wounds wide. And furthermore, I saw, that the sweet skin, and the
tender flesh, with the hair, and with the blood, was all raced and loosed about
with the Thorns, and broken in many pieces, and were hanging as they would
hastily have fallen down while it had kind moisture; how it was down I saw not,
but I understood that it was with the sharp Thorns, and the boystrous grievous
sitting on of the Garland, not sparing, and without pity, that although brake the
sweet skin with the flesh, and the Hair loosed it from the bone; where through
it was broken in pieces as a Cloth, and sagging downward, as it would hastily
have fallen for heaviness and for looseness. And that was great sorrow and dread
to me, for methought that I would not for my life have seen it fall.

This continued a while, and after it began to change; and I beheld and
marvelled how it might be, and then I saw it was, for it began to dry, and
stint a part of the weight that was round about the Garland: And so it was
environed all about, as it were Garland upon Garland; the Garland of Thorns
was dyed with the Garland of Blood, and that other Garland and the Head all was
one Color as clottered blood when it was dried: The skin and the flesh that
seemed of the Face and of the Body, was small rimpild with a tawny Color, like
a dry board when it is aged, and the face more brown than the body. I saw four
manner of drying: The first was bloodless: The second Pain following after: The
third is, that he was hanging up in the Air, as men hang a Cloth for to dry:
The fourth, that the bodily kind asked Liquor, and there was no manner of
Comfort ministered to him. Ah, hard and grievous was that Pain, but much more
hard and grievous it was when the moisture failed, and all began to dry thus
clinging. These were two Pains that showed in the blessed Head. The first
wrought to the drying while it was moist, and that other slow, with clinging
and drying, with blowing of Wind from without; that dried him more, and pained
with Cold, than my heart can think, and all other Pains, for which Pains I saw,
that all is too little that I can say, for it may not be told. The showing of
Christ's Pains filled me full of Pains, for I wist well that he suffered but
once, but as he would show it me, and fill me with mind, as I had before
desired: And in all this time of Christ's presence, I felt no Pain but for
Christ's Pains.

Then thought me, I knew full little what Pain it was that I asked, and as a
Wretch I repented me, thinking if I had wist what it had been, loath had me
been to have prayed it, for methought my Pains passed any bodily Death. I
thought, Is any Pain in Hell like this? and I was answered in my Reason, Hell
is an other Pain, for their is Despair; but of all Pains that lead to
Salvation, this is the most, to see the Lover to suffer. How might any Pain be
more than to see him that is all my Life, all my Bliss, and all my Joy, suffer?
Here left I steadfastly, that I loved Christ so much above my self, that there
was no Pain that might be suffered, like to that sorrow that I had to see him
in Pain.

The xviij. Chapter.
HEre I saw in part the Compassion of our Blessed Lady Saint Mary, for Christ:
And she was so i. e. united.
onyd in Love, that the greatness of her Love was cause of the greatness of her
Pain; for in this I saw a substance of kind Love continued by Grace, that his
Creatures have to him; which kind Love was most i e. plenteous.
fulsomelie showed in his sweet Mother, and overpassing: For so much as she
loved him more than all other, her Pain passed all other; for ever the higher,
the mightier; the sweeter that the Love is, the more sorrow it is to the Lover
to see that Body in pain that he loved. And so all his Disciples, and all his
true Lovers suffered more Pain than their own bodily dying: For I am sure by my
own feeling, that the least of them loved him so far above himself, that it
passes all that I can say.

Here saw I a great i e. union
oning between Christ and Us, to my understanding; for when he was in Pain we
were in Pain, and all Creatures that might suffer Pain, suffered with him; that
is to say, all Creatures that God has made to our Service. The Firmament and
Earth failed for sorrow in their kind, in the time of Christ's dying; for it
longs i e. natural.
kindly to their property to know him for their Lord, in whom all their virtue
stands: And when he feeled, then behoved needs to them for kindness to feel
with him, in as much as they might, for sorrow of his Pains: And thus they that
were his Friends suffered Pain for Love. And generally, all that is to say,
they that knew him not, suffered for feeling of all manner of Comfort save the
Mighty privy keeping of God. I mean of two manner of People that know him not,
as it may be understood by two Persons: That one was Pilate, that other Person
was St. Dionise of France, which was that time a Paynius; for when he saw
Wonders and Marveils, Sorrows and Dreads that befell at that time, he said,
Either the World is now at an End, or else, he that is Maker of i e. nature.
kinds suffers. Wherefore he did Write on an Altar, This is an Altar of the
unknown God. God of his goodness, that makes Planners, and the Elements to
work in their kind to the blessed man, and to the Cursed. In that time it was
withdrawn from both: Wherefore it was, that they that knew him not were in
sorrow that time. Thus was our Lord Jesu Pained for us, and we stand all in
this manner of Pain with him, and shall do till that we come to his bliss, as I
shall say hereafter.

The xix. Chapter.
IN this time I would have looked fro the Cross, and I durst not; for I wist
well whiles that I beheld the Cross I was sure and safe. Therefore I would not
assent to put my Soul in Peril, for besides, the Cross was no sureness for
dreed of fiends: Then had I a proffer in my Reason, as it had been friendly
said to me, Look up to Heaven to his Father: And then saw I well with the Faith
that I felt, that there was nothing between the Cross and Heaven that might
have diseased me. Here me behoved to look up, or else to answer; I answered
inwardly with all the Might of my Soul, and said, Nay, I may not, for thou art
my Heaven. This I said, for that I would not, for I had i. e. rather.
leaver have been in that Pain till Doomsday, than have come to Heaven
otherwise than by him; For I wist well that he that bound me so sore, he should
unbind me when he would. Thus was I learned to choose Jesu for my Heaven, whom
I saw only in Pain at that time: Me liked no other Heaven than Jesu, which
shall be my bliss when I come there; and this has ever been a Comfort to me,
that I chose Jesu to be my Heaven, by his Grace in all this time of Passion and
Sorrow: And that has been a Learning to me that I should evermore do so, to
chose Jesu only to my Heaven in weal and in woe. And though I as a Wretch has
repented me, as I said before; if I had wist what Pain it had been, I had been
loath to have prayed it. Here I saw verily that it was grudging and frailty of
the flesh, without assent of the Soul in which God assigns no blame.
Repenting and wilful choice be two Contraries, which I felt both at that time.
And those be two parts, that one outward, that other inward: The outward party
is our deadily flesh, which is now in Pain, and now in woe, and shall be in
this Life: Whereof I felt much at this time; and that part was that I repented.
The inward party is a high and a blessedful Life, which is all in Peace and
Love: And this is more privily felt; and this party is in which mightily,
wisely, and wilfully I chose Jesu to my Heaven. And in this I saw truly, that
the inward party is Master and Sovereign to the outward, naught charging nor
taking heed to the Wills of that, but all the intent, and the Will is set
endless to be oned to our Lord Jesu; that the outward party should draw the
inward to assent, was not showed to me, but that the inward party draws the
outward party by Grace, and both shall be owned in bliss without end by the
virtue of Christ; this was showed.

The xx. Chapter.
ANd thus saw I our Lord Jesu languring long time for the uning of the Godhead,
gave strength to the Man-head for Love, to suffer more than all men might; I
mean not only more Pain than all men might suffer, but also, that he suffered
more Pain than all man of Salvation that ever was from the first beginning into
the last day, might tell or fully think. Having regard to the worthiness of the
highest worshipful King, and the shameful and despiteous painful Death; for he
that is highest and worthiest, was foulest condemned and utterly despised: For
his Passion is to think and to know that he is God that suffered: Seeing after
these other two points which be lower; that one is what he suffered; and that
other for whom that he suffered: And in this he brought to mind in part the
height, and the nobility of the glorious Godhead, and therewith the precious
head and the tenderness of the blessedful body which be together owned; and
also the loathfulness that in our kind is to suffer Pain; for as much as he was
most tender and clean, right, so he was most strong and mighty to suffer: And
for every man's sin that shall be saved he suffered; and every man's sorrow,
dissolation and anguish he saw, and sorrowed for kindness and Love; for in as
much as our Lady sorrowed for his Pains, as much suffered he sorrow for her
sorrows. And moreover in as much as the sweet Man-head of him was worthier in
kind; for as long as he was passible, he suffered for us, and sorrowed for us.
And now he is up-risen, and no more passible; yet he suffered with us, as I
shall say after. And I beholding all this by his Grace, saw that the Love in
him was so strong which he has to our Soul, that willingfully he chose it with
great desire; and mildly he suffered it with great joy; for the Soul that
beholds thus, when it is touched by Grace, he shall verily see that the Pains
of Christ's Passion pass all Pains; that is to say, which Pains shall be turned
into everlasting Joy by the virtue of Christ's Passion. It is Gods will as to my
understanding that we have three manners of beholding of his blessed Passion.
The first is the beholding the hard Pain that he suffered with a Contrition and
Compassion: And that showed our Lord in this time, and gave me might and grace
to see it. And I looked after the departing with all my mights, and i. e.
thought.
wend to have seen the Body all dead; but I saw him not so: And right in the
same time that me thought by seeming that the Life might no longer last, and
the showing of the end behoved needs to be nigh.

The xxj. Chapter.
SUddenly I beholding in the same Cross, he changed in blessedful Cheer; the
changing of his blessed Cheer changed mine; and I was as glad and merry as it
was possible. Then brought our Lord merrily to my mind, Where is now any point
of thy Pain or of thy Anguish? And I was full merry; I understood that we be
now in our Lords meaning, in his Cross with him; in our Pains, and in our
Passion daying. And we wilfully abiding in the same Cross, with his help and
his Grace into the last point; suddenly he shall change his Cheer to us: And we
shall be with him in Heaven; between that one and that other shall all be one
time; and then shall all be brought into Joy. And so meant he in this showing,
Where is now any point of thy Pain or of thy Grief? And we shall be full of
bliss; and here saw I verily, that if he showed now to us his blessedful Cheer,
there is no Pain in Earth, ne in no other place that should trouble us: But all
things should be to us joy and bliss; but for he shows us the sad Cheer of
Passion, as he bare in this Life his Cross; therefore we be in Disease and
Travail with him as our kind asks. And the cause why that he suffers, is,
for he will of his Goodness make us the Heirs with him in his bliss: And for
this little Pain that we suffer here, we shall have an high endless knowing in
God, which we might never have without that; and the harder our Pains have been
with him in his Cross, the more shall our Worship be with him in his Kingdom.

The Ninth Revelation. The xxij. Chapter.
THen said our good Lord asking, Art thou i. e. content.
well apaid that I suffered for thee: I said, yea good Lord gramercy; yea good
Lord blessed mote thou be. Then said Jesu our good Lord; If thou art apaid, I
am apaid: It is a joy, a bliss, an endless liking to me, that ever I suffered
Passion for thee: And if I might have suffered more, I would have suffered
more. In this feeling my understanding was lifted up into Heaven: And there I
saw three Heavens: Of which sight I was greatly marvelled, and thought I see
three Heavens, and all of the blissedful Man-head of Christ; and none is more,
none is less, none is higher, none is lower, but even like of bliss. For the
first Heaven, Christ showed me his Father, in no bodily likeness, but in his
property, and in his working; that is to say, I saw in Christ that the Father
is: The Working of the Father is this, that he gives i e. reward.
meed to his Son Jesu Christ. This Gift and this meed is so blissedful to Jesus
that his Father might have given him no meed that might have been liked to him
better. For the first Heaven, that is the pleasing of the Father showed to me
as in Heaven, and it was full blissedfully; for he is well pleased with all the
deeds that Jesu has done about our Salvation: Wherefore we be not only his by
his i e. redeeming.
buying, but also by the courteous Gifts of his Father we be his bliss, we be
his meed, we be his Worship, we be his Crown; and this was a singular marvel,
and a full delectable beholding, that we be his Crown. This that I say is so
great bliss to Jesu, that he sets at naught his Travel, and his Passion, and
his cruel and shameful Death. And in these words, If I might suffer more, I
would suffer more. I saw truly, that as often as he might die, as often as he
would, and Love should never let him have rest till he had done it. And I
beheld with great diligence, for to wit, how often he would die if he might:
And truly the number passed my understanding, and my Wits so far that my reason
might not, nor could not comprehend it, ne take it. And when he had thus often
died, or should die, yet he would set it at naught for Love; for all thinks
him but little in regard of his Love: for though the sweet manhood of Christ
might suffer but once, the goodness of him may never cease of profer, every day
he is ready to the same if it might be; for if he, said he, would for my Love
make new Heavens, and new Earths, it were but little in regard: For this might
he do each day if he would without any Travel. But for to die for my Love so
often that the number passes Creatures reason, this is the highest profer that
our Lord God might make to man's Soul, as to my sight. Then means he thus; How
should it then be, that I should not for thy Love do all that I might, which
deed grieveth me naught, sithen that I would for thy Love dye so often, having
no regard to my hard Pains? And here saw I for the second beholding in his
blessed Passion, the Love that made him to suffer, it passes as far all his
Pains, as Heaven is above Earth; for the Pain was a noble, precious, and
Worshipful deed, done in a time by the working of Love: And Love was without
beginning, is and shall be without end; for which Love, he said full sweetly
this Word; If I might suffer more, I would suffer more: He said not if it were
needful to suffer more; but, If I might suffer more: For though it were not
needful, and he might suffer more, he would. This Deed and this Work about our
Salvation, was ordained as well as God might ordain it. It was done as
worshipfully as Christ might do it: And herein I saw a full bliss in Christ;
for his bliss should not have been full, if it might any better have been done
than it was done.

The xxiij. Chapter.
ANd in these three Words: It is a Joy, a Bliss, and endless liking to me, were
showed three Heavens, as thus; For the joy I understood the pleasaunce of the
Father; and for the bliss, the Worship of the Son; and for the endless liking,
of the Holy Ghost. The Father is pleased, the Son is worshipped, and the Holy
Ghost likes: And here saw I for the third, beholding in his blessedful
Passion; that is to say, the joy and the bliss that makes him to like it: For
our courteous Lord showed his Passion to me in five manners: Of which the first
is, the Bleeding of the Head: The second, Discoloring of his blessed Face: The
third is, the plentuous Bleeding of the Body in seeming of scourging. The
fourth is, the deep drying. These four as it is before said for the Pains of
the Passion. And the fifth is, that was showed for the joy and the bliss of the
Passion; for it is Gods will that we have true liking with him in our
Salvation. And therein he will, that we be mightily comforted and strengthened.
And thus will he merely with his Grace, that our Soul be occupied; for we be
his bliss, for in us he likes without end: And so shall we in him with his
Grace; all that he does for us and has done, and ever shall, was never cost,
ne charge to him; ne might be, but only that he died in our manhead, beginning
at the sweet Incarnation, and lasting to the blessed Uprising on Easter morrow:
so long dured the cost and charge about our Redemption in deed: In which deed
he ever joyeth endlesly, as it is before said. Ah Jesu, will we take heed to
this bliss, that is in the blissedful Trinity of our Salvation; and that we
desire to have as much Ghostly liking with his Grace, as it is before said; that
is to say, that the liking of our Salvation be like to the joy that Christ has
of our Salvation, as it may be while we be here. All the Trinity wrought in the
Passion of Christ, ministering abundance of Virtue and Plenty of Grace to us by
him, but only the Maidens Son suffered, whereof all the blessed Trinity
enjoys. And this was showed in this Word, Art thou well apaid? By that other
Word Christ said, If thou art well apaid, I am well apaid; as if he had said,
It is joy and liking enough to me, and I ask not else of thee of my Travel, but
that I might appay thee.

And in this he brought to my mind the property of a glad Giver; ever a glad
Giver takes but little heed at the thing that he gives, but all his desire,
and all his intent is, to please him, and solace him to whom he gives it: And
if the Receiver take the Gift gladly and thankfully, than the courteous, Giver
sets at naught all his Cost, and all his Travel, for joy and delight he
has; for he has pleased and solaced him that he loved. Plentuously and fully
was this showed. Think as Wisely of the greatness of this Word, Ever. For in
that was showed an high knowing of Love that he has in our Salvation; with
manifold joys that followen of the Passion of Christ. One is, that he joyeth
that he has done it in deed, and he shall no more suffer: That other is, that
he has therewith bought us from endless Pains of Hell: An other is, that he
brought us up into Heaven, and made us for to be his Crown, and his endless
Bliss.

The Tenth Revelation. The xxjv. Chapter.
WIth a good cheer our good Lord looked into his side, and beheld with joy; and
with his sweet looking, he led forth the understanding of his Creature by the
same Wound into his side within: And there he showed a fair and delectable
place, and large enough for all Mankind that shall be saved, and rest in Peace
and in Love: And therewith he brought to mind his dear Worthy Blood, and his
precious Water which he let pour out for Love. And with the sweet beholding he
showed his blessed Heart cloven in two; and with his enjoying he showed to my
understanding in part the blessedful Godhead, as far forth as he would at that
time strengthen the poor Soul for to understand, as it may be said; that is to
mean, the endless Love that was without beginning, and is, and shall be ever.
And with this our good Lord said well blessedfully, Low, how I love thee; as if
he had said, My Darling, behold and see thy Lord thy God that is thy Maker, and
thy endless joy. See thine own Brother, thy Savior, my Child, behold and see
what liking and bliss I have in thy Salvation: And for my love i e. rejoice.
enjoy with me. And also to more understanding, this blessed Word was said:
Lo, how I love thee; as if he had said, Behold and see that I loved thee so
much, or that I died for thee, that I would die for thee. And now I have died
for thee, and suffered willingfully that I may: And now is all my bitter Pain,
and all my hard Travel turned to everlasting joy and bliss to me and to thee.
How should it now be that thou should any thing pray me that liked me; but
if I should full gladly grant it thee, for my liking is thy Holiness, and the
endless joy and bliss with me. This is the understanding simply, as I can say
of this blessed Word, Lo, how I loved thee. This showed our good Lord to make
us glad and merry.

The Eleventh Revelation. And the xxv. Chapter.
ANd with this cheer of mirth and joy, our good Lord looked down on the right
side, and brought to my mind, where our Lady stood in the time of his passion,
and said, Will thou see her: And in this sweet Word, as if he had said, I wot
well that thou will see my blessed Mother: for after my self, she is the
highest Joy that I might show thee, and most liking and worship to me, and most
she is desired to be seen of all my blessed Creatures. And for the mavelous,
high, and singular Love that he has to this sweet Maiden, His blessed Mother
our Lady Saint Mary, he shows her bliss and joy, as by the meaning of this
sweet Word, as if he said; Will thou see how that I love her, that thou might
joy with me in the Love that I have in her, and she in me. And also to more
understanding, this sweet Word our good Lord speaks in Love to all Mankind,
that shall be saved, as it were all to one Person; as if he said, Will thou see
in her how thou art loved; for thy Love I have made her so High, so Noble, so
Worthy: And this likes me: And so will I that it do thee: For after himself
she is the most blessedful sight: But hereof am I not learned to long to see
her bodily Presence while I am here; but the virtues of her blessedful Soul,
her Truth, her Wisdom, her Charity, whereby I am learned to know my self, and
reverently dread my God: And when our good Lord had showed this, and said this
Word, Will thou see her? I answered and said, Yea good Lord, grant Mercy, Yea
good Lord if it be thy Will. Oftentimes I Prayed this, and I i e. thought.
went to have seen her in bodily liking, but I saw her not so. And Jesu in that
Word showed me a Ghostly sight of her right, as I had seen her before little and
simple; right so he showed her then High and Noble, and Glorious, and pleasing
to him above all Creatures: And so he will that it be known, that all those
that like in him, should also like in her.

And to more understanding he showed this example; as if a man love a Creature
singularly above all Creatures, he will make all other Creatures to love and to
like that Creature that he loves so much. And in this Word that Jesu said,
Will thou see her, methought it it was the most liking Word that he might give
me of her; with the Ghostly showing that he gave me of her: For our Lord showed
me nothing in special, but our Lady Saint Mary, and her showed three times. The
first was as she conceived: The second as she was in her Sorrow under the
Cross: And the third was, as she is now in Liking, Worship, and Joy.

The Twelfth Revelation. The xxvj. Chapter.
ANd after this, our Lord showed him more glorified as to my sight than I saw
him before; wherein I was learned, that our Soul shall never have rest till it
come into him, knowing that he is full of joy, homely and courteous, and
blessedful, and very Life. Oftentimes our Lord Jesu said, I it am, I it am, I
it am, That is highest, I it am, that thou love, I it am, that thou likest, I
it am, that thou servest, I it am, that thou longest I it am, that thou
desire I it am, that thou meanest I it am: that is all I it am, that Holy
Church Preaches thee and Teaches thee I it am, that showed me before to thee.
The Number of thy Words passes my Wits and understanding, and all my Mights;
for they were in the highest as to my sight: For therein is comprehended I
cannot tell what; but the joy that I saw in the showing of them passes all
that Heart can think, or Soul may desire. And therefore these Words be not
declared here, but every man after the Grace that God gives him in
understanding and longing, receive them in our Lords meaning.

The Thirteenth Revelation. The xxvij. Chapter.
ANd after this our Lord brought to my mind the longing that I had to him
before; and I saw nothing let me but sin: And so I beheld generally in us
all; and methought, if sin had not been, we should all have been clean and like
to our Lord as he made us. And thus in my folly before this time, often I
wondered why by the great foresaid Wisdom of God, the beginning of sin was not
let, for then thought me that all should have been well. This stirring was
much to be forsaken; and nevertheless, Mourning and Sorrow I made therefore,
without Reason and Discretion; but Jesu, that in this Vision, Informed me of
all that me needed, answered by this Word, and said, Sin is i. e. behoveful.
behovely, but all shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of
thing shall be well. In this naked Word sin, our Lord brought to my mind
generally all that is not good; and the shameful despite, and the uttermost
Tribulation that he bear for us in this Life, and his dying and all his Pains
and Passion Bodily and Ghostly, and the Pains of all his Creatures Ghostly and
Bodily: For we be all in part troubled, and we shall be troubled following our
Master Jesu, till we be full purged of our deadly Flesh, and of all our inward
Affections, which be not very good. And the beholding of this with all the
Pains that ever were, or ever shall be. And with all this I understood the
Passion of Christ, for the most Pain and over-passing: And all this was showed
in a touch and readily passed over into Comfort; for our good Lord would not
that the Soul were afraid of this ugly sight, but I saw not sin; for I
bebelieve it had no manner of substance, ne no part of being; ne it might not
be known but by the Pain that is caused thereof: And this Pain is something as
to my sight for a time, for it purges and makes us to know our self, and ask
Mercy; for the Passion of our Lord is Comfort to us against all this, and so is
his blessed Will; and for the tender Love that our good Lord has to all that
shall be saved; he comfort readily and sweetly, meaning thus: It is true,
that sin is cause of all this Pain; but all shall be well, and all manner of
thing shall be well. These Words were showed full tenderly, showing no manner
of blame to me, ne to none that shall be safe. Then were it great unkindness of
me to blame or wonder on God of my sin, sithen he blames not me for sin. And
in these same Words, I saw an high mavelous privity hid in God: Which
privity, he shall openly make, and shall be known to us in Heaven. In which
knowing we shall verily see the cause why he suffered sin to come. In which
sight, we shall endlesly have joy.

The xxxiij. Chapter.
THus I saw, how Christ has Compassion on us for the cause of sin. And right
as I was before in the Passion of Christ fulfilled with Pain and Compassion;
like in this I was in party fulfilled with Compassion of all my even Christen;
for full well he loves people that shall be saved; that is to say, Gods
Servants, Holy Church shall be shaked in Sorrow, and Anguish, and Tribulation
in this World, as men shakes a Cloth in the Wind: And as to this our Lord
answered, showing on this manner; Ah, A great thing shall I make hereof in
Heaven of endless Worship, and of everlasting Joy. Ye so far forth I saw that
our Lord enjoys of the Tribulation of his Servants with Pity and Compassion;
and to each person that he loves to his Bliss, for to bring, he lays on him
something that is no i e. impediment.
lack in in his sight; whereby they be i e. humbled.
lowed and despised in this World, scorned and mocked, and cast out: And this
he does for to i e. hinder.
let the harm that they should take of the Pomp, and of the Pride, and of the
vain Glory of this wretched Life, and make their way ready to come to Heaven in
bliss without end Everlasting. For he says, I shall all to break you from your
vain Affections, and your vicious Pride, and after that I shall gather you, and
make you meek and mild, clean and Holy by i e. uniting.
oning to me. And then saw I that each kind Compassion that man has on his
even Christian with Charity; it is Christ in him, that each manner naughting
that was showed in his Passion, it was showed again here in this Compassion.
Wherein were two manner of understandings in our Lords meaning; that one was
the bliss that we be brought to; wherein he will that we i e. rejoice.
enjoy. That other is for Comfort in our Pain; for he will that we i e. know
wit that all shall turn us to Worship, and to profit by the virtue of his
Passion: And that we wit that we suffered right naught alone, but with him, and
see him our ground. And that we see his Pains and his Tribulation pass so far
all that we may suffer, that it may not be full thought. And the well-beholding
of this will save us from grudging and despair in the feeling of our Pains: And
if we see verily that our sin deserves it, yet his Love excuses us, and of
his great courtesse he does away all our blame, and beholds us with ruth and
pity, as Children, Innocents and i e. unspotted.
unloathful.

The xxjx. Chapter.
BUt in this I stood beholding generally, ie. darkly.
sweinly and mourningly, saying thus to our Lord in my meaning with full great
dreed, Ah good Lord, How might all be well for the great harm that is to come
by sin to thy Creatures? And here I desired as I durst, to have some more open
declaring, wherewith that I might be eased in this. And to this our blessed
Lord answered full meekly, and with full lovely cheir; and showed that Adams
sin was the most harm that ever was done, or ever shall be into the Worlds end:
And also he showed that this is openly known in all Holy Church in Earth.
Furthermore, he learned that I should behold the glorious i e. satisfaction
Asseethe; for this Asseeth-making is more pleasing to the blessed Godhead,
and more Worshipful for man's Salvation without Comparison, than ever was the
sin of Adams harmful. Then means our blessed Lord thus, and in this Teaching;
that we should take heed to this. For sithen that I have made well by the most
harm; then it is my will that thou know thereby that I shall make well all that
is less.

The xxx. Chapter.
HE gave understanding of two parties, that one party is our Savior and our
Salvation. This blessed part is open, clear, fair, and light, and plenteous for
all Mankind that is of good will, and that shall be, is comprehended in this
part. Hereto we be bound of God, and drawn and counseled, and learned inwardly
by the Holy Ghost, and outward by Holy Church in the same Grace. In this will
our Lord that we be occupied and joying in him, for he joyeth in us: And the
more plenteously that we take of this with Reverence and Meekness, the more
thank we deserve of him, and the more i e. profit
speed to our self. And thus may we see and i e. rejoice in that.
enjoy our part is our Lord: That other is hid and i e. shut up.
sparred from us; that is to say, all that is besides our Salvation, for that
is our Lords privy Counsel, and it longs to the Royal Lordship of God to have
his privy Counsels in Peace. And it longs to his Servants for Obedience and
Reverence not to will to know his Counsels. Our Lord has pity and Compassion
on us, for that some Creatures make them so busy therein; and I am sure if we
i e. knew
wist how greatly we should please him, and ease our self to leave it, we
would. The Saints in Heaven they will nothing wit but what our Lord will show
them; and also their Charity and their desire is ruled after the Will of our
Lord: And thus ought we that our Will be like to them; then shall we nothing
will, ne desire but the Will of our Lord, like as they do; for we be all one in
Gods meaning. And here I was learned, that I should only enjoy in our blessed
Savior Jesu, and trust in him for all thing.

The xxxij. Chapter.
ANd thus our good Lord answered to all the Questions and Doubts that I might
make, saying full Comfortably: I may make all thing well: And I can make all
thing well, and I shall make all thing well; and I will make all thing well;
and thou shall see thy self that all manner of thing shall be well. There he
says, I may, I understand for the Father; and there he says, I can, I
understand for the Son; and there he says, I will, I understand for the Holy
Ghost; and there he says I shall; I understand the Unity of the blessed
Trinity, Three Persons and one Truth: And there he says, Thou shall see thy
self; I understand the Coming of all Mankind that shall be saved into the
blessedful Trinity. And in these five Words, God will that we be enclosed in
Rest, and Peace. And thus shall the Ghostly thirst of Christ have an end; for
this is the Ghostly thirst of Christ, the Love-longing that lasts and ever
shall, till we see that sight at Doomsday; for we that shall be safe, and
shall be Christ's Joy and his Bliss, been yet here, and some be to come, and so
shall some be into that day. Therefore this is his thirst, and Love-longing of
us all together here in him to our endless bliss, as to my sight; for we be not
now fully as whole in him as we shall be then; for we know in our Faith, and
also it was showed in all, that Christ Jesu was both God and Man: And i e.
according to
aneynst the Godhead he is himself highest bliss, and was fro without
beginning, and shall be without end: Which very endless bliss may never be i e.
increased.
highed nor i e diminished.
lowed in it self. And this was plenteously seen in every showing, and namely
in the xijth. where he says, I it am that is highest. And as aneynst Christ's
Manhood; it is known in our Faith, and also showed that he through the Virtue
of the Godhead, for Love to bring us to his bliss suffered Pains and Passion,
and died.

And these be the Works of Christ's Manhood, wherein he enjoys. And that
showed he in the ixth. where he says, It is a joy, a bliss, and endless liking
to me, that ever I suffered Passion for thee. And this is the bliss of Christ's
Works: And thus he means; there he says in the same showing, We be his
bliss, we be his i e reward.
meed, we be his Worship, we be his Crown: For as aneynst that Christ is our
head, he is glorified and unpassible: And as aneynst his body in which all his
Members be knit, he is not yet full glorified, ne all unpassible: For the same
thirst and longing that he had upon the i e. cross
Roode-tree, (which desire longing and thirst as to my fight, was in him from
without beginning) the same has he yet, and shall into the time that the last
Soul that shall be saved, is come up to his bliss: For as truly as there is a
property in God of ruth and pity; as verily there is a property in God of
thirst and longing: And of the virtue of this longing in Christ, we have to
long again to him, without which no Soul comes to Heaven. And this property of
longing and thirst comes of the endless goodness of God; right as the property
of pity comes of his endless goodness: And though he have longing and pity,
they been sundry properties, as to my sight. And in this stands the point of
Ghostly thirst, which is lasting in him as long as we be in need, us drawing up
to his bliss. And all this was seen in showing of Compassion, for that shall
cease at Doomsday. Thus he has ruth and Compassion on us: And he has longing
to have us; but his Wisdom and his Love suffer not the i e. end.
same to come till the best time.

The xxxij. Chapter.
ONe time our good Lord said, All manner of thing shall be well: And another
time he said, Thou shall see thy self, that all manner of thing shall be well.
And in these two the Soul took sundry manner of understanding One was this;
that he will, we wit that not only he takes heed to noble things and to great,
but also to little and to small, to low and to simple, and to one and to other.
And so means he in that he says, All manner of thing shall be well; for he
will that we wit that the least thing shall not be forgotten. Another
understanding is this; that there be many deeds evil done in our sight, and so
great harms take, that it seems to us that it were impossible that ever it
should come to a good end. And upon this we look, sorrow and mourn therefore;
so that we cannot rest us in the blissedful beholding of God as we should do:
And the cause is this; that the use of our Reason is now so blind, so low, and
so simple, that we cannot know the high mavelous Wisdom, the Might and the
Goodness of the blissedful Trinity: And this means he where he says, Thou
shall see thy self, that all manner of thing shall be well: As if he said, take
now faithfully and trustfully, add at the last end thou shall be verily in i e.
fullness.
fulhead of Joy: And thus in the same five Words beforesaid, I may make all
thing well; I understand a mighty Comfort of all Works of our Lord God that are
for to come. There is a deed, the which the blissedful Trinity shall do in the
last day, as to my sight: And what the deed shall be, and how it shall be done,
it is unknown of all Creatures which are beneath Christ, and shall be till when
it shall be done. The Goodness and the Love of our Lord God will, that we i e.
know
wit that it shall be: And the Might, and the Wisdom of him by the same Love
will i e. conceal.
hill it, and hide it from us what it shall be, and how it shall be done: And
the cause why he will, we wit it thus is, for he will we be the more eased in
our Soul, and peaceable in Love, leaving the beholding of all Tempests that
might i e. hinder.
let us of true enjoying in him. This is the great deed ordained of our Lord
God fro without beginning, treasured and hid in his blessed Breast, only known
to himself; by which deed, he shall make all thing well, for right as the
blessed Trinity made all thing of naught; right so the same blessed Trinity
shall make well all that is not well. And in this sight I marvelled greatly,
and beheld our Faith, meaning thus; Our Faith is grounded in Gods Word, and it
longs to our Faith, that we believe that Gods Word shall be saved in all
thing: And one point of our Faith is, that many Creatures shall be damned, as
Angels that fell out of Heaven for Pride, which be now Fiends; and many in
Earth that dies out of the Faith of Holy Church; that is to say, tho that be
Heathen: And also many that has received Christendom, and lives unchristen
Life, and so dies out of Charity; all these shall be damned to Hell without
end, as Holy Church teaches me to believe: And standing all this, methought it
was unpossible that all manner of thing should be well, as our Lord showed in
this time. And as to this, I had no other answer in showing of our Lord but
this; That that is unpossible to thee, is not unpossible to me; I shall save
my Word in all thing, and I shall make all thing well. And in this I was taught
by the Grace of God, that I should steadfastly hold me in the Faith as I had
before understood. And therewith, that I should stand and i e firmly.
sadly believe, that all manner thing shall be well, as our Lord showed in the
same time; for this is the great deed that our Lord God shall do: In which deed
he shall save his Word in all thing; and he shall make well all that is not
well: But what the deed shall be, and how it shall be done, there is no
Creature beneath Christ that wot it, ne shall wit it till it is done, as to the
understanding that I took of our Lords meaning in this time.

The xxxiij. Chapter.
ANd yet in this I desired as I durst, that I might have some fight of Hell,
and of Purgatory: But it was not my meaning to take proof of any thing that
longs to our Faith; for I believed i e. assuredly.
sothfastlie that Hell and Purgatory is for the same end that Holy Church
teaches for; but my meaning was, that I might have seen for Learning in all
thing that longs to my Faith, whereby I might live the more to Gods Worship,
and to my Profit. And for ought that I could desire, I ne could see of this
right naught, but as it is before said in the first showing; where that I saw
the Devil is reproved of God, and endless by damned. In which sight I
understand, that all the Creatures that be of the Devils condition in this Life
and therein ending; there is no more mention made of them before God and all
his Holy Ones, then of the Devil; notwithstanding that they be of Mankind;
whether they have be-Christened or not: For though the Revelation was showed of
Goodness, in which was made little mention of Evil: Yet I was not drawn thereby
from any point of the Faith that Holy Church teaches me to believe: For I had
sight of the Passion of Christ in diverse showing. In the first, in the second,
in the fourth, in the eighth, as it is before said; wherein I had in part
feeling of the sorrow of our Lady, and of his true Friends that saw his Pains:
but I saw not so properly specified the Jews that did him to Death; but
notwithstanding I knew in my Faith, that they were Accursed and Damned without
end, saving those that were Converted by Grace.

And I was strengthed, and learned generally to keep me in the Faith, in every
Point, and in all as I had before understood, hoping that I was therein with
Mercy and the Grace of God, desiring and praying in my meaning, that I might
continue therein unto my lives end. It is Gods will that we have great regard
to all the deeds that he has done; for he will thereby that we know, trust and
believe all that he shall do. But evermore us needs leave the beholding what
the deed shall be; and desire we to be like to our Brethren which be the Saints
in Heaven, that will right naught but Gods will: Then shall we only enjoy in
God, and be well apaid both with hiding and showing: For I saw verily in our
Lords meaning, the more we busy us to know his privities in that or in any
other thing, the farther more shall we be from the knowing.

The xxxjv. Chapter.
OUr Lord showed two manner of i e. secrets.
privities. One is this great privity, with all the privy Points thereto
belonging: And these privities he will we know thus hid, into the time that he
will clearly show them to us. That other are the privities which himself showed
openly in this Revelation; for those are privities which he will make open and
known to us: for he will that we wit that it is his will that we know them.
They are privities to us, but not only for that he will they be privities to
us, but they are privities to us, for our blind-head and our unknowing. And
therefore has he great ruth; and therefore he will make them open to us
himself, whereby we may know him, and love him, and cleave to him: For all that
is i e. profitable.
speedeful for us to wit, and for to know, full courteously our good Lord will
show us what it is with all the Preaching and Teaching of Holy Church, God
showed full great pleasaunce that he has in all men and women, that mightily
and wisely take the Preaching and Teaching of Holy Church; for he it is Holy
Church; He is the Ground, He is the Substance, He is the Teaching, He is the
Teacher, He is the End, and He is the Meed: Wherefore every kind Soul
Traveleth. And this is known, and shall be known to each Soul to which the Holy
Ghost declares it. And I hope truly all those that seek thus, they shall
speed, for they seek God. All this that I have now said, and more as I shall
say hereafter, is comforting against sin: For in the third showing, when I saw
that God does all that is done, I saw not sin, and then I saw that all is well;
but when God showed me for sin, then said he, All shall be well.

The xxxv. Chapter.
ANd when God Almighty had showed so plenteously, and so fully of his Goodness,
I desired, to wit, of a certain Creature that I loved, if it should continue in
good Living; which I hoped by the Grace of God was begun. And in this singular
desire, it seemed that I let my self; for I was not taught in this time: And
then was I answered in my Reason, as it were by a friendful mean; Take it
generally, and behold the courtesy of thy Lord God, as he showed to thee; for
it is more Worship to God to behold him in all, than in any special thing. I
assented, and therewith I learned, that it is more Worship to God to know all
thing in general, than to like in any thing in special, and if I should do
wisely after this Teaching. I hold not be glad for any thing in special, ne
greatly diseased for any manner thing, for All shall be well. For the full-head
of joy, is to behold God in all; for by the same blessed Might, Wisdom, and
Love, that he made all thing; to the same end, our good Lord leads it
continually, and there to himself shall bring it; and when it is time we shall
see it. And the ground of this was showed in the first, and more openly in the
third, where it says; I saw God in a Point: All that our Lord does, is
rightfully, and all that he suffers is Worshipful. And in these two is
comprehended Good and Evil; for all that is Good our Lord does, and that is
Evil our Lord suffers: I say not that Evil is Worshipful, but I say the
sufferance of our Lord God is Worshipful, whereby his Goodness shall be known
without end, and his mavelous Meekness and Mild-head by this working of Mercy
and Grace. Right i e: Plenitude.
full-head is that thing that is so good, that it may not be better than it is:
For God himself is very rightful head, and all his Works be done rightfully, as
they be ordained fro without beginning by his high Might, his high Wisdom, his
high Goodness. And right, as he has ordained it to the best, right so he
works continually, and leads it to the same end: And he is ever full
pleased with himself, and with all his Works. And the beholding of this blessed
Accord is full sweet to the Soul that sees it by Grace: All the Souls that
shall be saved in Heaven without end, be made rightful in the sight of God, and
by his own Goodness. In which rightfullness we be endlesly kept, and
marvellously above all Creatures. And Mercy is a Working that comes of the
Goodness of God. And it shall last working as long as sin is suffered to pursue
rightful Souls: And when sin has no longer leave to pursue, then shall the
Working of Mercy cease: And then shall all be brought into rightfulness, and
therein stand without end. By his sufferance we fall; and in his blessed Love
with his Might, and his Wisdom we are kept; and by Mercy and Grace we be raised
to manifold more Joy. And thus in Rightfulness and in Mercy he will be known
and Loved, now and without end. And the Soul that wisely beholds in Grace is
i e. well contented
well paid with both, and endlesly enjoys.

The xxxvj. Chapter.
OUr Lord God showed that a deed shall be done, and himself shall do it; and it
shall be Worshipful; and mavelous, and plentuous, and by him it shall be
done, and himself shall do it. And this is the highest joy that the Soul
understood, that God himself shall do it. And I shall do right naught but sin,
and my sin shall not i e. hinder.
let his Goodness Working. And I saw that the beholding of this is a Heavenly
Joy in a i e. fearful.
dreadful Soul, which evermore Godly by Grace desires Gods Will. This deed
shall by begun here; and it shall be Worshipful to God, and plentuously
profitable to all his Lovers in Earth: And ever as we come to Heaven, we shall
see it in mavelous Joy: And it shall last thus in Working to the last Day;
and the Worship and the Bliss of that shall last in Heaven before God, and all
his Holy Saints without end. Thus was this deed seen and understand in our
Lords meaning; and the cause why he showed it, is to make us to enjoy in him
and in all his Works.

When I saw the showing continued, I understood it was showed for a great thing
that was then for to come: Which thing God showed that himself should do it.
Which deed has the Properties before said. And this showed he full
blessedfully, meaning that I should take it wistly, faithfully, and trustfully;
but what the Deed should be it was kept privy to me. And in this I saw, he will
not we dread to know the things that he shows; He shows them, for he will
we know them: By which knowing, he will we Love him, and like in him, and
endlesly enjoy in him: And for the great Love that he has to us, he shows us
all that is Worshipful and Profitable for the time. And those things that he
will now have privy; yet of his great Goodness he showed them i e. secretly.
close. In which showing he will we believe, and understand, that we should see
it verily in his endless Bliss. Then ought we to enjoy in him for all that he
shows, and all that he hides: And if we i e. willingly.
wilfully and meekly do this, we shall find therein great ease, and endless
thanking we shall have of him therefore. And this is the understanding of this
Word, That it shall be done by me; that is to say, the general Man; that is to
say, all that shall be safe, it shall be Worshipful, Mavelous, and Plentuous,
and By me it shall be done, and God himself shall do it. And this shall be
highest Joy that may be beholden of the Deed that God himself shall do it, and
Man shall do right naught but sin. Then means our Lord God thus, as if he
said, Behold and see, here have thou matter of Meekness; Here have thou matter
of Love; Here have thou matter of Knowing thy self; Here have thou matter of
Enjoying in me: And for my Love enjoy in me, for of all thing; therewith might
thou most please me. And as long as we be in this Life, what time that we by
our Folly turn us to the beholding of the reproved, tenderly our Lord touches
us, and blissedfully calls us, saying in our Soul, Let me alone my dear
worthy Child; intend to me, I am enough to thee, and enjoy in thy Savior and
in thy Salvation. And that this is our Lords Working in us: I am sure the Soul
that is pierced therewith by Grace, shall see it and feel it; and though it be
so that this Deed be truly take for the general man, yet it excludes not the
special; for what our good Lord will do by his poor Creatures, it is now
unknown to me. But this Deed, and that other aforesaid, it is not both one, but
two sundry, but this Deed shall be known sooner, and that shall be as we come
to Heaven: And to whom our Lord gives it, it may be known here in party. But
the great Deed aforesaid shall neither be known in Heaven nor in Earth till
that it be done. And furthermore, he gave special understanding and teaching of
Working, and showing of Miracles as this; It is known that I have done Miracles
here before many, and full high and mavelous, worshipful and great, and so as
I have done, I do now continually, and shall in coming of time. It is known
that before Miracles come, Sorrows, and Anguish, and Trouble: And that is, that
we should know our own feebleness and mischief that we be fallen in by sin, to
meek us, and make us to cry to God for help and Grace; and great Miracles come
after, and that of the high might and wisdom, and goodness of God, showing his
virtue and the joys of Heaven, so as it may be in this passing Life, and that
for the strengthening of our Faith, and increase of our Hope in Charity:
Wherefore it pleases him to be known and Worshipped in Miracles. Then means
he thus, he will that we be not born over low for Sorrows and Tempests that
fall to us, for it has ever so been before Miracles coming.

The xxxvij. Chapter.
GOd brought to mind that I should sin: And for liking that I had in beholding
of him, I i e. attended.
entented not redily to that showing: And our Lord full mercifully abode, and
gave me Grace for to entend. And this showing I took singularly to my self: But
by all the gracious Comforts that follows as ye shall see, I was learned to
take it to all mine even Christen, all in general, and nothing in special:
Though our Lord showed me that I should sin, by me alone is understood all. And
in this I conceived a soft dread: And to this our Lord answered, I keep thee
full surely; this Word was said with more Love and Sureness of Ghostly keeping,
than I can or may tell: For as it was before showed to me that I should sin,
right so was the Comfort showed sureness of keeping for all mine even Christen
(Who shall be saved). What may make me more to love mine even Christen, than to
see in God that he loves all that shall be saved, as it were all one Soul; for
in every Soul that shall be saved, is a godly Will that never finally assenteth
to sin, ne never shall. Right as there is a beastly will in the lower party
that may will no Good; right so there is a godly Will in the higher party;
which Will is so good, that it may never will Evil endlesly, but ever Good; and
therefore we be that he loves, and endlesly we do that he likes. And this
showed our good Lord in the i e. fullness.
wholehead of Love that we stand in his sight, yea, that he loves us now as
well while that we be here, as he shall do when we be there before his blessed
Face. But for failing of Love in our party, therefore is all our Travel.

The xxxviij. Chapter.
ANd God showed that sin shall be no shame but Worship to man; for right as to
every sin is answering a Pain by Truth: Right so for every sin to the same Soul
is given a bliss by Love. Right as diverse sins be punished with diverse Pains
after that it be grievous; right so shall they be rewarded with diverse Joys in
Heaven for their Victories, i e. accordingly.
after as the sin has been painful and sorrowful to the Soul in Earth; for the
Soul that shall come to Heaven is so precious to God, and the place so
Worshipful, that the goodness of God suffers never that Soul to sin finally
that shall come thither: But what Sinners they are that so shall be rewarded,
is made known in Holy Church in Earth, and also in Heaven, by overpassing
Worships: For in this sight my understanding was lifted up into Heaven. And
then God brought merrily to my mind David, and other in the Old Law with him
without number. And in the New Law he brought to my mind, first Magdalen,
Peter, and Paul, Thomas, and Jude, St. John of Beverley, and others also
without number; how they be known in the Church on Earth with their sins; and
it is to them no shame, but all is turned them to Worship. And therefore our
courteous Lord shows for them here in party, like as it is there fulfilled;
for there the Token of sin is turned to Worship. And St. John of Beverley our
Lord showed him full highly in Comfort of us for homeliness (and country
sake:) and brought to my mind how he is a kind Neighbor, and of our knowing:
And God called him plainly St. John of Beverley, as we do, and that with a full
glad and sweet cheer, showing that he is a full high Saint in his sight, and a
blessedful: And with this he made mention, that in his Youth, and in his tender
Age, he was a dear worthy Servant to God; full greatly God loving and dreading.
And nevertheless God suffered him to fall; him mercifully keeping that he
perished not, ne lost no time. And afterward God raised him to manifold more
Grace; and by the Contrition and the Meekness that he had in his living, God
has given him in Heaven manifold joys, overpassing that he should have had, if
he had not sinned or fallen. And that this is true, God shows in Earth with
plentuous Miracles doing about his Body continually. And all this was to make
us glad and merry in Love.

The xxxjx. Chapter.
SIN is the sharpest Scourge that any chosen Soul may be smitten with: Which
Scourge all to beats Man or Woman, and all to breaks him, and purges him
in his own sight: So far forth, that otherwhile he thinks himself that he is
not worthy, but as it were, to sink into Hell, till when Contrition takes him
by touching of the Holy Ghost, and turns the Bitterness into Hope of Gods
Mercy: And then begin his Wounds, to Heal, and the Soul to quicken, turned into
the Life of Holy Church. The Holy Ghost leads him to Confession, wilfully to
show his sins nakedly and truly with great sorrow, and with great shame, that
he has so defouled the fair Image of God. Then undertaketh he Penance for
every sin enjoined by his i e Confessarius.
Domes-man, that is grounded in Holy Church, by the Teaching of the Holy Ghost.

And this is one i e. humiliation.
Meekness that greatly pleases God, and also meekly takes bodily sickness of
Gods sending: Also Sorrow and Shame outwardly, with reproof and despite of the
World; with all manner of Grievance and Temptations that we be cast in, Ghostly
and Bodily: Full preciously our good Lord keeps us, when it seems to us
that we be near forsaken, and cast away for our sin, and for we see that we
have deserved it. And because of the Meekness that we get thereby, we be raised
full high in Gods sight by his Grace. And also whom our Lord will, he visits
of his special Grace with so great Contrition, and also with Compassion, and
true longing to God, that they be suddenly delivered of Sin and of Pain, and
taken up to bliss, and made even with Saints. By Contrition, we be made clean;
by Compassion, we be made ready; And by true Longing to God we be made worthy.

These be three means as I understood, whereby that all Souls come to Heaven;
that is to say, that have been Sinners in Earth, and shall be saved: For by
these Medicines behooves that every sinful Soul be healed; though that he be
healed, his Wounds be seen before God not as Wounds, but as Worships. And so on
the contrariwise, as we be punished here with Sorrow and with Penance, we shall
be rewarded in Heaven by the courteous Love of our God Almighty, that will that
none that come there, leese his Travel in any degree: For he beholds sin as
Sorrow and Pains to his Lovers, in whom he assigns no blame for Love. The
meed that we undertake, shall not be little, but it shall be high, glorious and
worshipful; and so shall all shame turn to Worship and to Joy. For our
courteous Lord will not that his Servants despair for often failing, ne for
grievous falling; for our falling lets not him to Love us; Peace and Love is
ever in us, being and working; but we be not ever in Peace and in Love: But he
will we take heed thus, that he is ground of all our whole Life in Love. And
furthermore, that he is our everlasting Keeper, and mightily defends us
against all our Enemies that be full fell, and full fierce upon us. And so much
our need is the more; for we give them occasion by our falling.

The xl. Chapter.
ANd this is a sovereign Friendship of our courteous Lord, that he keeps us
so tenderly whiles we be in our sin: And furthermore, he touches us full
privily, and shows us our sin by the sweet light of Mercy and Grace. But when
we see our self so foul, then we wene that God were wrath with us for our sin.
Then be we stirred of the Holy Ghost by Contrition into Prayer and desire,
amending of our self with all our Might, to slack the Wrath of God, unto the
time we find a rest in Soul and softness in Conscience. And then hope we that
God has forgiven us our sin, and it is true. And then shows our courteous
Lord himself to the Soul merrily, and of full glad cheer, with friendfully
welcoming as if it had been in Pain and in Prison, saying thus: My dear
Darling, I am glad thou art come to me in all thy Woe; I have ever been with
thee, and now see thou me loving, and we be oned in Bliss. Thus are sins
forgiven by Grace and Mercy, and our Soul Worshipfully received in Joy; like as
it shall be when it comes into Heaven, as oftimes as it comes by the gracious
Working of the Holy Ghost, and the virtue of Christ's Passion. Here understood I
verily, that all manner of thing is made ready to us by the great Goodness of
God; so far forth, that what time we be our self in Peace and in Charity, we be
verily safe: But for we may not have this in fullhead while we be here;
therefore it befalls us ever to live in sweet Praying, and in lovely Longing
with our Lord Jesu, for he longs ever for to bring us to the fulhead of Joy,
as it is before said; where he shows the Ghostly Thirst.

But now because of all this Ghostly Comfort that is before said; if any Man or
Woman be stirred by Folly, to say or to think; If this be true, then were it
good for to Sin, to have the more meed, or else to charge the less to sin. Love
that touches us all by his blessed Comfort; the same blessed Love teaches us
that we shall hate sin only for Love. And I am sure by my own feeling, the more
that each kind Soul sees this in the courteous Love of our Lord God, the
lother is him to sin, and the more he is ashamed: For if it were laid before us
all the Pain that is in Hell, and in Purgatory, and in Earth, to suffer it
rather than sin, we should rather choose all that Pain, than sin: For sin is so
vile, and so mickle for to hate, that it may be likned to no Pain; which Pain
is not sin. And to me was showed none harder Hell than sin; for a kind Soul
hates no Pain but sin, for all is good but sin, and naught is evil but sin.
And when we give our intent to Love and Meekness, by the working of Mercy and
Grace, we be made all Fair and Clean.

And as Mighty, and as Wise as God is to save Man, as willing he is: For Christ
himself is ground of all the Laws of Christen Men; and he taught us to do Good
against Evil. Here we may see that he is himself this Charity, and does to us
as he teaches us to do: For he will that we be like him in whole-head of
endless Love to our self, and to our even Christen. No more than his Love is
broken to us for our sin, no more will he that our Love be broken to our self,
nor to our even Christen, but nakedly hate sin, and endlesly love the Soul, as
God loves it: Then should we hate sin like as God hates it, and love the Soul
as God loves it; for these words that God said, is an endless Comfort, I keep
thee full truly.

The Fourteenth Revelation. The xlj. Chapter.
AFter this our Lord showed for Prayer: In which showing, I saw two Conditions
in our Lords meaning. One is rightful Prayer. Another is i e. sure
siker trust: But yet oftentimes our trust is not full; for we be not sure that
God hears us, as we think for our unworthiness, and for we feel right naught;
for we be as barren, and as dry oft-times after our Prayers as we were before.
And thus in our feelling, our folly is cause of our Weakness: For thus have I
felt by my self. And all this brought our Lord suddenly to my mind, and showed
these Words, and said, I am ground of thy beseeking. First, it is my will that
thou have it: And sithen I make thee to will it: And sithen I make thee to
beseek it, and thou seek it: How should it then be, that thou should not
have thy seeking? And thus in the first Reason, with the three that follow, our
good Lord shows a mighty Comfort, as it may be seen in the same Words; and in
the first Reason, there he says; And thou beseek it: There he shows full
great pleasance and endless meed, that he will give us for our beseeking. And
in the sixth Reason, there he says, How should it then be? This was said for
an unpossible thing; for it is the most unpossible that may, that we should
seek Mercy and Grace, and not have it. For of all thing that our good Lord
makes us to beseek himself, he has ordained it to us from without beginning.
Here may we then see, that our beseeking is not the cause of the Goodness, and
Grace that he does to us, but his proper Goodness. And that showed he verily in
all these sweet Words, there he says, I am Ground: And our good Lord will that
this be known of his Lovers in Earth; and the more that we know, the more shall
we beseech, if it be wisely take; and so is our Lords meaning. Beseeching is a
true and gracious lasting will of the Soul, owned and fastened into the Will of
our Lord, by the sweet privy Working of the Holy Ghost. Our Lord himself he is
the first Receiver of our Prayer, as to my sight, and he takes it full
thankfully; and highly enjoying, he sends it up above, and sets it in
Treasure, where it shall never perish: It is there before God, with all his
Holy Saints continually received, ever speeding our needs. And when we shall
undertake our bliss, it shall be given us for a degree of Joy, with endless
Worshipful thanking of him; full glad and merry is our Lord of our Prayer: and
he looks thereafter, and he will have it; for with his Grace it makes us
like to himself in condition, as we be in kind; and so is his blessed Will: For
he says thus, Pray entirely, inwardly, though thee think it savor thee not,
yet it is profitable enough, though thou feel it naught: Pray entirely,
inwardly, though thou feel naught, though thou see naught; yea, though thou
think thou might not; for in Dryness, and Barrenness, in Sickness, and in
Feebleness, then is thy Prayer full pleasant to me; though thou think at savor
thee not but little, and so is all thy Living Prayer in my sight.

For the meed and the endless thank that he will give us, therefore he is
covetuous to have us Praying continually in his sight. God accepts the good
Will, and the Travel of his Servants, howsoever we feel: Wherefore it pleases
him that we work in Prayer, and in good Living, by his Help and his Grace,
reasonably with Discretion, keeping our Mights to him; till when we have him
that we seek in fulhead of joy, that is Jesu. And that showed he in the xvth.
Revelation, where he says, Thou shall have me to thy meed. Also to Prayer
longs thanking: Thanking is a true inward knowing, with great Reverence and
lovely Dreed, turning our self with all our Mights into the Working that our
Lord stirred us to enjoying and thanking inwardly: and sometime for
plentuousness it breaks out with Voice, and says, Good Lord, grant Mercy;
Blessed mote thou be. And sometime when the Earth is dry, and feels naught;
or else by Temptation of our Enemy, then it is driven by Reason and by Grace to
cry upon our Lord with Voice, rehearsing his blessed Passion, and his great
Goodness. And so the virtue of our Lords Word turns into the Soul, and
quickens the heart, and enters by his Grace into true Working, and makes it
to Pray full blessed fully, and truly to enjoy in our Lord, is a full lovely
thanking in his sight.

The xlij. Chapter.
OUr Lord will that we have true understanding, and namely in three things that
longs to our Prayer: The first is, by whom and how that our Prayer Springs;
by whom, he shows when he says, I am Ground; and how by his Goodness: For he
says, First it is my Will. For the second, in what manner, and how that we
should use our Prayers; and that is, that our Will be turned into the Will of
our Lord enjoying: And so he means when he says, I make thee to will it. For
the third, that we know the Fruit and end of our Prayer; that is to be oned,
and like to our Lord in all thing; and to this meaning, and for this end, was
all this lovely Lesson showed: And he will help us, and he shall make it so as
he sees himself; blessed mote he be: For this is our Lords Will that our
Prayer and our trust be both alike large; for if we trust not as much
mickle as we Pray, we do not full Worship to our Lord in our Prayer. And also
we tarry and Pain our self; and the cause is as I believe, for we know not
truly that our Lord is Ground in whom that our Prayer springs. And also that
we know not that it is given us by Grace of his Love; for if we knew this, it
would make us to trust to have of our Lords gift all that we desire; for I am
sure that no man asks Mercy and Grace with true meaning, but if Mercy and
Grace be first given to him. But sometime it comes to our mind that we have
prayed long time; and yet it thinks us that we have not our asking: but
herefore should we not be heavy; for I am sure by our Lords meaning, that
either we abide a better time, or more Grace, or a better Gift. He will that we
have true knowing in himself that he is being. And in this knowing, he will
that our understanding be grounded with all our Mights, and all our Intents,
and all our Meanings: And in this Ground, he will that we take our i e. resting
place.
steeds, and our dwelling. And by the gracious Light of himself, he will that
we have understanding of three things that follow. The first is, our Noble and
Excellent making. The second, our precious and dear worthy i e: redemption.
again being. The third, all thing that he has made beneath us, to serve us,
and for our Love keeps it. Then means he thus, as if he said, Behold and
see that I have done all this before thy Prayer, and now thou art and prayest
me. And thus he means that it longs to us, to wit, that the greatest Deeds
be done, as Holy Church teaches. And in the beholding of this, with thanking,
we owe to Pray for the Deed that is now in doing; and that is, that he rule us,
and guide us to his Worship in this Life, and bring us to his Bliss; and
therefore he has done all. Then means he thus, that we see that he does it;
and we pray therefore, for that one is not enough: for if we pray, and see not
that he does it, it makes us heavy and doubtful, and that is not his Worship.
And if we see that does it, and we pray not, we do not our duty: And so it may
not be; that is to say, so is it not in his beholding. But to see that he does
it, and to Pray forthwithall: So is he Worshipped, and we speed. All thing that
our Lord has ordained to do, it is his Will that we pray therefore, either in
special or in general. And the joy and the bliss that is to him, and the Thank
and the Worship that we shall have therefore, it passes the understanding of
all Creatures in this Life, as to my sight. For Prayer is a rightwise
understanding of that fullhead of joy that is for to come, with true longing,
and very trust savouring or seeing our bliss, that we be ordained to, kindly
makes us to long. True understanding and Love, with sweet meaning in our
Savior graciously makes us to trust. And thus have we of kind to long, and of
Grace to trust: And in these two Workings, our Lord beholds us continually;
for it is our duty. And his Goodness may no less assign in us, that longs to
us, to do our diligence thereto: And when we do it, yet shall us think that it
is naught: And true it is, but do we as we may, and meekly ask Mercy and
Grace; and all that us fails, we shall it find in him. And thus means he,
there he says, I am the Ground of thy beseeching. And thus in those blessedful
Words, with the showing, I saw a full overcoming against all our Wickedness,
and all our doubtful dreeds.

The xliij. Chapter.
PRayer owneth the Soul to God, which is ever like to God in kind and in
substance, restored by Grace; but it is often unlike in condition, by sin of man's
party. Then is Prayer a Witness that the Soul will as God will; and comfort
the Conscience, and ableth Man to Grace. And thus he teaches us to Pray; and
mightily to trust that we shall have it; for he beholds us in Love, and will
make us Partner of his good Will and Deed: And therefore he stirs us to
Pray, that that likes him to do: For which Prayer and good Will that we have
of his gift, he will reward us, and give us endless meed. And this was showed
in this Word, And thou beseekest it. In this Word God showed so great
pleasance, and so great liking, as he were much beholding to us for each good
Deed that we do; and yet it is he that does it: And for that we beseech him
mightily, to do that thing that him likes; as if he said, What might thou
please me more than to beseech mightily, wisely, and wilfully, to do that
thing that I will have done. And thus the Soul by Prayer is accorded with God.
But when our courteous Lord of his special Grace shows himself to our Soul,
we have that we desire: And then we see not for the time what we should more
Pray; but all our intent, with all our Mights is set whole into the beholding
of him. And this is an high unperceiveable Prayer, as to my sight; for all the
cause wherefore we Prayer, is to be oned in to the sight and beholding of him,
to whom we Pray marvellously, enjoying with reverent dreed; and so great
sweetness, and delight in him, that we can pray right naught, but as he
stirs us for the time. And well I wot, the more the Soul sees of God, the
more she desires him by Grace; but when we see him not so, then feel we need,
and cause to pray for feeling, and for unableness of our self to Jesu. For when
a Soul is tempted, troubled, and left to her self by her unrest, then it is
time to pray to make her self supple and * buxom to God; but she by no manner
of Prayer makes God supple to him, for he is ever one like in Love.

And thus I saw, that what time we see need, wherefore we pray; then our Lord
God follows us, helping our desire: And when we of his special Grace plainly
behold him, seeing none of other needs, then we follow him. And he draws us
to him by Love, for I saw, and and felt that his mavelous, and his i e.
plentiful.
fulsome Goodness fulfilleth all our Mights: And therewith I saw that his
continual Working in all manner of things, is done so godly, so wisely, and so
mightily, that it over-passeth all our Imagining, and all that we can mean or
think. And then we can do no more but behold him, and enjoy with a high mighty
desire to be all oned into him, and i e. attend.
entend to his motion, and enjoy in his loving, and delight in his Goodness.
And thus shall we with his sweet Grace in our own meek continual Prayer, come
into him; now in this Life, by many privy touchings of sweet Ghostly sights and
feelings, measured to us as our i e. simplicity.
simplehead may bare it. And this is wrought, and shall be by the Grace of the
Holy Ghost, so long till we shall die in longing for Love; and then shall we
all come into our Lord, our self clearly knowing, and God i e. plentifully.
fulsomely having: And we endlesly be all hid in God, verily seeing, and
fulsomely feeling him Ghostly hearing; and him delectably smelling, and him
sweetly smelling: And there shall we see God face to face homely, and
fulsomely. The Creature which is made, shall see, and endlesly behold God which
is the Maker; for thus may no man see God and live after; that is to say, in
this deadly Life: But when he of his special Grace will show him here, he
strengthens the Creature above himself, and he measures the showing after
his own Will, and it is profitable for the time.

The xljv. Chapter.
GOD showed in all the Revelations ofttimes that (a Holy) man works evermore
his Will and his Worship, duringly without stinting: And what this Working is,
was showed in the first, and that in a mavelous Ground: For it was showed in
the Working of the blissedful Soul of our Lady Saint Mary by Truth and Wisdom.
And how, I hope by the Grace of the Holy Ghost, I shall say as I saw. Truth
sees God, and Wisdom beholds God; and of these two, comes the third; and
that is, a mavelous delight in God which is Love: Where Truth and Wisdom is
verily, there is Love verily coming of them both, and all of Gods making: For
God is endless sovereign Truth, endless sovereign Wisdom, endless sovereign
Love unmade. And a man's Soul is a Creature in God, which has the same
properties made; and evermore it does that it was made for; that sees God, it
beholds God, and it loves God: Wherefore God enjoys in the Creature, and
the Creature in God endlesly marvelling. In which marvelling he sees his God,
his Lord, his Maker so high, so great, and so good, in regard of him that is
made, that unneth the Creature seems ought to the self; but the brightness
and clearness of Truth and Wisdom makes him to see, and to know, that he is
made for Love; in which Love God endlesly keeps him.

The xlv. Chapter.
GOD deemeth us upon our kindly substance, which is ever kept one in him, whole
and safe without end. And this Doom is of his rightful-head: And man deemeth
upon our Changeable sensuality, which seems now one, now another, i e.
according as
after that it takes of the parties, and showed outward. And this Doom is i
e. mingled, or twofold.
meddled; for sometimes it is good and easy; and sometime it is hard and
grievous: And in as much as it is good and easy, it longs to the
rightfulness; and in as much as it is hard and grievous, our good Lord Jesu
reformeth it by Mercy and Grace, through virtue of his blessed Passion, and so
brings into the rightfulness. And though these two be thus accorded and oned,
yet it shall be known both in Heaven, without end. The first Doom which is of
Gods rightfulness, and that is of his own high endless Love; and that is that
fair sweet Doom that was showed in all the fair Revelation; in which I saw him
assign to us no manner of blame. And though these were sweet and delectable,
yet only in the beholding of this, I could not be full eased: And that was for
the Doom of Holy Church, which I had before understanding, and was continually
in my sight. And therefore by this Doom, methought that me behooveth needs to
know my self a sinner: And by the same Doom I understood, that sinners be
sometimes worthy blame and Wrath; and these two could I not see in God: And
therefore my advise and desire was more than I can or may tell; for the higher
Doom God shows himself in the same time. And therefore me behooved needs to
take it: And the lower Doom was learned me before time in Holy Church; and
therefore I might not by no way leave the lower Doom. Then was this my desire,
that I might see in God, in what manner that the Doom of Holy Church here in
Earth, is true in his sight, and how it longs to me verily to know it,
whereby they might both be saved, so as it were Worshipful to God, and right
way to me. And to all this, I ne had no other answer, but a mavelous Example
of a Lord, and of a Servant, as I shall say after, and that full mistely
showed: And yet I stood in Desire, and Will, into my lives end, that I might by
Grace know these two Dooms, as it longs to me. For all Heavenly things, and
all Earthly things that long to Heaven, be comprehended in these two Dooms. And
the more knowing, and understanding, by the gracious leading of the Holy Ghost,
that we have of these two Dooms; the more we shall see and know our feelings
(and Workings of Grace); and ever the more that we see them, the more kindly by
Grace, we shall long to be fulfilled of endless Joy and Bliss, for we be made
thereto. And our kindly substance is now blessedfully in God, and has been
since it was made, and shall be without end.

The xlvj. Chapter.
BUt our passing living that we have here in our sensuality, knows not what
our self is, but in our Faith. And when we know, and see verily, and clearly
what our self is, then shall we verily and clearly see, and know our Lord God
in fulhead of joy. And therefore it behooves needs to be, that the nearer we be
our bliss, the more we shall long; and that both by Kind and by Grace: We may
have knowing of our self in this Life, by continual help and virtue of our high
kind; in which knowing, we may increase and wax by furthering and speeding of
Mercy and Grace. But we may never full know our self into the last point: In
which Point, this passing Life, and all manner of Woe and Pain shall have an
end. And therefore it longs properly to us both by Grace and by Kind, to long
and desire, with all our Mights to know our self. In which full knowing, we
shall verily and clearly know our God in fulhead of endless joy. And yet in all
this time fro the beginning to the end, I had two manner of beholdings: The one
was endless continuant Love; with sureness of keeping, and blissful Salvation,
for of this was all the showing. That other, was the common teaching of Holy
Church, of which I was before informed and grounded, and wilfully having in
use, and understanding. And the beholding of this came not from me; for by the
showing, I was not stirred, nor led therefro in no manner Point. But I had
therein teaching to love it, and like it; whereby I might with the help of our
Lord and his Grace, increase and rise to more Heavenly knowing, and higher
loving. And thus in all this beholding, methought it behoved needs to see and
to know that we be sinners, and do many Evils that we ought to leave, and leave
many good Deeds undone that we ought to do: Wherefore we deserve pain, blame,
and Wrath. And notwithstanding all this, I saw verily that our Lord was never
Wrath, ne never shall: For he is God, he is Good, he is Truth, he is Love, and
he is Peace; and his Might, his Wisdom, his Charity, and his Unity suffers
him not to be Wrath: For I saw truly that it is against the property of his
Might to be Wrath; and against the property of his Wisdom, and against the
property of his Goodness. God is that Goodness that may not be Wrath, for God
is not but Goodness. Our Soul is oned to him, unchangeable Goodness: And
between God and our Soul is neither Wrath nor Forgiveness in his sight; for our
Soul is so i e. fully
fulsomely oned to God of his own Goodness, that between God and our Soul may
be right naught. And to this understanding was the Soul led by Love, and drawn
by Might in every showing: That it is thus, our good Lord showed; and how it is
thus verily of his great Goodness, and that he will we desire, to wit; that is
to say, as it longs to his Creatures to wit it for all thing that the simple
Soul understood, God will that it be showed and known for those things that he
will have privy, mightily and wisely himself hides them for Love; for I saw in
the same showing, that much privity is hid, which may never be known into the
time that God of his Goodness has made us worthy to see it. And therewith I am
well i e. content.
apaid, abiding our Lords Will in this high marvel. And now I yield me to our
Mother Holy Church, as a simple Child owes.

The xlvij. Chapter.
TWo Points belonging to our Soul are debt. One is, that we Reverently marvel.
That i. e. duties.
other is, that we meekly suffer, every enjoying in God; for he will that we
know, that we shall in short time see clearly in himself all that we desire.
And notwithstanding all this, I beheld and marvelled greatly, what is the Mercy
and Forgiveness of God? For by the Teaching that I had before, I understood
that the Mercy of God shall be Forgiveness of his Wrath, after the time that we
have sinned: For methought that to a Soul whose meaning and desire is to Love,
that the Wrath of God were harder than any other Pain. And therefore I took,
that the Forgiveness of his Wrath should be one of the principal Points of his
Mercy. But for ought that I might behold and desire, I could not see this Point
in all the showing. But how I saw and understood of the Working of Mercy; I
shall say some deal, as God will give me Grace. I understood thus; Man is
changeable in this Life, and by simpleness and uncunning falls into sin: He
is unmighty, and unwise of himself; and also his Will is over-laid. In this
time he is in Tempest, and in Sorrow, and in Woe: And the cause is blindness,
for he sees not God; for if he saw God continually, he should have no
mischievous feeling, ne no manner stirring, nor sorrowing that serves to sin.
Thus saw I, and felt in the same time; and methought that the sight and the
feeling was high, and plentuous, and gracious, in regard that our common
feeling is in this Life; but yet methought it was but low and small, in regard
of the great desire that the Soul has to see God: For I felt in me five manner
of workings, which be these; Enjoying, Mourning, Desire, Dreed, and true Hope.
Enjoying for God, gave me understanding, and knowing that it was himself that I
saw Mourning, and that was for feeling desire, that was that I might see him
for ever more and more; understanding and knowing, that we shall never have
full rest, till we see him clearly and verily in Heaven. Dreed was, for it
seemed to me in all that time, that sight should fail, and I to be left to my
self. True hope, was in the endless Love that I saw, that I should be kept by
his Mercy, and brought to the bliss. And the joying in his sight, with this
true Hope of his merciful keeping, made me to have Feeling and Comfort: So that
Mourning and dreed were not greatly painful. And yet in all this, I beheld in
the showing of God, that this manner sight of him may not be continuant in this
Life; and that for his own Worship, and for increase of our endless joy. And
therefore we fail oftentimes of the sight of him: And anon we fall into our
self, and then find we feeling of right naught but the contrarious that is in
our self. And that of the old Root of our first sin, with all that follows of
our own continuance: And in this we be traveled and tempted, with feeling of
sin and of pain in many diverse manner, Ghostly and Bodily, as it is known to
us in this Life.

The xlviij. Chapter.
BUt our good Lord the Holy Ghost, which is endless Life dwelling in our Soul,
full truly keeps us, and works therein a Peace, and brings it to ease by
Grace, and makes it i e. complyant.
buxom, and accords it to God. And this is the Mercy and the Way that our
good Lord continually leads us in, as long as we be in this Life, which is
changeable: For I saw no Wrath but on man's party, and that forgiveth he in us:
For Wrath is not else but a frowardness, and a contrariousness to Peace and
Love. And either it comes of feeling of Might, or of feeling of Wisdom, or of
feeling of Goodness: which feeling is not of God, but it is in our party; for
we by sin and wretchedness have in us a Wrath, and a continuant contrariousness
to Peace and to Love. And that showed he full often in his lovely Cheer of ruth
and pity: For the ground of Mercy is in Love, and the working of Mercy is our
keeping in Love: And this was showed in such a manner, that I could not
perceive of the property of Mercy otherwise, but as it were all Love in Love;
that is to say, as to my sight, Mercy is a sweet gracious working in Love, ie.
mingled.
meddled with plenteous pity; for Mercy works, us keeping; and Mercy works
turning to us all thing to good: Mercy for Love suffers us to fail by
measure, and in as much as we fail, in so much we fall; and in as much as we
fall, in so much we die: For us behooveth needs to die, in as much as we fail
sight and feeling of God, that is our life. Our failing is dreadful, our
falling is shameful; and our dying is sorrowful. But yet in all this the sweet
eye of pity and love departs never from us, ne the working of Mercy cease
not: For I beheld the property of Mercy, and I beheld the property of Grace,
which have two manner of Working in one Love: Mercy is a pitiful property,
which longs to Mother-hood in tender Love: And Grace is a Worshipful property
which longs to Royal Lordship in the same Love. Mercy works, keeping,
suffering, quickening, and healing, and all is of tenderness of Love: And Grace
works with Mercy, raising, rewarding, endlesly over-passing, that our Loving,
and our Travel deserves, spreading abroad, and showing the high plenteousness,
largeness of Gods Royal Lordship in his mavelous courtesy. And this is of
the abundance of Love; for Grace works our dreadful failing into plenteous
and endless solace: And Grace works our shameful falling into high Worshipful
rising; and Grace works our sorrowful dying into Holy blissful Life: For I
saw full truly, that ever as our contrariousness works to us here in Earth,
pain, shame, and sorrow. Right so on the contrariwise, Grace works to us in
Heaven, Solace, Worship, and Bliss; and over-passing so far forth, that when we
come up and receive that sweet Reward which Grace has wrought to us there, we
shall thank and bless our Lord endlesly, enjoying that ever we suffered Woe;
and that shall be for a property of blessed Love that we shall know in God,
which we might never have known without Woe going before. And when I saw all
this, me behooved needs to grant that the Mercy of God and the Forgiveness
slacketh and wastes our Wrath.

The xljx. Chapter.
FOr it was an high marvel to the Soul which was continuantly showed in all,
and with great diligence, beholding that our Lord God aneynst himself may not
forgive, for he may not be Wrath. It were unpossible; for this was showed, that
our Life is all grounded and rooted in Love, and without Love we may not live.
And therefore to the Soul, that of his special Grace, sees so far forth of the
high mavelous goodness of God, that we be endlesly oned to him in Love: It is
the most unpossible that may be, that God should be Wrath; for Wrath and
Friendship be two Contraries; for he that wastes and destroys our Wrath, and
makes us meek and mild; it behooveth us needs to believe, that he be ever in
one Love, meek, and mild: Which is contrary to Wrath, for I saw full truly,
that where our Lord appears, Peace is taken, and Wrath has no i e: place
steed: For I saw no manner of Wrath in God, neither for short time, nor for
long; for truly as so my sight, if God might be Wrath a while, we should
neither have Life, ne steed, ne being; for as verily as we have our being of
the endless Might of God, and of the endless Wisdom, and of the endless
Goodness: Also verily we have our keeping in the endless Might of God, in the
endless Wisdom, and in the endless Goodness. For though we feel in us Wrath,
Debate, and Strife, yet we be all mercifully beclosed in the midhead of God,
and in his meekhead, in his benignity, and in his i e. kindness.
buxomness. For I saw full truly, that all our endless Friendship, our steed,
our life, and our being is in God; for that same endless Goodness that keeps
us when we sin, that we perish not: That same endless Goodness continually
treats in us a Peace against our Wrath, and our contrarious falling, and
makes us to see our need, with a true dread mightily to seek unto God to have
Forgiveness, with a gracious desire of our Salvation, for we may not be
blissfully saved, till we be verily in Peace and in Love, for that is our
Salvation. And though we be Wrath, and the contrariousness that is in us be now
in Tribulation, Disease, and Woe, as falling into our blindness, and our
pronity; Yet be we sure and safe by the merciful keeping of God that we perish
not; but we be not blissfully safe, in having of our endless joy, till we be
all in Peace and in Love; that is to say, full pleased with God, and with all
his Works, and with all his Dooms; and loving and pleasable with our selves,
and with our even Christen, and with all that God loves, as love likes. And
this does Gods Goodness in us. Thus saw I that God is our very Peace; and he is
our sure Keeper, when we be our self at unpeace; and he continually works to
bring us into endless Peace: And thus when by the working of mercy and grace we
be made meek and mild, than we be full safe. Suddenly is the Soul oned to God,
when she is truly peaced in her self; for in him is found no Wrath. And thus I
saw when we be all in Peace and in Love, we find no contrariousness in no
manner of letting. And that contrariousness which is now in us, our Lord God of
his goodness makes it to us full profitable: For contrariousness is cause of
all our Tribulation, and all our Woe: And our Lord Jesu takes them, and
sends them up to Heaven; and then they are made more sweet and delectable
than Heart may think, or Tongue can tell. And when we come thither, we shall
find them ready all turned into very fairness and endless Worship. Thus is God
our steadfast ground, and shall be our full bliss, and make us unchangeable, as
he is when we be there.

The L. Chapter.
ANd in this deadly Life Mercy and Forgiveness is our way, that evermore
leads us to grace. And by the tempest and the sorrow that we fall in on our
party, we be often dead as to man's Doom in Earth; but in the sight of God, the
Soul that shall be safe, was never dead, ne never shall be. But yet here I
wondered and marvelled with all the diligence of my Soul meaning thus; Good
Lord, I see that thou art the very Truth, and I know truly that we sin
grievously all day, and be much blameworthy: And I may neither leave the
knowing of this i e. truth
sooth, nor I see not the showing to us no manner of blame. How may this be?
For I know by the common teaching of Holy Church, and by mine own feeling, that
the blame of our sins continually hangs upon us fro the first man, into the
time that we come up into Heaven. Then was this my marvel, that I saw our Lord
God showing to us no more blame, than if we were as clean, and as holy as
Angels be in Heaven. And between these two contraries, my Reason was greatly
traveled by my blindness, and could have no rest, for dread that his blessed
Presence should pass from my sight, and I to be left in unknowing how he behold
us in our sin; for either me behooved to see in God that sin were all done
away, or else me behooved to see in God how he sees it; whereby I might truly
know how it longs to me to see sin, and the manner of our blame. My longing
endured, him continually beholding; and yet I could have no patience for great
fear and perplexity, thinking if I take it thus, that we be no sinners, nor no
blame worthy; it seems as I should Err, and fail of knowing of this sooth.
And if it be true that we be sinners, and blame worthy, good Lord, how may it
then be that I cannot see this truth in thee; which art my God, my Maker, in
whom I desire to see all truth? For three Points make me hardy to ask it. The
first is, for it is so low a thing, for if it were an high, I should be i e.
fear
adred. The second is, that it is so common; for if it were special and privy
also, I should be adred. The third is, that it needs me to wit, as me
thinks; if I shall live here for knowing of Good and Evil, whereby I may by
reason and by grace the more depart them asunder, and love Goodness, and hate
Evil, as Holy Church teaches. I cried inwardly with all my Might, seeking unto
God for help; meaning thus, Ah Lord Jesu, King of Bliss, How shall I be eased?
Who shall tell me, and teach me that me needs to wit, if I may not at this
time see it in thee?

The lj. Chapter.
ANd then our courteous Lord answered in showing full i e. darkly.
mistely, by a wonderful Example of a Lord that has a Servant, and gave me
sight to my understanding of both: which sight was showed double in the Lord;
and the sight was showed double in the Servant. That one party was showed
Ghostly in bodily likeness. That other party was showed more Ghostly without
bodily likeness. For the first, thus I saw two Persons in bodily likeness; that
is to say, a Lord and a Servant. And therewith God gave me Ghostly
understanding: The Lord sits solemnly in rest and in peace; the Servant
stands before his Lord reverently ready to do his Lords Will: The Lord
looks upon his Servant full lovely, and sweetly, and meekly; he sends him
into a certain place to do his Will. The Servant not only he goes, but
suddenly he starteth, and runs in great haste for Love to do his Lords Will.
And anon he falls in a i e. precipice.
slade, and takes full great sorrow; and then he groneth, and month, and
walloweth, and wrieth; but he may not rise nor help himself by no manner of
way. And of all this the most mischief that I saw him in, was failing of
Comfort; for he could not turn his face to look up on his loving Lord, which
was to him full near, in whom is full Comfort: But as a man that was full
feeble and unwise for the time he intended to his feeling and enduring in Woe.
In which Woe he suffered seven great Pains. The first was the sore brusing that
he took in his falling, which was to him much pain. The second was the
heaviness of his body. The third was feebleness that followed of these two. The
fourth was, that hew as blinded in his Reason, and i e. astonished.
stonnyed in his mind, so farth forth, that almost he had forgotten his own
Love. The fifth was, that he might not rise. The sixth was pain most mavelous
to me; and that was that he lay alone. I looked all about and beheld, and far,
ne near, ne high, ne low; I saw to him no help. The seventh was, that the place
that he lay in, was long, hard, and grievous. I marvelled how this Servant
might thus meekly suffer all this Woe. And I beheld with avisement, to wit, if
I could perceive in him any default; or if the Lord should assign him any
manner of blame. And verily there was none seen; for only his good will and his
great desire was the cause of his falling. And he was as unlothful, and as good
inwardly as he was when he stood before his Lord, ready to do his Will. And
right thus continually, his loving Lord full tenderly beholds him; and now
with a double cheer: One outward full meekly and mildly with great rewth and
pity; and this was of the first. Another inward more Ghostly: And this was
showed with a leading of my understanding into the Lord in restoring, which I
saw him highly enjoy for the worshipful resting, and noble that he will, and
shall bring his Servant to by his plentuous Grace; and this was of the other
showing. And now was my understanding led again into the first, both keeping in
mind: Then said this courteous Lord in his meaning: To my beloved Servant, what
harm and disease he has had, and taken in my service for my love, yea, and for
his good will? It is not reason that I reward him, his ie. fright
frey and his dreed, his hurt and his maym, and all his Woe? and not only this,
but falls it not to me to give him a gift, that be better to him, and more
worshipful than his own heal should have been; or else methinketh I did him no
Grace. And in this, an inward Ghostly showing of the Lords meaning descended
into my Soul, in which I saw, that it behooved needs to be standing his great
goodness and his own worship, that his dear worthy Servant which he loved so
much, should be highly and worshipfully rewarded without end, above that he
should have been if he had not fallen; yea, and so far forth, that his falling
and all his Woe that he has taken thereby, shall be turned into the high
over-passing Worship and endless Bliss: And at this Point, the showing of the
example vanished, and our good Lord led forth my understanding, in sight and in
showing of the Revelation to the end. But notwithstanding all this forth
leading, the marvelling of the example went never from me; for methought it was
given me for answer to my desire: And yet could I not take therein full
understanding to my ease in that time; for in the servant that was showed for
Adam; as I shall say, I saw many diverse properties that might by no manner be
direct to single Adam. And thus in that time I stood mickle in three Knowings;
for the full understanding of this mavelous Example was not given me in that
time. In which misty Example, the privities of the Revelation be yet much hid.
And notwithstanding this, I saw and understood that every showing is full of
privities: And therefore me behooveth now to tell three properties, in which I
am i e somewhat.
somedeal eased. The first is, the beginning of teaching that I understood
there in the same time. The second is, the inward Learning that I have
understood therein since. The third is, all the holy Revelation from the
beginning to the end, which our Lord God of his Goodness brings ofttimes
freely to the sight of my understanding. And these three be so oned as to my
understanding, that I cannot, nor may depart them. And by these three as one, I
have teaching whereby I i e. ought
owe to believe and trust in our Lord God, that of the same Goodness that he
showed it, and for the same end, right so of the same goodness and of the same
end; he shall declare it to us when it is his Will; for twenty years after the
time of the showing, save three months I had teaching inwardly, as I shall say.
It longs to thee to take heed to all the properties and the conditions that
were showed in the Example, though thee think that it be misty and indifferent
to thy sight. I assented wilfully with great desire, seeing inwardly with
avisement all the points and the properties that were showed in the same time,
as far forth as my Wit and my understanding will serve; beginning at my
beholding at the Lord and at the Servant: At the manner of sitting of the Lord,
and the place he sat on; and the color of his Clothing; and the manner of
shape; and his cheer without, and his nobley, and his goodness within: And the
manner of standing of the Servant; and the place where, and how: and his manner
of Clothing, the Color; and the shape at his outward behavior; and at his
inward goodness, and his unlothfulness. The Lord, that sat solemnly in rest and
in peace, I understand that he is God. The Servant that stood before him, I
understood that he was showed for Adam; that is to say, one man was showed that
time, and his falling, to make thereby to be understood how God beholds all
man and his falling: For in the sight of God, all man is one man, and one man
is all man. This man was hurt in his Might, and made full feeble. And he was
stonnyed in his understanding; for he was turned from the beholding of his
Lord, but his Will was kept in Gods sight: for his Will I saw our Lord commend
and approve, but himself was let and blinded of the knowing of this Will:
And this is to him great sorrow, and grievous disease; for neither he sees
clearly his loving Lord, which is to him full meek and mild; nor he sees truly
what himself is in the sight of his loving Lord. And well I wot, that when
these two be wisely and truly seen, we shall get rest and peace here in party.
And the i e. perfect fullness.
fulsomness in the bliss in Heaven by his plentuous Grace: And this was a
beginning of teaching which I saw in the same time, whereby I might come to
knowing, in what manner he beholds us in our sin. And then I saw that only
pain blames and punishes. And our courteous Lord comfort and succoureth.
And ever he is to the Soul in glad cheer, longing and loving to bring us to his
bliss. The place that the Lord sat on was simple, on the Earth barren and
desert, alone in Wilderness; his Clothing was wide and side, and full seemly,
as falls to a Lord: The color of the clothing was Blew as Azure, most sad
and fair; his cheer was merciful: The color of his Face was fair, brown,
white, with full seemly Countenance; his eyes were black, most fair and seemly,
showing full of lovely pity. And within him an heyward long and broad, all full
of endless Heavenliness: And the lovely looking that he looked on his Servant
continually; and namely, in his falling; methought it might melt our Hearts for
love, and burst them in two for joy. This fair looking showed of a seemly i e.
mixture.
medelur, which was mavelous to behold. That one was rewth and pity: That
other joy and bliss: The joy and bliss passes as far the ruth and the pity, as
Heaven is above Earth: the pity was Earthly, and the bliss Heavenly. The rewth
and the pity of the Father was of the falling of Adam, which is his most loved
Creature: The joy and the bliss was of the falling of his dear worthy Son,
which is i e. equal.
even with the Father. The merciful beholding of his lovely cheer, fufilled all
Earth, and descended down with Adam into Hell; with which continuant pity, Adam
was kept fro endless Death. And this Mercy and Pity dwells with mankind, into
the time that we come up into Heaven. But man is blinded in this Life, and
therefore, we may not see our Father God as he is. And what time that he of his
Goodness will show him to man, he shows him i e. friendly.
homely as may, notwithstanding that I saw verily, we ought to know and
believe, that the Father is not man. But his sitting on the Earth barren and
desert, is this to mean: He made man's Soul to be his own City, and his dwelling
Place; which is most pleasing to him of all his Works. And what time Man was
fallen, into sorrow and pain; he was not all seemly to serve of that Noble
Office. And therefore our kind Father would have i e. adorned for him.
dight him none other place, but to sit upon the Earth; abiding mankind, which
is i e. mingled.
meddled with Earth: Till what time by his Grace, his dear worthy Son had
brought again his City into the noble fairness, with his hard travel. The i e.
blewness.
blewhead of that clothing betokens his stedfastness: The i e. brownness
brown-head of his fair face, with the seemly i e. blackness
black-head of the eyes, was most according to show his holy Soberness. The
largeness of his clothing, which was fair flaming about, betokens that he
has beclosed in him all heaviness, and all endless joy and bliss. And this was
showed in a touch; where I saw that my understanding was led into the Lord, in
which I saw him highly i e. rejoice.
enjoy, for the worshipful restoring, that he will and shall bring his Servant
to by his plentious Grace. And yet I marvelled, beholding the Lord and the
Servant before said: I saw the Lord sit solemnly, and the Servant standing
reverently before his Lord: In which Servant is double understanding; one
without, an other within; outward he was clad simple, as a Labourer which was
disposed to travel, and he stood full near the Lord, not even fore anenst him;
but in party aside, and that on the left side. His clothing was a white
Kirtle, single, old, and all defaulted, dyed with sweat of his body; streit
sitting to him, and short as it were an handful beneath the knee; bare, seeming
as it should soon be worn up, ready to be ragged and rent. And in this I
marvelled greatly, thinking, this is now an unseemly clothing for the Servant
that is so highly loved, to stand in before so Worshipful a Lord. And inward in
him was showed a ground of Love; which Love, he had to the Lord, that was even
like to the Love that the Lord had to him. The Wisdom of the Servant saw
inwardly, that there was one thing to do, which should be Worship to the Lord.
And the Servant for Love, having no regard to himself, nor to nothing that
might fall off him, hastily did start and run at the sending of his Lord, to do
that thing which was his Will and his Worship; For it seemed by his outward
clothing, as if he had been a continuant Labourer, and an hard traveller of
long time. And by the inward sight that I had, both in the Lord and in the
Servant, it seemed that he was anaved; that is to say, new beginning for to
travel; which Servant was never sent out before. There was a Treasure in the
Earth which the Lord loved; I marvelled and thought what it might be: And I was
answered in my understanding, it is a meat which is lovesome and pleasing unto
the Lord: For I saw the Lord sit as a man, and I saw neither meat nor drink
wherewith to serve him; this was one marvel. Another marvel was, that this
solemn Lord had no Servant but one, and him he sent out: I beheld, thinking
what Labor it may be that the Servant should do; and then I understood that he
should do the greatest Labor, and the hardest Travel; that is, he should be a
Gardner, delving and i e. ditching.
diking, and sweating, and turning the Earth up and down, and seek the
deepness, and water the Plants in time: And in this he should continue his
Travel, and make sweat-floods to run, and noble plentuousness Fruit to spring,
which he should bring before the Lord, and serve him therewith to his liking;
and he should never turn again, till he had dight this meat all ready, as he
knew that it liked to the Lord: And then he should take this meat, with the
drink, and bear it full Worfully before the Lord. And all this time the Lord
should sit right on the same place, abiding the Servant whom he sent out: And
yet I marvelled fro whence the Servant came: For I saw in the Lord, that he
has within himself endless Life, and all manner of Goodness, save the treasure
that was in the Earth: And that was grounded within the Lord in mavelous
deepness of endless Love. But it was not all to his Worship, till his Servant
has thus nobly i e. dressed
dight it, and brought it before him in himself present. And without the Lord
was right naught but Wilderness. And I understood not all what this Example
meant; and therefore I marvelled from whence the Servant came: In the Servant
is comprehended the second Person of the Trinity; and in the Servant is
comprehended Adam; that is to say, all men. And therefore when I say the Son,
it means, the Godhead, which is even with the Father. And when I saw the
Servant, it means Christ's Manhood, which is rightful Adam. By the nearhood of
the Servant, is understood the Son; And by the standing on the left side is
understood Adam. The Lord is God the Father: The Servant is the Son, Jesu
Christ: The Holy Ghost is the even Love that is in them both. When Adam fell,
Gods Son fell for the right oning which was made in Heaven; Gods Son might not
be separate from Adam, for by Adam I understand all man: Adam fell fro Life to
Death into the slade of this wretched World; and after that into Hell. Gods Son
fell with Adam into the slade of the Maidens Womb; which was the fairest
Daughter of Adam; and that was for to excuse Adam from blame in Heaven and in
Earth. And mightily he fetched him out of Hell. By the Wisdom and the Goodness
that was in the Servant, is understood Gods Son; by the poor clothing as a
Labourer standing near the left side, is understood the manhood of Adam, with
all the mischief and feebleness that follows: For in all this our good Lord
showed his own Son and Adam but one man. The Virtue and the Goodness that we
have, is of Jesu Christ. The feebleness and blindness that we have, is of Adam;
which two were showed in the Servant: And thus has our good Lord Jesu taken
upon him all our blame. And therefore our Father may nor will no more blame,
assign to us, than to his own dear worthy Son Jesu Christ. Thus was he the
Servant before his coming into the Earth; standing ready before the Father in
purpose, till what time he would send him to do the worshipful deed; by which
Mankind was brought again into Heaven; that is to say, notwithstanding that he
is God even with the Father, as anenst the Godhead: But in his foreseeing
purpose that he would be Man, to save Man in fulfilling of the Will of his
Father; so he stood before his Father as a Servant, wilfully taking upon him
all our charge. And then he start full readily at the Fathers Will; and anon he
fell full low in the Maidens Womb, having no regard to himself, ne to his hard
Pains. The white Kirtle is the flesh: The single-head is, that there was right
naught between the Godhead and the Manhood: The straitness is Poverty; the
old is of Adams Wearing; the defaulting is the sweat of Adams travel; the
shortness shows the Servant-Labourer. And thus I saw the Son stand, saying in
his meaning: Lo my dear Father, I stand before thee in Adams Kirtle, all ready
to start and to run; I would be in the Earth to thy Worship when it is thy Will
to send me, how long shall I desire it? Full truly i e. knew
wist the Son when it was the Fathers Will; and how long he should desire; that
is to say, as anenst the Godhead, for he is the Wisdom of the Father.
Wherefore this meaning was showed in understanding of the Manhood of Christ:
For all Mankind that shall be saved, by the sweet Incarnation and Passion of
Christ, all is the Manhood of Christ; for he is the Head, and we be his
Members: To which Members the day and the time is unknown, when every passing
Woe and Sorrow shall have an end, and the everlasting Joy and Bliss shall be
fulfilled. Which day and time for to see all the company of Heaven longs and
desires; and all that be under Heaven, which shall come thither, their way is
by longing and desiring: Which desiring and longing was showed in the Servant
standing before the Lord; or else thus, in the Son standing before the Father
in Adams Kirtle: For the longing and desiring of all Mankind that shall be safe
appeared in Jesu; for Jesu is in all that may be safe, and all that be saved is
in Jesu. And all of the Charity of God, with obedience, meekness, and patience,
and virtues that longs to us. Also in this mavelous Example, I have
teaching within me, as it were the beginning of an A. B. C. whereby I may have
some understanding of our Lords meaning: For the privities of the Revelation be
hid therein; notwithstanding that all the shewings be full of privities. The
sitting of the Father betokens the Godhead; that is to say, for showing of
Rest and Peace: For in the Godhead may be no travel. And that he shows
himself as Lord, betokens to our Manhood: The standing of the Servant
betokens travel: and on the left side betokens, that he was not all worthy
to stand even right before the Lord. His starting was the Godhead, and the
running was the Man-head; for the Godhead start fro the Father into the
Maidens Womb, falling into the taking of our kind. And in this falling he took
great sore: The sore that he took was our flesh, in which as soon as he took
it, he had feeling of deadly Pains. By that he stood dreadful before the Lord,
and not even right, betokens that his clothing was not honest to stand even
right before the Lord; nor that might not, nor should not be his Office, whiles
he was a Labourer; nor also he might not sit with the Lord in rest and peace,
till he had won his peace rightfully with his hard travel. And by the left side
that the Father left his own Son wilfully in the manhood, to suffer all man's
pain without sparing of him. By that his Kirtle was at the point to be ragged
and rent; is understood the Rods and Scourges, the Thorns and the Nails; the
drawing and the dragging, his tender flesh renting, as I saw in some part, the
tender flesh was rent from the head-pann, falling on pieces, unto the time the
bleeding failed: And then it began to dry again, cleaving to the bone. And by
the wallowing, and writhing, groaning, and mourning, is understood that he
might never rise all mightily fro that time that he was fallen into the Maidens
Womb, till his body was slain and dead, he yielding the Soul into the Fathers
hand, with all mankind for whom he was sent. And at this point he began first
to show his might: for then he went into Hell. And when he was there, then he
raised up the great root out of the deep deepness, which rightfully was knit to
him in high Heaven. The body lay in the Grave till Easter morrow; and fro that
time he lay never more, for there was rightfully ended the wallowing, and the
writhing, the groaning, and the mourning. And our foul deadly flesh that Gods
Son took upon him which was Adams old Kirtle, strait, bare, and short, then by
our Savior was made fair, new, white, and bright, and of endless cleanness;
wide and side, fairer and richer than was the clothing which I saw on the
Father, for that clothing was blew. And Christ's clothing is now of fair
seemly i e. mixture.
medelour, which is so mavelous that I can it no descrie, for it is all of
very Worship. Now sits not the Lord on Earth in Wilderness, but he sits
on his rich and noble Seat which he made in Heaven most to his liking. Now
stands not the Son before the Father, as a Servant before the Lord,
dreadfully clothed in party naked: but he stands before the Father even
right richly clothed, in blissful largeness with a Crown upon his head of
precious richness: For it was showed that we be his Crown: Which Crown is the
Fathers joy, the Sons Worship, the Holy Ghosts liking: And endless mavelous
bliss to all that be in Heaven. Now stands not the Son before the Father on
the left side as a Labourer; but he sits on the Fathers right hand in
endless rest and peace. But it is not meant that the Son sits on the right
hand beside, as one man sits by another in this Life: For there is no such
sitting as to my sight in the Trinity; but he sits on his Fathers right
hand; that is to say, right in the highest nobility of the Fathers joy. Now is
the Spouse Gods Son in peace with his loved Wife: Which is the fair Maiden, of
endless joy. Now sits the Son very God and very Man in his City in rest and
in peace, which his Father has dight to him of endless purpose: And the Father
in the Son; And the Holy Ghost in the Father and in the Son.

The Lij. Chapter.
ANd thus I saw that God i e. rejoice.
enjoys that he is our Father, and God enjoys that he is our Mother: And
God enjoys that he is our very Spouse, and our Soul his loved Wife: And
Christ enjoys that he is our Brother: And Jesu enjoys that he is our
Savior. These be five high joys, as I understand; in which he will that we
enjoy, him praising, him thanking, him loving, him endlesly blessing, all that
shall be saved, for the time of this Life: we have in us a mavelous i e.
mixture.
medelour both of weal and of woe: We have in us our Lord Jesu Christ up-risen;
and we have in us the wretchedness and the mischief of Adams falling, dying. By
Christ we be lastingly kept; and by his gracious touching we be raised into
very trust of Salvation. And by Adams falling, we be so briken in our feeling
on diverse manners by sin and by sundry pains. In which we be made dark, and so
blind, that unneths we can take any Comfort. But in our meaning, we abide God,
and faithfully trust to have Mercy and Grace. And this is his own working in
us; and of his Goodness opens the eye of our understanding, by which we have
sight, some time more, and sometime less, i e. according as
after that God gives ability to take. And now we be raised into that one, and
now we are suffered to fall into that other. And thus is that meddle so
mavelous in us, that unneths we know of our self, or of our even Christen, in
what way we stand for the marvellousness of this sundry feeling: But that each
holy assent that we assent to God when we feel him, truly willing to be with
him with all our heart, with all our Soul, and with all our might. And then we
hate and despise our evil stirring, and all that might be occasion of sin,
Ghostly and Bodily. And yet nevertheless, when this sweetness is hid, we fall
again into blindness, and so into. Woe and Tribulation on diverse manners. But
then is this our comfort, that we know in our Faith that by the virtue of
Christ which is our Keeper, we assent never thereto. But we grudge there
against, and endure in pain and in woe, praying into that time that he showed
him again to us. And thus we stand in this medelour all the days of our Life:
But he will we trust that he is lastingly with us; and that in three manners.
He is with us Heaven very man, in his own person, us up-drawing: And that was
showed in the Ghostly thirst. And he is with us in Earth, us leading, and that
was showed in the third; where I saw God in a point. And he is with us in our
Soul, endlesly ie. dwelling.
wonning, ruling, and guiding us: And that was showed in the xvjth. as I shall
say. And thus in the Servant was showed the blindness and the mischief of Adams
falling. And in the Servant was showed the Wisdom and the Goodness of Gods Son.
And in the Lord was showed the rewth and the pity of Adams Woe: And in the Lord
was showed the high nobility and endless Worship, that mankind is come to by
the virtue of the Passion and the Death of his dear worthy Son. And therefore
mightily he enjoys in his falling, for the high raising and fulhead of bliss
that mankind is come to, over-passing that we should have had, if he had not
fallen. And thus to see this over-passing nobility, was my understanding led
into God, in the same time that I saw the Servant fall. And thus we have matter
of mourning; for our sin is cause of Christ's pains: and we have lastingly
matter of joy; for endless Love made him to suffer. And therefore the Creature
that sees and feels the working of Love by Grace, hates naught but sin; for
of all thing, as to my sight, Love and Hate be hardest and most unmeasurable
contraries. And notwithstanding all this, I saw and understood this in our
Lords meaning, that we i e. can.
may not in this Life keep us from sin; all holy in full cleanness, as we shall
be in Heaven. But we may well by Grace keep us fro the sins which would lead us
to endless pain, as Holy Church teaches us, and eschew Venial, reasonably i e.
according to
up our might. And if we by our blindness, and our wretchedness any time fall,
that we readily rise, knowing the sweet touching of Grace; and wilfully amend
us upon teaching of Holy Church after that the sin is grievous; and go forth
with God in Love: And neither on that one side fall over low, enclining to
despair; ne on that other side be over richless, as we i e. cared not.
give no force: But meekly know our feebleness, witting that we may not stand
the twinkling of an eye, but with keeping of Grace; and reverently cleave to
God, in him only trusting. For otherwise is the beholding of God, and otherwise
is the beholding of Man. For it longs to man meekly to accuse himself; and it
longs to the proper Goodness of our Lord God courteously to excuse man. And
these be two parties that were showed in the double cheer, in which the Lord
beheld the falling of his loved Servant. That one was showed outward, full
meekly and mildly with great ruth and pity: And that other of inward endless
Love. And right thus will our good Lord that we accuse our self wilfully, and
truly see and know his everlasting Love that he has to us, and his plentuous
Mercy. And thus graciously to see and know both together, is the meek accusing
that our good Lord asks of us: And himself works i e. where.
there it is; and this is the lower party of man's Life. And it was showed in
the outward cheer: In which showing, I saw two parts. The one is the ruful
falling of Man: That other is the worshipful i e satisfaction
asseth that our Lord has made for man. That other cheer was showed inward;
and that was more highly and all one: For the Life and the Virtue that we have
in the lower party is of the higher. And it comes down to us of the kind Love,
of the self by Grace. Between that one and that other is right naught; for it
all is one Love: Which one blessed Love has now in us double Working; for in
the lower party be Pains and Passions, Ruths and Pities, Mercies and
Forgiveness, and such other which be profitable. But in the higher party be
none of these; but all one high Love and mavelous joy: In which mavelous
joy all Pains be wholly destroyed. And in this not only our good Lord showed
our excusing; but also the worshipful nobility that he shall bring us to,
turning all our blame into endless Worship.

The Liij. Chapter.
ANd thus I saw that he will that we know, that he takes no harder the falling
of any Creature that shall be saved; then he took the falling of Adam, which we
know was endlesly loved, and surely kept in the time of all his need; and now
is blessedfully restored in high over-passing joys. For our Lord God is so
good, so gentle, and so courteous, that he may never assign default final, in
whom he shall be ever blessed and praised. And in this that I have now said,
was my desire in party answered, and my great fear some deal eased by the
lovely gracious showing of our Lord God. In which showing I saw and understood
full surely, that in each Soul that shall be safe, is a godly Will that never
assented to sin, ne never shall. Which Will is so good that it may never will
Evil (finally): But evermore continually it wills good, and works good in
the sight of God. Wherefore our Lord will we know it in the Faith and the
Belief: And namely and truly that we have all this blessed Will whole and safe
in our Lord Jesu Christ: For that each kind that Heaven shall be fulfilled
with, behooved needs of Gods rightfulness so to be knit and i e. united.
onid in him, that therein were kept a substance which might never, nor should
be parted from him; and that through his own good Will in his endless foresaid
purpose. And notwithstanding this rightful knitting, and this endless oning,
yet the Redemption, and the again buying of Mankind, is needful and speedful in
every thing, as it is done for the same intent and the same end, that Holy
Church in our Faith us teaches. For I saw that God began never to love
Mankind: For right, the same that mankind shall be in endless bliss (fulfilling
the joy of God as anempts his Works) right so the same Mankind has been in the
foresight of God, known and loved fro without beginning in his rightful intent:
And by the endless intent and assent, and the full accord of all the Trinity,
the mid Person would be Ground and Head of this fair kind; out of whom we be
all come, in whom we be all enclosed, into whom we shall all go; in him
finding our full Heaven in everlasting joy, by the foreseeing purpose of all
the blessed Trinity fro without beginning. For i e. before.
or that he made us he loved us; and when we were made, we loved him. And this
is a love made of the kindly substancial Goodness of the Holy Ghost; mightily
in reason of the Might of the Father, and wise, in mind of the Wisdom of the
Son. And thus is man's Soul made of God; and in the same point knit to God. And
thus I understood that man's Soul is made of naught; that is to say, it is made
but of naught that is made, as thus: When God should make man's body, he took
the slime of the Earth, which is a matter meddled and gathered of all bodily
things; and thereof he made man's body. But to the making of man's Soul, he would
take right naught, but made it. And thus is the kind made rightfully oned to
the Maker; which is substancial kind unmade, that is God. And therefore it is,
that there may, ne shall be right naught between God and man's Soul: And in this
endless Love man's Soul is kept whole, as all the matter of the Revelation
means and shows. In which endless Love we be led and kept of God, and never
shall be lost; for he will that we know that our Soul is a Life; which Life of
his Goodness and his Grace shall last in Heaven without end, him loving, him
thanking, him praising. And right the same that we should be without end, the
same we were treasured in God, and hid, known, and loved fro without beginning.
Wherefore he will we wit that the noblest thing that ever he made is mankind;
and the fullest substance and the highest virtue is the blessed Soul of Christ.
And furthermore he will we wit, that this dear worthy Soul was preciously knit
to him in the making: Which knot is so subtle and so mighty, that it is owned
into God. In which oning it is made endlesly holy. Furthermore he will we wit
that all the Souls that shall be saved in Heaven without end, be knit in this
knot, and oned in this oning, and made Holy in this Holiness.

The Ljv. Chapter.
ANd for the great endless Love that God has to all mankind, he makes no
departing in Love between the blessed Soul of Christ, and the least Soul that
shall be saved: For it is full easy to believe and trust, that the dwelling of
the blessed Soul of Christ is full high in the glorious Godhead. And truly as
I understood in our Lords meaning; Where the blessed Soul of Christ is, there
is the substance of all the Souls that shall be saved by Christ, (in their
Exemplar and final cause.) Highly ie. ought
owe we to enjoy that God dwells in our Soul; and more highly we owe to
enjoy, that our Soul dwells in God. Our Soul is made to be Gods dwelling
place; and the dwelling of our Soul is God, which is unmade. A high
understanding it is inwardly to see and to know that God which is our Maker,
dwells in our Soul. And a higher understanding it is, and more inwardly, to
see and to know our Soul that is made dwells in God in substance: Of which
substance by God we be that we be. And I saw no difference between God and our
substance, but as it were all God. And yet my understanding took, that our
substance is in God; that is to say, that God is God, and our substance is a
Creature in God. For the almighty Truth of the Trinity is our Father: For he
made us, and keeps us in him: And the deep Wisdom of the Trinity is our
Mother, in whom we be closed: And the high Goodness of the Trinity is our Lord,
and in him we be closed, and he in us. We be closed in the Father, and we be
closed in the Son, and we be closed in the Holy Ghost. And the Father is
beclosed in us; the Son is beclosed in us; and the Holy Ghost is beclosed in
us: All Might, all Wisdom, and all Goodness, one God, one Lord. And our Faith
is a virtue that comes of our kind substance into our sensual Soul by the Holy
Ghost. In which virtue all our virtues come into us; for without that, no man
may receive virtues; for it is naught else but a right understanding, with true
belief, and sure trust of our being that we be in God, and he in us, which we
see not. And this virtue with all others that God has ordained to us coming
therein, works in us great things; for Christ mercifully is working in us:
And we graciously according to him through the gift and the virtue of the Holy
Ghost. This working makes that we be Christ's Children, and Christen in Lyving.

The lv. Chapter.
ANd thus Christ is our way, us surely leading in his Laws. And Christ in his
body mightily bears as up into Heaven. For I saw that Christ, us all having
in him that shall be saved by him, Worshipfully presents his Father in Heaven
with us; which present full thankfully his Father receives, and courteously
gives it unto his Son Jesu Christ. Which Gift and Working is joy to the
Father, and bliss to the Son, and liking to the Holy Ghost. And of all thing
that to us longs, it is most liking to our Lord that we enjoy in this joy,
which is in the blessed Trinity of our Salvation. And this was seen in the
Ninth Showing, where it speaks more of this matter. And notwithstanding all
our feeling, woe or weal, God will, we understand and believe, that we we more
verily in Heaven, than in Earth. Our Faith comes of the kind Love of our Soul,
and of the clear light of our Reason, and of the steadfast mind which we have of
God in our first making. And what time our Soul is inspired in our body, in
which we be made sensual, as soon Mercy and Grace begin to work; having of us
cure and keeping with pity and love. In which Working the the Holy Ghost
forms in our Faith hope, that we shall come again up above to our substance
into the virtue of Christ, increased and fulfilled through the Holy Ghost. Thus
I understood that the sensuality is grounded in kind, in Mercy and in Grace:
Which ground ableth us to receive Gifts that lead us to endless Life: for I saw
full surely that our substance is in God. And also I saw that in our sensuality
God is; for in the same point that our Soul is made sensual, in the same point
is the City of God ordained to him from without beginning. In which City he
comes, and never shall remove it; For God is never out of the Soul, in which
he shall dwell blessedly without end. And this was said in the xvjth. showing,
where it says, The place that Jesu takes in our Soul, he shall never remove
it. And all the Gifts that God may give to the Creature, he has given to his
Son Jesu for us. Which Gifts he ie. dwelling.
wonning in us has beclosed in him, into the time that we be waxen and grown,
our Soul with our Body, and our Body with our Soul; either of them take help of
other till we be brought up into stature, as kind works. And then in the
ground of kind, with working of Mercy, the Holy Ghost graciously enspireth into
us Gifts leading to endless Life. And thus was my understanding led of God to
see in him, and to wit, to understand and to know, that our Soul is a made
Trinity, like to the unmade blessed Trinity, known and loved from without
beginning; and in the making oned to the Maker, as it is before said. This
sight was full sweet and mavelous to behold, peaceable and restful, sure and
delectable. And for the worshipful oning that was thus made of God between the
Soul and the Body, it behooved needs to be, that mankind should be restored fro
double death: Which restoring might never be into the time that the second
Person in the Trinity had taken the lower party of mankind; to whom that
highest was oned in the first making. And these two parties were in Christ, the
higher and the lower, which is but one Soul: The higher party was ever in peace
with God in full joy and bliss: The lower party, which is sensuality, suffered
for the Salvation of mankind. And these two parties were seen and felt in the
viijth. Showing; in which my body was fulfilled of feeling, and mind of Christ's
Passion, and his dying. And furthermore, with this was a subtle feeling and a
privy inward sight of the high parts. And that was showed in the same time,
where I might not for the mean profer look up into Heaven: And that was for
that each mighty beholding of the inward Life: Which inward Life is that high
substance that precious Soul which is endless enjoying in the Godhead.

The lvj. Chapter.
ANd thus I saw full surely that it is ready to us, and more easy, to come to
the knowing of God, than to know our own Soul. For our Soul is so deep grounded
in God, and so endlesly treasured, that we may not come to the knowing thereof,
till we have first knowing of God; which is the Maker to whom it is oned. But
notwithstanding, I saw that we have kindly of fulhead to desire wisely and
truly to know our own Soul, whereby we be learned to seek it i e. where.
there it is, and that is into God. And thus by the gracious leading of the
Holy Ghost we shall know him both in one. Whether we be stirred to know God or
our Soul, it is both good and true. God is more nearer to us than our own Soul;
for he is ground in whom our Soul stands, and he is mean that keeps the
substance and the sensuality together, so that it shall never depart: For our
Soul sits in God in very rest, and our Soul stands in God in sure
strength: And our Soul is kindly rooted in God in endless Love. And therefore
if we will have knowing of our Soul, and commoning, and daliance therewith, it
behooveth to seek into our Lord God, in whom it is enclosed. And of this
enclosing, I saw and understood more in the xvjth Showing, as I shall say. And
as aneinst our substance it may rightly be called our Soul: And aneinst our
sensuality it may rightly be called our Soul; and that is by the oning that it
has in God. That worshipful City that our Lord Jesu sits in it is our
sensuality in which he is enclosed. And our kindly substance is beclosed in
Jesu, with the blessed Soul of Christ sitting in rest in the Godhead. And I
saw full surely that it behooveth needs to be, that we should be in longing,
and in Penance, into the time that we be led so deep into God; that we verily
and truly know our own Soul. And surely I saw, that into this high deepness our
good Lord himself leads us in the same Love that he made us, and in the same
Love he bought us by Mercy and Grace, through virtue of his blessed Passion;
and notwithstanding all this, we may never come to the full knowing of God,
till we know first clearly our own Soul; for into the time that it is in the
full mights, we may not be all holy; and that is, that our sensuality by the
virtue of Christ's Passion, be brought up into the substance, with all the
profits of our tribulation that our Lord shall make us to get by Mercy and
Grace. I had in party touching, and it is grounded in kind; that is to say, our
reason is grounded in God, which is substancially kindness. Of this substancial
kindness, Mercy and Grace springs, and spreads into us, working all things
in fulfilling of our joy. These be our grounds in which we have our being, our
increase, and our fulfilling; for in kind, we have our Life and our Being, and
in Mercy and Grace, we have our increase and our fulfilling. It be three
properties in one goodness: And where that one works all worken in the thing
that belongen to us. God will we understand, desiring with all our heart, and
with all our strength, to have knowing of them ever more and more, into the
time that we be fulfilled: For fully to know them, and clearly to see them is i
e. naught.
not else but endless joy and bliss that we shall have in Heaven, which God
will we begin here in knowing of his Love; for only by our reason we may not
profit: But if we have evenly therewith mind and Love: ne only in our kindly
ground that we have in God, we may not be saved, but if we have, coming of the
same ground, Mercy and Grace. For of these three Workings, altogether we
receive all our goods; of which, the first be goods of kind. For in our first
making, God gave us as much good, and as great good, as we might receive only
in our spirit: But his foreseeing purpose in his endless Wisdom, would that we
were double.

The Lvij. Chapter.
ANd against our substance, he made us so noble, and so rich, that evermore we
work his Will and his Worship; there I say, We, it means man that shall be
saved. For truly I saw that we be that he loves, and do that him likes,
lastingly without any stinting. And of this, great riches; and of this, high
noble virtues by measure come to our Soul, what time that it is knit to our
body: In which knitting we be made sensual. And thus in our substance we be
full, and in our sensuality we fail; which failing God will restore and fulfill
by working of Mercy and Grace, plenteously flowing into us of his own kind
goodness. And thus this kind goodness makes that Mercy and Grace works in
us. And the kind goodness that we have of him, ableth us to receive the working
of Mercy: and Grace. I saw that our kind is in God whole; in which he makes
diversities flowing out of him to work his will; whose kind keeps, and Mercy
and Grace restores and fulfilleth. And of these none shall be perished; for
our kind which is the higher party, is knit to God in the making, and God is
knit to our kind, which is the lower party in our flesh taking. And thus in
Christ our two kinds be oned: For the Trinity is comprehended in Christ, in
whom our higher party is grounded and rooted; and our lower party the second
person has taken, which kind first to him was a dight. For I saw full truly,
that all the Works that God has done, or ever shall, were full known to him,
and before seen fro without beginning. And for Love he made mankind; and for
the same Love himself would become Man. The next good that we receive is our
Faith, in which our profiting begins; and it becomes of the high riches of
our kind substance into our sensual Soul; and it is grounded in us, and we in
that, through the kind goodness of God, by the working of Mercy and Grace. And
thereof come all our goods, by which we be led and saved; for the Commandments
of God come therein: In which we owe to have two manner of understanding: That
one is, that we owe to understand and know which be his bidings, to love them,
and to keep them. That other is, that we owe to know his forbiddings, to hate
them, and to refuse them: for in these two is all our working comprehended.
Also in our Faith come the Seven Sacraments, each following other in order as
God has ordained them to us, and all manner virtues; for the same virtues that
we have received of our substance given to us in kind of the Goodness of God,
the same virtues by the working of Mercy be given to us in Grace through the
Holy Ghost renewed: Which virtues and gifts are treasured to us in Jesu Christ;
for in that same time that God knit him to our body in the Maidens Womb, he
took our sensual Soul. In which taking he, us all having beclosed in him, he
oned it to our substance. In which oning he was perfect man; for Christ having
knit in him all man that shall be saved, is perfect man. Thus our Lady is our
Mother, in whom we be all beclosed, and of her born in Christ; for she that is
Mother of our Savior, is Mother of all that be saved in our Savior. And our
Savior is our very Mother, in whom we be endlesly born, and never shall come
out of him. Plentuously, fully, and sweetly was this showed: And it is spoken
of in the first, where it is said, We be all in him beclosed, and he is
beclosed in us. And that is spoken of in the xvjth. Showing, where he he says,
He sits in our Soul; for it is his liking to reign in our understanding
blessedfully, and sits in our Soul restfully: and to dwell in our Soul
endlesly, us all working into him. In which working he will we be his helpers,
giving to him all our intent, learning his Laws, keeping his lore, desiring
that all bedone that he does, truly trusting in him; for verily I saw that all
our substance is in God.

The Lviij. Chapter.
GOD the blessedful Trinity which is everlasting being, right as he is endless
from without beginning; right so it was in his purpose endless to make mankind:
Which fair kind first was dight to his own Son the second Person; and when he
would by full accord of all the Trinity, he made us all at ones. And in our
making he knit us, and oned us to himself: By which oning, we be kept as clean,
and as noble as we were made; by the virtue of that each precious oning, we
love our Maker, and like him, praise him, and thank him, and endlesly enjoy in
him. And this is the working which is wrought continually in each Soul that
shall be saved; which is the godly Will before said. And thus in our making God
Almighty is our kindly Father. And God all Wisdom is our kindly Mother, with
the Love and the Goodness of the Holy Ghost, which is all one God, one Lord.
And in the knitting, and in the oning he is our very true Spouse, and we his
loved Wife, and his fair Maiden; with which Wife he was never displeased, for
he says, I love thee, and thou love me, and our love shall never part in
two. I beheld the working of all the blessed Trinity. In which beholding, I saw
and understood these three properties; the property of the Father-head, and the
property of the Mother-head, and the property of the Lordship in one God. In
our Father Almighty we have our keeping, and our bliss. And aneynst our kindly
substance, which is to us by our making fro without beginning. And in the
second Person, in Wit and Wisdom we have our keeping: And aneynst our
sensuality, our restoring, and our saving; for he is our Mother, Brother, and
Savior. And in our good Lord the Holy Ghost we have our rewarding, and our
yielding for our living and our travel, and endlesly over-passing all that we
desire in his mavelous courtesy of his high plentuous Grace; for all our
Life is in three: In the first our being: And in the second, we have our
increasing: And in the third, we have our fulfilling. The first is kind; the
second is Mercy; the third is Grace. For the first, I saw and understood, that
the high might of the Trinity is our Father, and the deep Wisdom of the Trinity
is our Mother, and the great Love of the Trinity is our Lord. And all these
have we in kind, and in our substantial making. And furthermore, I saw that the
second Person which is our Mother substancially, the same deer worthy Person is
now become our Mother sensual; for we be double of Gods making; that is to say,
substancial and sensual. Our substance is the higher party which we have in our
Father God Almighty: And the second Person of the Trinity is our Mother in
kind, in our substancial making, in whom we be grounded and rooted: And he is
our Mother of Mercy, in our sensuality taking. And thus our Mother is to us
diverse manner working, in whom our parts be kept undeparted: For in our Mother
Christ we profit and increase; and in Mercy he reformeth us and restores. And
by the virtue of his Passion, his Death, and his Uprising oned us to our
substance. This works our Mother in mercy to all his beloved Children, which
be to him buxom and obedient: And grace works with mercy, and namely in two
properties, as it was showed. Which working longs to the third Person the
Holy Ghost; he works rewarding and giving. Rewarding is a gift of trust that
the Lord does to them that has traveled. And giving is a courteous Working
which he does freely of grace, fulfilling and over-passing all that is deserved
of Creatures. Thus in our Father God Almighty we have our being. And in our
Mother of mercy Jesu Christ, we have our reforming, and our restoring, in whom
our parts be oned, and all made perfect man: And by yielding and giving in
grace of the Holy Ghost we be fulfilled, and our substance is in our Father,
God Almighty: And our substance is in our Mother God all Wisdom: And our
substance is in our Lord God the Holy Ghost, all goodness; for our substance is
whole in each person of the Trinity, which is one God. And our sensuality is
only in the second Person, Christ Jesu, in whom is the Father and the Holy
Ghost. And in him, and by him, we be mightily taken out of Hell, and out of the
wretchedness in Earth; and worshipfully brought up into Heaven, and
blessedfully oned to our substance; increased in Riches and Nobly, by all the
virtue of Christ, and by the grace and working of the Holy Ghost.

The Ljx. Chapter.
ANd all this bliss we have by mercy and grace: Which manner bliss we might
never have had and known; but if that property and goodness which is in God had
been contraried, whereby we have this bliss: For wickedness has been suffered
to rise contrary to that goodness; and the goodness of mercy and grace
contraried against that wickedness; and turned all to goodness and worship to
all that shall be saved: For it is that property in God which does good against
evil. Thus Jesu Christ that does good against evil is our very Mother. We have
our being of him, where the ground of Mother-head begins, with all the sweet
keeping of Love that endlesly follows. As verily as God is our Father; as
verily is God our Mother; and that showed he in all; and namely, in these sweet
words there he says, I it am; that is to say, I it am, the Might and the
Goodness of the Father-head: I it am, the Wisdom and the Kindness of the
Mother-head: I it am, the Light and the Grace, that is all blessed Love: I it
am, the Trinity: I it am, the Unity: I it am, the high Sovereign Goodness of
all manner thing: I it am, that makes thee to long: I it am, the endless
fulfilling of all true desires. For there the Soul is highest, noblest, and
worshipfullest, yet it is lowest, meekest, and mildest. And of this
substancioal ground we have all our Virtues in our sensuality by gift of kind,
and by helping, and speeding of mercy and grace; without which we may not
profit. Our high Father Almighty God, which is being, he knows us, and loved
us fro before any time. Of which knowing in his full mavelous deep Charity,
by the foreseeing endless counsel of all the blessed Trinity; he would that
the second Person should become our Mother, our Brother, and our Savior.
Whereof it follows, that as verily as God is our Father, verily God is our
Mother. Our Father wills, our Mother works. Our good Lord the Holy Ghost
confirms; and therefore it longs to us to love our God in whom we have our
being, him reverently thanking and praising of our making, mightily praying to
our Mother of mercy and pity, and to our Lord the Holy Ghost, of help and
grace: for in these three is all our Life, Kind, Mercy, and grace: Whereof we
have mild-head, patience and pity, and hating of Sin and Wickedness, for it
longs properly to virtues to hate Sin and Wickedness. And thus is Jesu our
very Mother in kind of our first making: And he is our very first Mother in
Grace by taking of our kind made; all the fair Working, and all the sweet
kindly Offices of dear worthy Mother-head is i e. appropriated.
impropred to the second Person: For in him we have this goodly Will whole and
safe without end, both in Kind and in Grace, of his own proper goodness. I
understood three manner of beholdings of Mother-head in God. The first is,
ground of our kind Making. The second is, taking of our kind, and there
begins the Mother-head of Grace. The third is, Mother-head in Working. And
therein is a forth-speeding by the same Grace; of length, and breadth, of height
and of deepness without end, and all is one Love.

The Lx. Chapter.
BUt now me behooveth to see a little more of this forth-spreading, as I
understood in the meaning of our Lord; how that we be brought again by the
Mother-head of Mercy and Grace into our kindly steed, where that we were in
made by the Mother-head of kind Love; which kind Love never leaves us. Our
kind Mother, our gracious Mother; for he would all whole become our Mother in
all thing; he took the ground of his Work full low, and full mildly in the
Maidens Womb. And that showed he in the first, where he brought the meek Maiden
before the eye of my understanding, in the simple stature as she was when he
conceived; that is to say, our high God the severeign Wisdom of all. In this
low place he arraid him, and dight him all ready in our poor flesh, himself to
do the service and the office of Mother-hood in all thing. The Mothers service
is nearest, readiest and surest. Nearest, for it is most of kind; readiest, for
it is most of Love; and sikerest, for it is most of Truth. This Office, ne
might, nor could never none done to the full, but he alone. We wit that all our
Mothers bear us to Pain and to dying. What is that but our very Mother Jesu? He
alone bears us to joy, and to endless living, blessed mote he be. Thus he
sustained us within him, in Love and Travel, into the full time that he would
suffer the sharpest Thorns, and grievous Pains that ever were, or ever shall
be, and died at the last. And when he had done, and so borne us to Bliss, yet
might not all this i e. give satisfaction
make asseeth to his mavelous Love. And that he showed in these high
over-passing Words of Love; If I might suffer more I would suffer more. He
might no more die, but he would not stint working. Wherefore him behooveth to
find us, for the dear worthy Love of Motherhood has made him debtor to us. The
Mother may give her Child to suck her milk; but our precious Mother Jesu he may
feed us with himself, and does full courteously, and full tenderly with the
Blessed Sacrament; that is precious food of very Life, and with all the sweet
Sacraments he sustaineth us full mercifully, and graciously. And so meant he in
these blessed Words, where he said, I it am that Holy Church preaches thee,
and teaches thee; that is to say, all the Health and the Life of the
Sacraments; all the Virtue and the Grace of my Word; all the goodness that is
ordained in Holy Church to thee; I it am. The Mother may lay her Child tenderly
to her Breast; but our tender Mother Jesu he may homely lead us into his
blessed Breast by his sweet open side, and show us there in party of the
Godhead, and the joys of Heaven, with Ghostly sureness of endless bliss. And
that showed he in the jxth. Revelation, giving the same understanding in this
sweet Word, where he says, Lo how I love thee; behold into his blessed side
enjoying. This fair lovely Word, Mother, it is so sweet and so kind in it self,
that it may not verily be said of none, ne to none but of him, and to him, that
is very Mother of Life and of all. To the property of Mother-head longs kind
Love, Wisdom, and Knowing; and it is God: For though it be so, that our bodily
forth-bringing be but little, low, and simple, in regard of our Ghostly
forth-bringing, yet it is he that does it in the Creatures, by whom that it is
done. The kind loving Mother that wotteth; and knows the need of her Child,
she keeps it full tenderly, as the kind and condition of Mother-head will;
and ever as it waxes in Age and in Stature, she changes the Works, but not
her Love: And when it is waxed of more Age, she suffers that it be chastised;
in breaking down of Vices, to make the Child receive Virtues and Grace. This
Working with all that be fair and good, our Lord does it in him by whom it is
done. Thus he is our Mother in kind by the working of Grace in the lower party,
for love of the higher. And he will that we know it; for he will have all our
Love fastened to him. And in this I saw that all debt that we owe by Gods
bidding to Father-head and Mother-head, is fulfilled in true loving of God:
Which blessed Love Christ works in us. And this was showed in all; And
Namely, in the High plentuous Words, where he says; I it am that thou Love.

The Lxj. Chapter.
ANd in our Ghostly forth-bringing he uses more tenderness in keeping, without
any comparison; by as much as our Soul is of more price in his sight: He
kindles our understanding; he prepares our ways; he eases our Conscience;
he comfort our Soul; he lights our Heart, and gives us in party knowing,
and loving in his blessedful Godhead, with gracious mind in his sweet
Manhood, and his blessed Passion; with courteous marvelling in his high
over-passing goodness; and makes us to love all that he loves for his Love,
and to be well apaid with him, and with all his Works. And when we fall
hastily, he raises us by his lovely i e. embracing.
beclipping, and his gracious Touching. And when we be strengthened by his
sweet working, then we wilfully choose him by his Grace, to be his Servants,
and his Lovers, lastingly without end. And yet after this he suffers some of
us to fall more hard, and more grievous than ever we did before, as us
thinks. And then i e. judge
wene we that we be not all wise, that all were naught that we have begun but
it is not so: For it needs us to fall, and it needs us to see it; for if we
fell not, we should not know how feeble, and how wretched we be of our self,
nor also we should not so i e. fully
fulsomely know the mavelous Love of our Maker; for we shall verily see in
Heaven without end, that we have grievously sinned in this Life. And
notwithstanding this, we shall verily see that we were never hurt in his
(eternal) Love, nor we were never the less of price in his sight. And by the
assey of this falling, we shall have an high and a mavelous knowing of Love
in God without end: For hard and mavelous is that Love which may not, nor
will not be broken for trespass. And this was one understanding of profit. An
other is the lowness and meekness that we shall get by the sight of our
falling; for thereby we shall highly be raised in Heaven: To which rising we
might never have come without that meekness. And therefore it needed us to see
it; and if we see it not, though we feel it, it should not profit us. And
commonly first we fall, and sithen we see it, and both is of the mercy of God.
The Mother may suffer the Child to fall some time, and be diseased in diverse
manners for the own profit; but she may never suffer that any manner of peril
come to her Child, for Love. And though our earthly Mother may suffer her Child
to perish, our Heavenly Mother Jesu may never suffer us that be his Children to
perish; for he is all Mighty, all Wisdom, and all Love: And so is none but he,
blessed mote he be. But ofttimes when our Falling and our Wretchedness is
showed us, we be sore adread, and so greatly ashamed of our self, that unneths
we wit where that we may hold us. But then will not our courteous Mother that
we flee away: For him were nothing i e. more unwilling.
lother. But he will then that we use the condition of a Child: For when it is
diseased and afraid, it runs hastily to the Mother; and if it may do no
more, it cries on the Mother for help, with all the might; so will he that we
done as the meek Child, saying thus: My kind Mother, my gracious Mother, my
dear worthy Mother, have mercy upon me; I have made my self foul, and unlike to
thee, and I may not, nor can amend it, but with thine Help and Grace. And if we
feel us not than eased as soon, be we sure that he uses the condition of a wise
Mother: For if he see that it be for profit to us to mourn and to weep, he
suffers with ruth and pity into the best time for Love. And he will then that
we use the property of a Child, that evermore kindly trusts to the Love of
the Mother, in Weal and in Woe. And he will that we take us mightily to the
Faith of Holy Church, and find there our dear worthy Mother in solace and true
understanding, with all the blessed i e. community of Christians.
Common: For one singular person may oftentimes be broken, as it seems to the
self, but the whole body of Holy Church was never broken, ne never shall be
without end. And therefore a sure thing it is, a good and a gracious, to will
meekly, and mightily be fastened and oned to our Mother Holy Church, that is
Christ Jesu. For the flood of Mercy; that is his dear worthy Blood and and
precious Water is plentuous to make us fair and clean. The blessed Wounds of
our Savior be open and i e. rejoice.
enjoy to heal us. The sweet gracious Hands of our Mother be ready and diligent
about us; for he in all this Working uses the very Office of a kind Nurse that
has naught else to done, but to entend to the Salvation of her Child. It is
his Office to save us; It is his Worship to do it; and it is his Will we know
it: For he will we love him sweetly, and trust in him meekly and mightily. And
this showed he in these gracious words, I keep thee full surely.

The Lxij. Chapter.
FOr in that time he showed our frailty and our Fallings, our Breakings and our
Naughtings, our Despites and our Chargings, and all our Woe, as far forth as me
thought that it might fall in this Life. And therewith he showed his blessed
Might, his blessed Wisdom, his blessed Love, that he keeps us in this time as
tenderly, and as sweetly to his Worship, and as surely to our Salvation, as he
does when we be in most solace and comfort. And thereto raises us Ghostly and
Highly in Heaven, and turns all to his Worship, and to our Joy without end.
For his precious Love he suffers us never to loose time, (Since all things
turn to our greater good.) And all this is of the kind goodness of God by the
working of Grace. God is i e. nature.
kind in his being; that is to say, that goodness that is kind, it is God; He
is the ground, he is the substance, he is the same thing that is kindness: And
he is very Father and very Mother of kinds: And all kinds that he has made to
flow out of him to work his Will, it should be restored and brought again into
him by Salvation of man, through the working of Grace. For of all kinds that he
has set in diverse Creatures by party, in man is all the whole in full head; and
in virtue, in fair-head, and in good-head, in Rialty and in Noblety, in all
manner of Solemnity of Preciousness and Worship. Here may we see that we be all
bound to God for kind, and we be bound to God for Grace. Here may we see that
us needs not greatly to seek far out to know sundry kinds, but to Holy Church
into our Mothers breast; that is to say, into our own Soul, where our Lord
dwells: And there should we find all now, in Faith and in Understanding; and
after verily in himself clearly in bliss. But no Man, ne Woman take this
singularity to himself; for it is not so, it is general: For it is our precious
Mother Christ, and to him was this fair kind i e. appropriated.
dight, for the Worship and the Nobly of man's making, and for the joy and the
bliss of man's Salvation, right as he saw, wist and knew from without beginning.

The Lxiij. Chapter.
HEre may we see that we have verily of i e. nature.
kind to hate sin. And we have verily of grace to hate sin, for kind is all
good and fair in it self: And grace was sent out to save kind, and keep kind,
and destroy sin, and bring again fair kind into the blessed Point fro thence it
came; that is, God, with more Nobleness and Worship by the virtuous working of
grace; for it shall be seen before God, of all his Holy in joy without end,
that kind has been assaid in the fire of Tribulation, and therein found no
lack, nor no default. Thus is kind and grace of one accord; for Grace is God,
as unmade kind is God: He is two in manner working, and one in Love. And
neither of them works without other, ne none be departed. And when we by the
mercy of God, and with his help accord us to kind and to grace, we shall see
verily that sin is worse, viler and painfuller than Hell, without any likeness:
For it is contrarious to our fair kind; for as verily as sin is unclean, as
truly sin is i e. unnatural.
unkind. And this is an horrible thing to see, to the loving Soul that would be
all fair and shining in the sight of God, as kind and grace teaches. But be we
not adread of this, but in as much as dread may speed; but meekly make we our
moan to our dear worthy Mother, and he shall all besprinckle us in his precious
blood, and make our Soul full soft, and full mild, and heal us full fair by
process of time, right as it is most worship to him, and joy to us without end.
And of this sweet fair working he shall never cease nor stint, till all his
dear worthy Children be brought forth and born. And that showed he where he
gave the understanding of the Ghostly thirst; that is, the Love-longing that
shall last till Doomes-day. Thus in our very Mother Jesu our Life is grounded
in the foreseeing wisdom of himself fro without beginning, with the high might
of the Father, and the sovereign goodness of the Holy Ghost. And in the taking
of our kind he quicked us; and in his blessed dying upon the Cross he bare us
to endless Life. And fro that time, and now and ever shall into Doomes-day, he
feeds us and i e. nourishes.
fordreth us, right as the high sovereign Kindness of Mother-head will, and as
the kindly need of Child-head asks. Fair and sweet is our Heavenly Mother
Jesu in the sight of our Soul; precious and lovely be the gracious Children in
the sight of our Heavenly Mother: With mildness and meekness, and all that fair
virtues that long to Children in kind; for i e. naturally.
kindly the Child dispaireth not of the Mothers Love: kindly the Child
presumes not of it self; kindly the Child loves the Mother, and each one of
them other. These be as fair Virtues with all other that be like, wherewith our
Heavenly Mother is served and pleased. And I understood none higher stature in
this Life than Childhood in feebleness, and failing of might and of wit, into
the time our gracious Mother has brought us up into that our Fathers bliss.
And there shall it verily be made known to us, his meaning in the sweet Words,
where he says, All shall be well, and thou shall see it thy self that all
manner of thing shall be well.

The Fifteenth Revelation. The Lxjv. Chapter.
ANd then shall the bliss of our Mother-head in Christ be new to begin in the
joys of our Father God: Which new beginning shall last without end. Now
beginning thus, I understood, that all his blessed Children which be come out
of him by kind, should be brought into him again by grace. Before this time I
had great longing and desire of Gods gift to be delivered of this World, and of
this Life; for oft-times I beheld the Woe that is here, and the weal and the
blessed being that is there. And if there had no pain been in this Life, but
the absence of our Lord, methought sometime that it was more than I might bear.
And this made me to mourn and busily to long. And also of my own wretchedness,
sloth and weariness that me liked, not to live and to travel as me fell to do.
And to all this our courteous Lord answered for Comfort and Patience, and said
these Words: Suddenly thou shall be taken from all thy Pain, from all thy
Sickness, from all thy Disease, and from all thy Woe. And thou shall come up
above, and thou shall have me to thy meed, and thou shall be fulfilled of joy
and bliss; and thou shall never more have no manner of Pain, no manner of
Sickness, no manner misliking, no wanting of will, but ever joy and bliss
without end. What should it then grieve thee to suffer a while, sithen it is my
Will and my Worship? And in this word (suddenly thou shall be taken.) I saw
that God rewarded man of the patience that he has in abiding of Gods will, and
of his time. And that man i e. lengthneth.
lengeth his patience i e. far above.
over the time of his living; for unknowing the time of his passing. This is a
great profit; for if a man knew his time, he should not have patience over that
time. And also God will that while the Soul is in the body, it seem to it self
that it is ever at the point to be taken (out thereof,) for all this Life and
this longing that we have here is but a point. And when we be taken suddenly
out of Pain into Bliss, then Pain shall be naught. And in this time I saw a
Body lying on the earth: Which body showed heavy and fearful. and without shape
and form, as it were a i e. foul.
swilge stinking mire. And suddenly out of this body sprung a full fair
Creature, a little Child full shapen and formed, swift and lively, and whiter
than the Lilly, which sharply glided up into Heaven. The i e foulness.
swilge of the body betokens great wretchedness of our deadly flesh: And the
littleness of the Child betokens the cleanness and the pureness of our Soul.
And I thought with this body i e. abides.
bliveth no fairness of this Child, ne of this Child dwells no foulness of
this body. It is full bliss-ful (for) man to be taken from pain, more than pain
to be taken from man; for if pain be taken from us, it may come again.
Therefore this is a sovereign Comfort, and a blessful beholding in a longing
Soul, that we shall be taken from pain; for in this i e. promise.
behest I saw a merciful Compassion that our Lord has in us for our Woe, and a
courteous i e. assurance.
behighting of clear Deliverance: For he will that we be comforted in the
overpassing joy. And that he showed in these words; And thou shall come up
above; and thou shall have me to thy meed, and thou shall be fulfilled of Joy
and Bliss. It is Gods will that we set the point of our thought in this
blissful beholding as oft-time as we may, and as long time keep us therein with
his grace; for this is a blissful Contemplation to the Soul that is led of God,
and full much to his Worship for the time that it lasts. And when we fall
again to our self by heaviness and Ghostly blindness, and feeling of pains
Ghostly and Bodily by our fragility: It is Gods will that we know, that he has
not forget us. And so means he in these words, and says for Comfort; And
thou shall never more have pain in no manner; nor no manner of Sickness, no
manner of mis-liking, no want of Will, but ever joy and bliss without end: What
should it then agrieved thee to suffer a while, sithen it is my Will and my
Worship? It is Gods will that we take his behests and his Comfortings as
largely and as mightily as we may take them. And also he will that we take our
abidings and our diseases as lightly as we may take them, and set them at
naught: For the lightlier that we take them, and the less price that we set at
them for love, less pain shall we have in the feeling of them, and the more
thank and meed shall we have for them.

The Lxv. Chapter.
ANd thus I understood that what man or woman wilfully choseth God in this Life
for Love, he may be sure that he is loved without end, with endless Love that
works in him that grace; for he will we keep this trustily, that we be as
sicker in hope of the bliss of Heaven whiles we are here, as we shall be in
surety when we are there. And ever the more liking and joy that we take in this
sickerness, with reverence and meekness, the better likes him. For as it was
showed, this reverence that I mean, is a holy, courteous dread of our Lord, to
which meekness is knit; and that is, that a creature see the Lord mavelous
great, and her self mavelous little: For these virtues are had endlesly to the
Loved of God. And it may now be seen and felt in measure by the gracious
presence of our Lord, when it is: Which presence in all thing is most desired;
for it works that mavelous sickerness in true Faith, and siker hope by
greatness of Charity in dread that is sweet and delectable. It is Gods will
that I see my self as much bound to him in Love, as if he had done for me all
that he has done. And thus should every Soul think in regard of his Love; that
is to say, the Charity of God makes in us such a unity, that when it is truly
seen, no man can part them self from other. And thus ought each Soul to think
that God has done for him all that he has done. And this shows he to make
us to love him, and liken him, and nothing dread but him; for it is his will we
know that all the might of our enemies is locked in our Friends hands. And
therefore the Soul that knows this sickerly, he shall not dread but him that
she loves. All other dreads she set them among passions, and bodily sickness,
and imaginations. And therefore though we been in so much pain, woe and disease
that us thinks, we can think right naught but that we are in, or that we
feel; as soon as we may we pass it lightly over, and set we it at naught. And
why? for God will be known; for if we know him, and Love him, and reverently
dread him, we shall have patience, and be in great rest. And it should been
great liking to us all that he does. And this showed our Lord in these words:
What should it then agrieve thee to suffer a while, seeing it is my Will and my
Worship? Now have I told you of xv. Shewings, as God witsafe to minister them
to my mind, renewed by Lightnings and Touchings, I hope, of the same Spirit
that shows them all. Of which xv. Shewings the first began early in the
morning, about the hour of four; and it lasted showing by process full fair and
soberly, each following other till it was noon of the day, or past.

The Sixteenth Revelation. The Lxvj. Chapter.
ANd after this the good Lord showed the xvjth. Revelation on the night
following, as I shall say after. Which xvjth. was conclusion and confirmation
to all the xv. But first me behooveth to tell you as anenst my feebleness,
wretchedness and blindness. I have said at the beginning where it says (And in
this suddenly all my pain was taken from me.) Of which pain I had no grief, ne
no disease, as long as the xv. Shewings lasted in showing. And at the end all
was close, and I saw no more; and soon I felt that I should live longer. And
anon my sickness came again; first in my head with a sound and a noise: And
suddenly all my body was fulfilled with sickness, like as it was before. And I
was as barren and as dry as I had never had comfort but little, and as a wretch
mourned heavily for feeling of my bodily pains, and for faulting of comfort
Ghostly and Bodily. Then came a Religious person unto me and asked me how I
fared; and I said, I had raved to day, and he laughed loud and inwardly: And I
said, The Cross that stood before my face, methought it bled fast. And with
this word the Person that I spoke to waxed all sad and marvelled. And anon I
was sore ashamed, and astonished for my retchlesness. And I thought this man
takes sadly the least word that I may say, that saw no more thereof. And when
I saw that he took it so sadly, and with so great reverence, I waxed full
greatly ashamed, and would have been i e. confessed, and absolved.
shriven, but I could tell it to no Priest; for I thought, How should a Priest
believe me, when I by saying I raved, I showed my self not to believe our Lord
God. Notwithstanding, I believed him truly for the time that I saw him. And so
was then my will and my meaning ever for to do without end: But as a Fool I
let it pass out of my mind. Ah, Lo how wretched I was; this was a great sin
and a great unkindness, that I for folly of feeling of a little bodily pain, so
unwisely left for the time the comfort of all this blessed showing of our Lord
God. Here may you see what I am of my self. But herein would our courteous Lord
not leave me. And I lay still till night trusting in his mercy; and then I
began to sleep.

The Lxvij. Chapter.
ANd in my sleep at the beginning, methought the fiend set him in my throat,
putting forth a visage full near my face, like a young man: And it was long and
wonder lean, I saw never none such. The color was red like the Tile stone when
it is new brent, with black spots therein, like frackles, fouler than the
Tile-stone; his hair was red, as rust not scoured; before with side Locks
hanging down in flakes; he grinned upon me with a shroud look, and showed me
white teeth: And so i e. much
my kill me thought it the more ugly; body, ne hands had he none, shapely; but
with his paws he held me in the throat, and would have stopped my breath, and
killed me, but he might not. This ugly showing was made sleeping, and so was none
other. And in all this time I trusted to be saved and kept by the mercy of God.
And our courteous Lord gave me grace to wake, and i e. scarcely.
unnethes had any Life. The persons that were with me beheld me, and wet my
temples, and my heart began to comfort. And anon a little smoke came in at the
door, with a great heat, and a foul stinch; and then I said, Benedicite
dominus, Is it all on fire that is here? And I went it had been a bodily fire,
that should burn us all to death? I asked them that were with me, if they felt
any stench, they said nay, they felt none; I said, Blessed be God, for then
wist I well it was the fiend that was come only to tempt me. And anon I took me
to that our Lord had showed me on the same day, with all the Faith of Holy
Church; for I beheld it as both in one, and fled thereto as to my Comfort. And
anon all vanished away, and I was brought to great rest and peace, without
Sickness of body, or dread of Conscience.

The Lxviij. Chapter.
ANd then our good Lord opened my Ghostly eye, and showed me my Soul in the
midst of my heart: I saw the Soul so large as it were and endless World, and
also as it were a blessed Kingdom. And by the conditions that I saw therein, I
understood that it is a worshipful City. In mids of that City our Lord Jesu
very God and very Man, a fair Person and of large stature, Highest Bishop, most
Solemn King, Worshipful Lord. And I saw him clothed solemnly in Worship; he
sits in the Soul, even right in Peace and rest. And he rules and gives
Heaven and Earth, and all that is. The Manhood with the Godhead sits in
rest: The Godhead rules and gives without any instrument or business. And
the Soul is all occupied with the blessed Godhead; that is, sovereign Might,
sovereign Wisdom, and severeign Goodness. The place that Jesu takes in our
Soul he shall never remove without end, as to my sight: for in us is his
homliest home, and his endless dwelling. And in this he shows the Liking that
he has of the making of man's Soul; for as well as the Father might make a
Creature, and as well as the Son might make a Creature. So well would the Holy
Ghost that man's Soul were made, and so it was done. And therefore the
blessedful Trinity enjoys without end in the making of man's Soul: For he saw
without beginning, what should like him without end. All thing that he has
made shows his Lordship, as understanding was given in the same time by
example of a Creature, that is led to see great Nobleness, and Kingdoms longing
to a Lord. And when it had seen all the Nobleness beneath, then marvelling, it
was stirred to seek up above to that high place where the Lord dwells;
knowing by reason that his dwelling is in the worthiest place. And thus I
understand truly that our Soul may never have rest in things that is beneath it
self. And when it comes above all Creatures into it self, yet may it not abide
in the beholding of it self; but all the beholding is blessedfully set in God;
that is, the Maker dwelling therein; for in man's Soul is his very dwelling. And
the highest Light and the brightest Shining of the City is the glorious Love of
our Lord God, as to my sight. And what may make us more enjoy in God, than to
see in him that he enjoys in us highest of all his Works? For I saw in the
same showing that if the blessed Trinity might have made man's Soul any better,
any fairer, any nobler than it was made, he should not have been full pleased
with making of man's Soul: But for he made man's Soul as fair, as good, as
precious, as he might make it a Creature, therefore the blessed Trinity is full
pleased without end in the making of man's Soul. And he will that our hearts be
mightily raised above the deepness of the earth, and all vain sorrows, and
enjoy in him. This was a delectable sight, and a restful showing that is
without end: And the beholding of this whiles we are here, it is full pleasant
to God, and full great speed to us. And the Soul that thus beholds, it makes
him like to him that is beholden, and oned it in rest and in peace by his
grace. And this was a singular joy and bliss to me that I saw him sitting: for
the truth of sitting showed endless dwelling. And he gave me knowing truly that
it was he that showed me all before: and when I had beholden all this with
advisement; then showed our good Lords words full meekly, without voice, and
without opening of lips, right as he had done before, and said full sweetly; Wit
it now well, it was no raving that thou saw to day: but take it and believe
it, and keep thee therein, and comfort thee therewith, and trust thereto, and
thou shall not be overcome. These last words were said for learning of full
true i e. assurance.
sikerness; that is, our Lord Jesu that showed me all. And right as in the
first word, that our good Lord showed, meaning his blessed Passion, herewith is
the fiend overcome; right so he said in the last word, with full true
faithfulness meaning us all: Thou shall not be overcome. And all this Learning
and this true Comfort is general to all mine even Christen, as it is aforesaid;
and so is Gods will. And this word, Thou shall not be overcome, was said full
sharply, and full mightily for sickness and comfort against all Tribulations
that may come: He said not, thou shall not be troubled, thou shall not be
traveled, thou shall not be diseased; but he said, Thou shall not be overcome.
God will that we take heed at this word, and that we be ever mighty in faithful
trusting in weal and woe; for he loves us, and likes us: and so will he that
we Love him and Like him, and mightily trust in him, and all shall be well: and
soon all was close, and I saw no more after this.

The Lxjx. Chapter.
THe fiende came again with his heat, and with his stench, and made me full
busy. The stench was so vile and so painful, and bodily heat also dreadful and
travellous. Also I heard a bodily talking, as it had been of two bodies: and
both to my thinking talked at one time, as they had held a Parliament, with
great business. And all was soft whistering. And I understood not what they
said. And all this was to stir me to despair; as methought, seeming to me as
they scorned i e. praying.
bidding of Beads, which are said i e. hastily.
boystously, with much failing of devout intending, and wise diligence, the
which we owe to God in our prayer. And our good Lord God gave me grace mightily
to trust in him, and to comfort my Soul with bodily speech, as I should have
done to another Person that had been traveled; methought that business might
not be likened to no bodily likeness.

The Lxx. Chapter.
MY bodily eye I set in the same Cross, there I had seen in comfort before that
time. My tongue with speech of Christ's Passion, and rehersing the Faith of Holy
Church, and my heart to fasten on God with all the trust and the might that I
thought to my self meaning, Thou have now great business to keep thee in the
Faith, for that thou should not be taken of thine enemies. Would thou now
fro this time evermore be so busy to keep thee from sin, this were a good and
a sovereign occupation. For I thought faithfully, were I safe from sin, I were
full safe from all the fiends in Hell, and enemies of my Soul. And thus he
occupied me all that night, and on the morrow, till it was about prime day. And
anon they were all gone and passed, and there left nothing but stink, and
lasted still a while: and I scorned him. And thus was I delivered of him by the
virtue of Christ's Passion; for therewith is the fiend overcome, as our Lord
Jesu Christ said before. In all this blessed showing our good Lord gave
understanding that the sight should pass. Which blessed showing the Faith
keeps with his own good will and his grace; for he left with me neither
sign, ne token, whereby I might know it. But he left with me his own blessed
word in true understanding, bidding me full mightily that I should believe it,
and so I do; Blessed mote he be. I believe that he is our Savior that showed
it, and that it is in the Faith that he showed. And therefore I love it ever
joying, and thereto I am bound by all his own meaning, with the next words that
follow: Keep thee therein, and comfort thee therewith, and trust thereto. Thus
I am beholding to keep it in my Faith: For on the same day that it was showed,
what time the sight was passed, as a wretch I forsook it, and openly I said
that I had raved. Then our Lord Jesu of his mercy would not let it perish, but
he showed it all again within my Soul with more fulhead, with the blessed Light
of his precious Love, saying these Words full mightily and full meekly; Wit it
now well, it was no raving that thou saw this day; as if he had said, for the
sight was passed from thee, thou lost it, and could or might not keep it: But
wit it now; that is to say, now thou see it. This was said not only for the
same time, but also to set thereupon the ground of my Faith, where he says
anon following; But take it, and learn it, and keep thee therein, and comfort
thee therewith, and trust thereto, and thou shall not be overcome.

The Lxxj. Chapter.
IN these six Words that follows, where he says, Take it; his meaning is to
fasten it faithfully in our Heart; for he will it dwell with us in Faith into
our Lives end, and after in fulhead of joy, willing that we have ever faithful
trust of his blessedful promises, knowing his goodness. For our Faith is
contraried in diverse manner, by our own blindness, and our Ghostly Enemies
within and without. And therefore our precious Lover helps us with Ghostly
Light, and true Teaching, on diverse manner within and without, whereby that we
may know him. And therefore in what manner that he teaches us, he will that we
perceive him wisely, receiving him sweetly, and keep us in him faithfully. For
above the Faith is no goodness kept in this Life, as to my sight. And beneath
the Faith is no Health of Soul. But in the Faith there will our Lord we keep
us: For we have by his goodness and his own working to keep us in the Faith.
And by his sufferance through Ghostly enmity we are i e. tried
assaid in the Faith, and made mighty. For if our Faith had not enmity, it
should deserve no meed, as by the understanding that I have in our Lords
meaning. Glad, and merry, and sweet, is the blessedful Lovely Cheer of our Lord
to our Souls; for he beheld us ever living in Love-Longing. And he will our
Soul be in glad cheer to him, to yield him his meed. And thus I hope with his
grace he has, and more shall draw the i. e. outward.
utter cheer to the inner, and make us all at one with him, and each of us with
other in true lasting joy that is Jesu. I have meaning of three manner of
chears of our Lord: The first is cheer of Passion, as he showed whiles he was
with us in this Life dying. And though this beholding be mourning and i. e. dark
swemful, yet it is glad and merry; for he is God. The second manner of cheer
it is pity, and ruth, and compassion: and this shows he to all his Lovers,
with * sikerness of keeping that has i. e. sureness.
need to his mercy. The third is the blissedful cheer as it shall be without
end. And this was oftenest showed, and longest continued. And thus in the time
of our Pain and our Woe, he shows to us cheer of his Passion and his Cross,
helping us to bear it by his own blessed virtue. And in time of our sinning, he
shows to us cheer of ruth and pity, mightily keeping us, and defending
against all our Enemies. And these two be the common chears which he shows to
us in this Life, therewith meddling the third: And that is his blessed cheer
like in party as it shall be in Heaven; and that is by gracious touching of
sweet Lightning of Ghostly Life, whereby that we are kept in true Faith, Hope,
and Charity with Contrition and Devotion, and also with Contemplation, and all
manner of true joys and sweet Comforts. The blessedful cheer of our Lord God
works it in us by Grace. But now me behooveth to tell in what manner that I
saw sin deadly, in the Creatures which should not die for sin, but live in the
joy of God without end. I saw that two contraries should not be together in one
steed. The most contrarious that are is the highest bliss, and the deepest
pain. The highest bliss that is, is to have God in clerity of endless Light,
him verily seeing, him sweetly feeling, him all peaceable having in fulhead of
joy: And thus was the blessedful cheer of our Lord God showed in party. In
which showing I saw that sin was the most contrary, so far forth that as long
as we be meddled with any part of sin, we shall never see clearly the blessed
cheer of God: And the horriblier, and the grievouser that our sins be, the
deeper are we for that time fro this blessed sight. And therefore it seems to
us ostentimes as we were in peril of Death, and in a party of Hell, for the
sorrow and the pain that sin is to us. And thus we are dead for the time fro
the very sight of our blessedful Life. But in all this I saw faithfully that we
be not dead in the sight of God, ne he passes never from us; but he shall
never have his full bless in us till we have our full bless in him, verily
seeing his fair blessedful cheer, for we are ordained thereto in kind, and
getten thereto by grace. Thus I saw how sin is deadly for a short time to the
blessed Creatures of endless Life; and ever the more clearly that the Soul
sees the blissful cheer by grace of Loving, the more it longs to see it in
fulhead; that is to say, in his own Likeness: For notwithstanding that our Lord
God dwells now in us, and is here with us, and i e. embraces.
colleth us, and becloseth us for tender Love that he may never leave us, and
is more near to us than Tongue may tell, or Heart may think: Yet may we never
stint of mourning, ne of weeping, nor of seeking, nor of Longing, till when we
see him clear in his blessedful cheer: For in that precious sight there may no
Woe abide, nor Weal fail. And in this I saw matter of Mirth, and matter of
Mourning: Matter of Mirth that our Lordour Maker is so near to us, and in us,
and we in him by faithfulness of keeping of his great goodness. Matter of
Mourning for our Ghostly eye is so blind, and we so boarn down with Weight of
our deadly flesh, and Darkness of sin, that we may not see our Lord God clearly
in his blessedful cheer; No, and because of this Darkness, scarce we can
believe or i e. think:
trow his great Love and our Faithfulness of keeping. And therefore it is that
I say, we may never leave off Mourning, ne Weeping: This Weeping means not
all in pouring out of tears by our bodily eye, but also to more Ghostly
understanding; for the i e. natural.
kindly desire of our Soul is so great, and so unmeasurable, that if it were
given us to our joy and our comfort, all the i e. nobleness.
nobly that ever God made in Heaven and in Earth, and we saw not the fair
blessedful cheer of himself, yet should we never leave mourning, ne of Ghostly
Weeping; that is to say, of painful Longing, till when we see verily the fair
blessedful cheer of our Maker. And if we were in all the pain that heart may
think, or tongue may tell; and we might in that time see his blessedful cheer,
all this pain should us not grieve. Thus is that blessedful sight end of all
manner of pain to Loving Souls, and fulfilling of all manner of joy and bliss.
And that showed he in the high mavelous Words where he says; I it am that is
highest; I it am that thou love; I it am that is all. It longs to us to
have three manner of knowings. The first is, that we know our Lord God: The
second is, that we know our self; what we are by him in kind and in grace: The
third is, that we know meekly that our self is against our sin and against our
feebleness. And for these three was all this showing made, as to my
understanding.

The Lxxij. Chapter.
ALL this blessed teaching of our Lord God was showed by three parts; that is
to say, By bodily sight, and by Word formed in my understanding, and by Ghostly
sight. For the bodily sight, I have said as I saw as truly as I can: And for
the Words, I have said them right as our Lord showed them me: And for the
Ghostly sight, I have said some deal, but I may never full tell it. And
therefore of this Ghostly sight I am stirred to say more as God will give me
grace. God showed two manner of sickness that we have: That one is unpatience,
or sloth; for we bear our travel and our pain heavily. That other is despair
or doubtful dreed, as I shall say after: Generally he showed sin wherein all is
comprehended, but in special he showed none but these two. And these two are it
that most travelleth and troubles us, as by that our Lord showed me. Of which
he will we be amended; I speak of such men and women that for Gods Love hate
sin, and dispose them to do Gods Will: Then by our Ghostly blind-head and
bodily heaviness, we are most enclining to this. And therefore it is Gods will
that they be known, and then should we refuse them, as we do other sins. And
for help against this, full meekly our Lord showed the patience that he had in
this hard Passion: And also the joy and the liking that he has of that Passion
for Love. And this he showed in Example, that we should gladly and easily bear
our pains; for that is great pleasing to him, and endless profit to us. And the
cause why we are traveled with them is for unknowing of Love. Though the Three
Persons of the blessed Trinity be all even in the self: The Soul took most
understanding in Love; yea, and he will in all thing that we have our beholding
and our enjoying in Love. And of this knowing are we most blind. For some of us
believe that God is All mighty, and may do all; and that he is All wisdom, and
can do all: But that he is All Love and will do all, there we fail. And this
unknowing it is that most lets Gods Lovers, as to my sight: For when we
begin to hate sin, and amend us by the ordinance of Holy Church, yet there
dwells a dread that lets us, by the beholding of our self and of our sin
before done. And some of us for our every day sins, for we hold not our promise,
nor keep our cleanness that our Lord sets us in, but fall oft-times into so
much wretchedness, that shame it is to say it. And the beholding of this makes
us so sorry, and so heavy, that unneths we can see any comfort. And this dread
we take sometime for a meekness, but it is a foul blindness, and a wickedness.
And we cannot despise it as we do another sin that we know, which comes
through lack of true Judgment, and it is again truth: For of all the properties
of the blissedful Trinity it is Gods will that we have most Faithfulness and
Liking in Love; for Love makes Might and Wisdom full meek to us. For right as
by the courtesy of God he forgets our sin after the time that we repent us:
So will he that we forget our sin as against our unskillful heaviness, and our
doubtful dreads.

The Lxxiij. Chapter.
FOr I understood four manner of Dreads: One is dread of a i e. fright.
fray that comes to man suddenly by frailty. This dread does good, for it
helps to purge man, as does bodily sickness, or such other pain that is not
sin; for all such pains help man, if they be patiently taken. The second is
dread of pain; whereby man is stirred and waked fro sleep of sin: For man that
is hard of sleep of sin, he is not able for the time to receive the soft
comfort of the Holy Ghost, till he has undertaken this dread of pain, of
bodily death and of Ghostly Enemies. And this dread stirs us to seek Comfort
and Mercy of God. And thus this dread helps us as an entry, and ableth us to
have contrition by the blissedful touching of the Holy Ghost. The third is
doubtful dread: Doubtful dread is as much as it draws to despair; God will
have it turned in us into Love, by true knowing of Love; that is to say, that
the bitterness of doubts be turned into sweetness of kind Love by grace; for it
may never please our Lord that his Servants doubt in his goodness. The fourth
is Reverent Dread; for there is no dread that fully pleases God in us, but
reverent dread, and that is soft. For the more it is had, the less it is felt
for sweetness of Love. Love and Dread are Brethren, and they are rooted in us
by the goodness of our Maker, and they shall never be taken from us without
end. We have of kind to Love, and we have of grace to Love; and have we of kind
to dread, and we have of grace to dread. It longs to the Lordship, and to the
Father-head to be dread, as it longs to the goodness to be Loved: and it
longs to us that are his Servants and his Children to dread him for Lordship,
and Father-head; as it longs to us to Love him for Godhead. And though this
reverent Dread and Love be not both in one, but are two in property and in
working, and neither of them may be had without other. And therefore I am sure,
he that Loves he dreadeth, though he feel it but little. All dreads other than
reverend dread that are proferred to us, though they come under color of
Holiness, they are not so true. And hereby may they be known asunder. That
dread that makes us hastily to flee fro all that is not good, and fall into
our Lords breast; as the Child into the Mothers arm, with all our intent, and
with all our mind, knowing our feebleness and our great need, knowing his
everlasting Goodness and his blessed Love, only seeking into him for Salvation,
cleaving to with faithful trust: That dread that brings us into this Working,
it is kind and gracious, and good, and true. And all that is contrarious to
this, either it is wrong, or it is meddled with wrong. Then is this the remedy
to know them both, and refuse the wrong: For the kind property of dread which
we have in this Life by the gracious Working of the Holy Ghost, the same shall
be in Heaven before God, gentle, courteous, full sweet. And thus we shall in
Love be homely and near to God. And we in dread be gentle and courteous to God,
and both in one manner like i e. equal
even. Desire we then of our Lord God to dread him reverently, and Love him
meekly, and to trust in him mightily: For when we dread him reverently, and
love him meekly, our trust is never in vain; for the more that we trust, and
the mightilier that we trust, the more we please and worship our Lord that we
trust in. And if us fail this reverent dread and meek Love, as God forbid we
should, our trust shall soon be mis-ruled for that time. And therefore us
needs much to pray our Lord of grace that we may have this reverent dread,
and make Love of his Gift in Heart and in Work, for without this no man may
please God.

The Lxxjv. Chapter.
I Saw that God may do all that us deedeth: And these three that I shall say,
Need, Love, Longing: Pity and Love keeps us in the time of our need. And
Longing in the some Love draws us into Heaven; for the thirst of God is to
have the general man into him. In which thirst he has drawn his Holy Souls
that be now in bliss. And so i e. ta^^ng.
getting his lively Members, ever he draws and drinks, and yet him
Thirsts and Longs. I saw three manner of Longings in God, and all to one
end. The first is, for that he Longs to learn us to know him and to Love him
ever more and more, as it is convenient and speedful to us. The second is, that
he longs to have us up into bliss, as Souls are when they be taken out of
pain into Heaven. The third is, to fulfill us of bliss, and that shall be on
the last day fulfilled ever to last. For I saw, as it is known in our Faith,
that then pain and sorrow shall be ended to all that shall be saved. And not
only we shall receive the same bliss that Souls before have had in Heaven, but
also we shall receive a new, which plentuously shall fly out of God into us,
and fulfill us. And those be the goods which he has ordained to give us from
without beginning. These goods are treasured and hid in himself; for into that
time Creature is not mighty, ne worthy to receive them. In this we should see
verily the cause of all the Deeds that God has done. And over-more we should
see the cause of all thing that he has suffered: And the bliss, and the
fulfilling shall be so deep and so high, that for Wonder and Marvel all
Creatures should have to God so great reverent and dread over-passing, that
has been seen and felt before that the Pillars of Heaven shall travel and
quake. But this manner of trembling and dread shall have no manner of pain; but
it longs to the worthy majesty of God, thus to be beholden of his Creatures
dreadfully trembling and quaking: For much more of joy endlesly marvelling of
the greatness of God the Maker, and of the least part of all that is made. For
the beholding of this makes Creature mavelous meek and mild. Wherefore God
will, and also it longs to us both in kind and in grace, to will to have
knowing of this desiring the sight and the working. For it leads us in right
way, and keeps us in true Life, and oneth us to God. And as good as God is,
as great he is: And as much as it longs to his Godhead to be Loved, so much
it longs to his great highness to be dread. For this reverent dread is the
fairer courtesy that is in Heaven before Gods face. And as much as he shall be
known and Loved, over-passing that he is now: In so much he shall be dread
over-passing that he is now. Wherefore it behooveth needs to be, that all
Heaven, all Earth shall tremble and quake when the Pillars shall tremble and
quake.

The Lxxv. Chapter.
I Speak but little of this reverent dread: For I hope it may be seen in this
matter aforesaid. But well I wot that our Lord showed me no Souls but those
that dread him; for well I wot the Soul that truly takes the teaching of the
Holy Ghost, it hates more sin for the vileness and the horribility, than it
does all the pain that is in Hell. For the Soul that beholds the kindness of
our Lord Jesu, it hates no Hell; but Hell is sin as to my sight. And therefore
it is Gods will that we know sin, and pray busily, and travel wilfully, and
seek teaching meekly, that we fall not blindly therein; and if we fall, that we
rise readily: for it is the most pain that the Soul may have to turn from God
any time by sin. The Soul that will be in rest when other men's sins come to
mind, he should flee it as the pain of Hell, seeking into God for help again
that, for the beholding of other men's sin, it makes as it were a thick mist
before the eye of the Soul. And we may not for the time see the Fair-head of
God, but if we may behold them with Contrition with him, with Compassion on
him, and with Holy desire to God for him. For without this it noieth, and
troubles, and lets the Soul that behold them; for this I understand in the
showing of the Compassion. In this blessedful showing of our Lord I have
understanding of two Contrarious. That one is the most Wisdom that any Creature
may do in this Life. That other is the most folly. The most Wisdom is a
Creature to do after the Will and the Counsel of his highest sovereign Friend.
This blessed Friend is Jesu, and it is his Will and Counsel that we hold us
with him, and fasten us homely to him, evermore in what state soever we been:
For whether we be foul or clean, we are ever one in his Loving. For weal, ne
for woe he will never we flee him; but for the change-ability that we are in
our self, we fall often into sin; than have we this by the stirring of our
Enemy, and by our own Folly and Blindness: For they say thus, Thou wotest well
thou art a Wretch, a Sinner, and also untrue, for thou keep not thy
Covenant. Thou promisest oftentimes our Lord that thou shall do better; and
anon thou fallest again in the same, namely in sloth, and leesing of time. For
that is the beginning of sin as to my sight; and namely, to the Creatures that
have given themself to serve our Lord with inward beholding of his blessedful
goodness. And this makes us adread to appear before our courteous Lord. Than is
it our Enemy that will put us a back with his false dread of our Wretchedness,
for pain that he threateth us by, for it is his meaning to make us so heavy and
so sorry in this, that we should let out of mind the blessedful beholding of
our everlasting Friend.

The Lxxvj. Chapter.
OUr good Lord showed the enmity of the fiend, whereby I understood that all
that is contrarious to Love and to Peace, it is of the fiend, and of his party;
And we have of our feebleness and our folly to fall: And we have of mercy and
of grace of the Holy Ghost to rise to more joy. And if our enemy ought wins
of us by our falling (for it is his likeness) he leeseth many times more in our
rising by charity and meekness. And this glorious rising it is so great sorrow
and pain to him, for the hate that he has to our Soul, that he brenneth
continually in envy. And all this sorrow that he would make us to have, it
shall turn into himself. And for this it was that our Lord scorned him, and
showed that he shall be scorned; and this made me mightily to Laugh. Then is
this the remedy that we be a known of our Wretchedness, and fly to our Lord:
For ever the more needier that we be, the more speedful it is to us to touch
him; and say we thus in our meaning; I know well that I have deserved pain, but
our Lord is Almighty, and may punish me mightily; and he is all Wisdom, and can
punish me wisely, and he is all Goodness, and loves me tenderly. And in this
beholding it is speedful to us to abide; for it is a full Lovely meekness of a
sinful Soul wrought by Mercy and Grace of the Holy Ghost? When we will wilfully
and gladly take the scourging and the chastising that our Lord himself will
give us, and it shall be full tender and full easy if we will only hold us
pleased with him, and with all his Works. For that Penance that man takes upon
himself, it was not showed me; That is to say, it was not showed me specified,
but this was showed specially, and highly, and with full lovely cheer, that we
should meekly and patiently bear and suffer that Penance that God himself
gives us, with mind of his blessed Passion; for when we have mind of his
blessed Passion with Pity and Love: Then we suffer with him, like as his
Friends did that saw it. And this was showed in the xiijth. near at the
beginning, where it speaks of Pity; for he says, Accuse not thy self that
thy Tribulation and thy Woe is all thy default: For I will not that thou be
heavy, ne sorrowful undiscreetly; for I tell thee, howsoever thou do thou shall
have Woe. And therefore I will that thou wisely know thy Penance which thou art
in continually, and that thou meekly take it for thy Penance. And then shall
thou truly see that all this living is Penance profitable. This Place is
Prison; This Life is Penance, and in the remedy he will that we enjoy. The
Remedy is, that our Lord is with us, keeping us, and leading into fulhead of
joy; for this is an endless joy to us in our Lords meaning; that he that shall
be our bliss when we are there, he is our Keeper while we are here; our Way and
our Heaven, in true Love and faithful trust. And of this he gave understanding
in all, and namely, in showing of his Passion, where he made me mightily to
choose him for my Heaven. Flee we to our Lord, and we shall be comforted, touch
we him, and we shall be made clean; cleave we to him, and we shall be sure and
safe from all manner of perils; for our courteous Lord will that we be as
homely with him, as heart may think, or Soul may desire. But be we ware that we
take not so retchesly this homely-head for to leave courtesy; for our Lord
himself is sovereign homely-head, and so homely as he is, as courteous he is;
for he is very courteous. And the blessed Creatures that shall be in Heaven
with him without end, he will have them like to himself in all thing; and to be
like to our Lord perfectly, it is our very Salvation and our full bliss. And if
we wot not how we shall do, all this, desire we of our Lord, and he shall
Learn us; for it is his own liking and his Worship: Blessed mote he be.

The Lxxvij. Chapter.
OUr Lord of his mercy shows us our sin and our feebleness by the sweet
gracious sight of himself. For our sin is so foul and so horrible, that he of
his courtesy will not show it us but by the Light of his Mercy. Of four things,
it is his Will that we have knowing: The first is, that he is the ground of
whom we have all our Life and our Being. The second is, that he keeps us
mightily and mercifully in the time that we are in our sin, among all our
Enemies that are full fell upon us. And so much we are in the more peril, for we
give them occasion thereto, and we know not our own need. The third is, how
courteously he keeps us, and makes us to know that we go amiss. The fourth
is, how steadfastly he abides us, and changes no cheer; for he will that we be
turned and unied to him in Love, as he is to us. And thus by gracious knowing
we may see our sin profitable without despair: For soothly us needs to see
it; and by the sight we should be made ashamed of our self, and breaking down
as against our Pride and our Presumption: For us behooveth verily to see that
of our self we are right naught but Sin and Wretchedness. And thus by the sight
of the Less (part of sin) that our Lord shows us, the more is wasted, which
we see not: For he of his courtesy measures the sight to us: For it is so
foul and so horrible, that we should not endure to see it as it is. And thus by
this meek knowing through Contrition and Grace we shall be broken from all
thing that is not our Lord. And then shall our blessed Savior perfectly cure
us, and one us to him. This breaking, and this curing our Lord means by the
general man; for he that is highest and nearest with God, he may see himself
sinful and needy with me. And I that am the least and the lowest of those that
shall be saved; I may be comforted with him that is highest: So has our Lord
oned us in Charity, when he showed me that I should sin. And for joy that I had
in beholding him, I intended not readily to that showing. And our courteous
Lord rested there, and would no further teach me, till when that he gave me
Grace and Will to entend. And hereof was I Learned, though that we be highly
lifted into Contemplation by the special gift of our Lord, yet us behooveth
needs therewith to have sight and knowing of our sin, and of our feebleness.
For without this knowing we may not have true meekness; and without this we may
not be safe. And also I saw we may not have this knowing of our self, nor of
none of all our Ghostly Enemies; for they will not us so much good: For if it
were by their Will, we should never see it till our ending day. Then are we
much bound to God that he will himself for Love show it us in time of mercy and
grace.

The Lxxviij. Chapter.
ALso I had in this more understanding, in that he showed me that I should sin.
I took it nakedly to my own singular Person for I was no otherwise stirred in
that time: But by the high gracious comfort that followed after I saw, that his
meaning was for the general man; that is to say, all man which is sinful, and
shall be into the Last day: Of which man I am a Member as I hope by the mercy
of God; for the blessed comfort that I saw, it is large enough for us all. And
there was I Learned that I should see mine own sin, and not other men's, but if
it may be for comfort or help of my even Christen. And also in the same
showing, there I saw that I should sin: There was I Learned to be dreadful for
i e. frailty.
unsikerness of my self. For I wot not how I shall fall, ne I know not the
measure, ne the greatness of my sin: For that would i e. I desired with fear to
have known.
I a wist dreadful; and thereto I had none answer. Also our courteous Lord in
that same time, he showed full sweetly and full mightily the endless-head, and
the unchange-ability of his Love: and also his great goodness, and his gracious
inwardly keeping, that the Love of him and of our Souls shall never be departed
into without end. And thus in the dread I have matter of meekness, that saves
me fro Presumption. And in the blessed showing of Love I have matter of true
Comfort and of Joy, that saves me from despair. All this homely showing of our
courteous Lord it is a Lovely Lesson, and a sweet gracious Teaching of himself
in comforting of our Soul: For he will that we know by the sweetness of the
homely Love of him, that all that we see or feel within or without, which is
contrarious to this, that it is of the Enemy, and not of God; as thus, If that
we be stirred to be the more retchlesser of our Living, or of the keeping of
our heart, because that we have knowing of this plentuous Love; than needs us
greatly to beware of this stirring, if it come. It is untrue, and greatly we
owe to hate it, for it has no likeness of Gods Will; and when befallen by
frailty or blindness. Then our courteous Lord touching us, stirs us and
keeps. And then will he that we see our wretchedness, and meekly be it a
known. But he will not that we abide therewith, ne he will not that we busy us
greatly about our accusing, ne he will not that we be too wretchedful on our
self; but he will that we hastily entend to him: For he stands all alone, and
abides us continually, moaning and mourning till when we come. And he has
haste to have us to him: For we are his joy and his delight, and he is our
Salve of our Life; there I say he stands all alone. I leave the speaking of
the blessed company in Heaven, and speak only of his Office and his Working
here in Earth, upon the i e manner.
condition of the Showing.

The Lxxjx. Chapter.
BY three things man stands in this Life: By which three God is Worshipped,
and we be speed, kept, and saved. The first is, use of man's kindly Reason. The
second is, the common Teaching of Holy Church. The third is, the inward
gracious Working of the Holy Ghost. And these three be all of one God. God is
ground of our kindly Reason; and God is teaching of Holy Church; and God is the
Holy Ghost. And all be sundry gifts to which he will we have great regard, and
according us thereto: For these work in us continually altogether, and those be
great things. Of which greatness he will we have knowing here as it were in an
A. B. C. that is to say, that we may have a little knowing, whereof we should
have fulhead in Heaven: and that is for to speed us. We know in our Faith that
God alone took our kind, and none but he: And furthermore, that Christ alone
did all the great Works that longs to our Salvation, and none but he: And
right so he alone does now in the last end; that is to say, he dwells here in
us, and rules us, and gives us in this Living, and brings us to his bliss.
And thus shall he do as long as any Soul is in Earth that shall come to Heaven:
And so far forth, that if there were none such Soul in Earth but one, he should
be with that all alone, till he had brought it up to his bliss. I believe and
understand the ministration of Holy Angels as Clerks tell; but it was not
showed me: For himself is nearest and meekest, highest and lowest, and does
all. And not only all that us needs, but also he does all that is Worshipful
to our joy in Heaven. And there I say he abides us moaning and mourning. It
means all the true feeling that we have in our self in Contrition and in
Compassion; and all moaning and mourning, for we are not oned with our Lord,
and such as is speedful it is Christ in us. And though some of us feel it
seldom, it passes never fro Christ, till what time he have brought us out of
all our Woe: For Love suffers him never to be without pity. And what time
that we fall into sin, and leave the mind of him, and the keeping of our own
Soul, then bears Christ alone all the charge of us. And thus stands he
moaning and mourning. Then Longs it to us for reverence and kindness to turn
us hastily to our Lord, and let him not all alone; he is here alone with us
all; that is to say, only for us he is here. And what time I be strange to him
by sin, despair, or sloth, then I let my Lord stand alone, in as much as he is
in me. And thus it fares with us all which be sinners. But though it be so
that we do thus oftentimes, his goodness suffers us never to be alone, but
lastingly he is with us, and tenderly he excuses us, and ever keeps us from
blame in his sight.

The Lxxx. Chapter.
OUr good Lord showed him to his Creature in diverse manner, both in Heaven and
in Earth. But I saw him take no place, but in man's Soul. He showed him in Earth
in the sweet Incarnation, and his blessed Passion, and in other manner he
showed him in Earth, where I said I saw God in a point. And in other manner he
showed him in Earth, thus as it were a Pilgrimage; that is to say, he is here
with us leading us, and shall be till when he has brought us all to his bliss
in Heaven. He showed him diverse times reigning, as it is aforesaid; but
principally in man's Soul: He has taken there his resting place, and his
Worshipful City; out of which Worshipful i e. scat
See he shall never rise, ne remove without end. Mavelous and solemn is the
place where the Lord dwells. And therefore he will that we readily entend to
his gracious touching, more enjoying in his whole Love, then sorrowing in our
often fallings. For it is the most worship to him of any thing, that we may do,
that we live gladly and merrily for his Love in our Penance; for he beholds
us so tenderly, that he sees all our Living here to be Penance. For kind
Longing in us to him is a Lasting Penance in us, which Penance he works in
us, and mercifully helps us to bear it; for his Love makes him to Long: his
Wisdom and his Truth with his rightful-head makes him to suffer us here. And
in this manner he will see it in us; for this is our kindly Penance, and the
highest to my sight. For this Penance comes never fro us, till what time that
we be fulfilled, when we should have him to our meed. And therefore he will
that we set our hearts in the over-passing; that is to say, fro the pain that
we feel into the bliss that we trust.

The Lxxxj. Chapter.
BUt here showed our courteous Lord the moaning and the mourning of our Soul,
meaning thus: I wot well thou will live for my Love, merrily and gladly
suffering all the Penance that may come to thee: But forasmuch as thou live
not without sin, therefore thou art heavy and sorrowful. And if thou might
live without sin, thou would suffer for my Love all the Woe that might come
to thee, and it is sooth: But be not too much agrieved with sin that falls to
thee against thy will, (that is; not maliciously.) And here I understood that
the Lord beheld the Servant with Pity, and not with blaim; for this passing
Life asks not to Live all without sin. He Loves us endlesly, and we sin
customably; and he shows it us full mildely, and then we sorrow and mourn
discreetly, turning us into the beholding of his mercy, cleaving to his Love
and to his Goodness, seeing that he is our Medicine, witting that we do
(nothing) but sin. And thus by the meekness that we get in the sight of our
sin, faithfully knowing his everlasting Love, him thanking and praising, we
please him. I love thee and thou love me, and our love shall never be
departed on two; and for thy profit I suffer. And all this was showed in
Ghostly understanding, saying this blessed word; I keep thee full i e. surely.
sikerly. And by the great desire that I saw in our blessed Lord, that we
should Live in this manner; that is to say, in Longing and enjoying, as all
this Lesson of Love shows. Thereby I understand that all that is contrarious
to this, it is not of him, but it is of Enmity. And he will that we know it by
the sweet gracious Light of his kind Love. If any such Liver be in Earth which
is continually kept from falling, I know it not; for it was not showed me. But
this was showed, that in falling, and in rising we are ever preciously kept in
one Love, (by which we were ehosen before others from all eternity.) For in the
beholding of God we fall not. And in the beholding of our self, we stand not.
And both these be i e. true.
sooth, as to my sight. But the beholding of our Lord God is the higher i e
truth
soothness. Then are we much bound to him, that he will in this Living show us
this high soothness. And I understood whiles we be in this Life, it is full
speedful to us that we see these both at once. For the higher beholding keeps
us in Ghostly joy, and true enjoying in God: That other that is the lower
beholding, keeps us in dread, and makes us ashamed of our self. But our good
Lord will ever that we hold us much more in the beholding of the higher, and
not leave the knowing of the Lower into the time that we be brought up above,
where we shall have our Lord Jesu to our meed, and be fulfilled of joy and
bliss without end.

The Lxxxij. Chapter.
I Had in party touching, sight, and feeling in three properties of God, in
which the strength and the effect of all the Revelation stands. And it were
seen in every showing: And most properly in the Twelfth, where it says
oftentimes, I it am. The properties are these, life, love, and light. In life
is mavelous homeli-head. In love is gentle courtesy: And in light is endless
kindness. These three properties were seen in one goodness; into which goodness
my reason would be oned and cleaving to with all the mights. I beheld with
reverent dread, and highly marvelling in the sight and in feeling of the sweet
accord that our reason is in God, understanding that it is the highest gift
that we have received, and it is grounded in kind. Our Faith is a Light kindly
coming of our endless day; that is our Father God: In which Light our Mother
Christ, and our good Lord the Holy Ghost leads us in this passing Life. This
Light is measured discreetly, needfully stands to us in the Night; the Light
is cause of our Life; the Night is cause of our Pain, and all our Woe: In which
Woe we desire endless meed and thank of God, for we with mercy and grace
wilfully know and believe our Light, going therein wisely and mightily. And at
the end of Woe suddenly our eye shall be opened, and in clearness of sight our
Light shall be full: Which Light is God our Maker, Father and Holy Ghost, in
Christ Jesu our Savior. Thus I saw and understood that our Faith is our Light,
in our night, which Light is God our endless day.

The Lxxxiij. Chapter.
THis light is Charity, and the measuring of this Light is done to us
profitably by the Wisdom of God: For neither the Light is so large that we may
see clearly our blessedful day: ne it is all i e. shut up.
speered from us; but it is such a Light in which we may live i e. meritoriously
meedfully with travel, reserving the worshipful thanks of God. And this was
seen in the vjth. Showing, where he says, I thank thee of thy service, and of
thy travel. Thus Charity keeps us in Faith, and in Hope: And Faith and Hope
leads us in Charity; and at the end all shall be Charity. I had three manner
of understandings in this Light of Charity: The first is Charity unmade: The
second is Charity made: The third is Charity given. Charity unmade is God;
Charity made is our Soul in God: Charity given is virtue, and that is a
gracious gift of working; In which we Love God for himself, and our self in
God, and all that God Loves for God.

The Lxxxjv. Chapter.
ANd in this sight I marvelled highly; for notwithstanding our simple Living,
and our blindness here, yet endlesly our courteous Lord beholds us in this
Working, enjoying. And of all thing we may please him best, wisely and truly to
believe it, and to enjoy with him and in him; for as verily as we shall be in
bliss of God without end, him praising and thanking, as verily we have been in
the foresight of God, Loved and known in his endless purpose fro without
beginning. In which unbegun Love he made us; in the same Love he keeps us,
and never suffers us to be hurt, by which our bliss might be lessed. And
therefore when the doom is given, and we be all brought up above, then shall
we clearly see in God the privities which now be hid to us. And then shall none
of us be stirred to say in any thing, Lord, if it had been thus, it had been
well. But we shall all say with one voice, Lord, blessed mote thou be, for it
is thus: Thus it is well. And now we see verily, that all thing is done as it
was thine Ordinance i e before.
or any thing was made.

The Lxxxv. Chapter.
THis Book is begun by Gods gift and his grace; but it is not yet performed as
to my sight. For Charity pray we all together, with Gods working, thanking,
trusting, enjoying. For this will our good Lord be praid, by the understanding
that I took in all his own meaning. And in the sweet words where he says full
merrily, I am ground of thy beseeching. For truly, I saw and understood in our
Lords meaning, that he showed it; for he will have it knowing more then it is.
In which knowing he will give us grace to Love him, and cleave to him. For he
beholds his heavenly Treasure and Solace in heavenly Joy, in drawing of our
hearts from sorrow and darkness, which we are in. And fro the time that it was
showed, I de-desired oftentimes to wit in what was our Lords meaning: And
fifteen Year after and more, I was answered in Ghostly understanding, saying
thus; What? would thou wit thy Lords meaning in this thing? Wit it well:
Love was his meaning. Who shows it thee? Love. Wherefore shows he it thee?
For Love. Hold thee therein, thou shall wit more in the same. But thou shall
never wit therein other without end. Thus was I Learned that love is our Lords
meaning. And I saw full surely in this and in all that our God made us, he
Loved us; which Love was never slacked, ne never shall. And in this Love he
has done all his Works: And in this Love he has made all thing profitable to
us: And in this Love our Life is everlasting; in our making we had beginning:
But the Love wherein he made us was in him fro without beginning. In which Love
we have our beginning. And all this shall we see in God without end.

Deo Gratias.
Explicit liber Revelationum Juliane Anachorite Norwic. cujus anime propicietur
Deus.
FINIS.

