GOOD NEWS OUT OF THE WEST, Declared in a Letter sent from Lieueenant General
CROMWELL, To a worthy Member of the House of COMMONS.

Showing what great things God has done by small means.

Two thousand slain and taken prisoners: Also fifteen hundred Horse taken
beside Bag and Baggage.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1645.

THE COPY OF LIEUTENANT GENER ALL CROMWELL HIS LETTER TO To a worthy Member of
the House of COMMONS.
Dear Sir,
I Have now a double advantage upon you, through the goodness of God, who
still appears with us. And as for us, we have seen great things in this last
mercy: It is not inferior to any we have had, as follows:

We were advanced to Long-Sutton, near a very strong Place of the Enemies,
called Lamport, far from our own Garrisons, without much Ammunition, in a
place extremely wanting in provisions, the malignant Club-men interposing, who
are ready to take all advantages against our parties, and would undoubtedly
take them against our Army, if they had opportunity. Goring stood upon the
advantage of strong passes, staying until the rest of his retreats came up to
his Army, with a resolution not to engage, until Greenvill and Prince CHARLES
his men were come up to him. We could not well have necessitated him to an
Engagement, nor have stayed one day longer without retreating to our
Ammunition, and to convenience of victual.

In the morning word was brought us, That the enemy drew out He did so, with a
resolution to send most of his Cannon and Baggage, to Bridgewater, which he
effected: But with a resolution not to fight; but trusting to his ground,
thinking he could march away at pleasure.

The pass was strait between him and us, he brought two Cannons to secure his,
and laid his Musketeers strongly in the hedges: we beat off his Cannon, fell
down upon his Musketeers, beat them off from their strength, and where our
horse could scarcely pass two a breast, I commanded Major Bether to charge
them with two Troops of about an hundred and twenty Horse, which he performed
with the greatest gallantry imaginable, beat back two bodies of the enemies
Horse, being Gorings own Brigade, brake them at Swords point. The enemy
charged him with near four hundred fresh Horse. He set them all going, until
oppressed with multitudes, he brake through them with the loss not of above
three or four men. Major Desborough seconded him with some other of those
Troops, which were about three, Bether faced about, and they both ranted at
swords point, (...) great body of the enemies Horse; which gave such an
unexpected terror to the enemies Army, that set them all a running. Our Foot in
the mean time coming on bravely, and beating the enemy from their strength, we
presently had the chase to Lamport and Bridgewater. We took and killed about
2000, brake all his Foot: We have taken very many Horse, and considerable
prisoners; what are slain we know not, we have the Lieutenant General of the
Ordnance, Col: Preston, Colonel Heveningsham, Colonel Slingsbey, we know of:
besides very many other Officers of quality. All Major General Massies party
was with him 7 or 8 miles from us, and about 1200 of our Foot, and 3 Regiments
of our Horse: so that we bad but 7 Regiments with us.

Thus you see what the Lord has wrought for us: Can any creature ascribe any
thing to it self? Now can we give all the glory to God, and desire all may do
so: for it is all due unto him. Thus you have Long-Sutton mercy added to Naesby
mercy: And to see this, is it not to see the face of God? You have heard of
Naesby, it was a happy victory: As in this, so in that, God was pleased to use
his servants; and if men will be malicious, and swell with envy, we know who
has said, If they will not see, yet they shall see and be ashamed for their
envy at his people. I can say this of Naesby, that when I saw the enemy drew
up, and march in gallant order toward us, and we a company of poor ignorant
men to seek how to order our battle: The General having commanded me to
order all the Horse, I could not (riding alone about my business) but smile
out to God in praises, in assurance of victory, because God would by things
that are not, bring to naught things that are, of which I had great assurance,
and God did it. Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men.

I cannot write more particulars now, I am going to the Rendevouz of all our
Horse, 3 miles from Bridgewater, we march that way. It is a seasonable mercy; I
can better tell you then write, that God will go on. We have taken two Guns,
three Carriages of Ammunition in the Chase. The enemy quitted Lamport: when
they ran out at one end of the town, we entered the other: they fiered that at
which we should chase, which hindered our pursuit, but we over-took many of
them. I believe we got near fifteen hundred horse. Sir, I beg your Prayers:
Believe and you shall be established, I rest,

Your Servant.

FINIS.

