Lieut: General Cromwells LETTER TO The House of Commons, OF All the
Particulars of taking the City of BRISTOLL; And the manner of P: Ruperts
marching to Oxford.

Together with two Orders;

The one, for a Day of Thanksgiving in all parts of the Kingdom within the
power of the Parliament.

And the other, for a Collection for a distressed and plundered party in the
said City of Bristoll.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter and Orders be
forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Sept. 18. 1645.

SIR,
IT has pleased the General to give me in charge to represent unto you a
particular Account of the taking of Bristoll, the which I gladly undertake.

After the finishing of that Service at Sherborn, it was disputed at a Council
of War, whether we should march into the West, or to Bristoll? Amongst other
Arguments, the leaving so considerable an Enemy at our backs to march into the
heart of the Kingdom, the undoing of the Country about Bristoll, which was
exceedingly harrassed by the Prince his being but a Fortnight thereabouts, the
correspondence he might hold with Wales, the possibility of uniting the Enemies
Forces where they pleased, and especially the drawing to an Head the
disaffected Club-men of Somerset, Wilts, and Dorser, when once our backs were
toward them. These considerations, together with the taking so important a
place, so Advantageous for the opening of Trade to London, did sway the
balance, and begat that conclusion. When we came within four miles of the
City, we had a new debate, whether we should endeavor to Block it up, or make
a Regular Siege; The latter being overruled, Colonel Welden with his Brigade,
marched to Pile-hill, on the South side of the City, being within Musket shot
thereof, where in a few days they made a good Quarter, over-looking the City;
upon our advance, the Enemy fired Bedminster, Clifton, and some other Villages,
and would have fired the Country thereabouts, if our unexpected coming had not
hindered. The General caused some Horse and Dragoons under Commissary General
Ireton, to Advance over Avon, to keep in the Enemy on the North side of the
Town, until the Foot could come up; and after a day, the General, with
Colonel Mountagues, and Colonel Rainsbroughs Brigades, marched over at
Keynsham to Stapleton, where he Quartered that Night; the next day, Colonel
Mountague having his Post assigned with his Brigade, was to secure all between
Froom and Avon: he came up to Lawfords-gate, within Musket shot thereof:
Colonel Rainsbroughs Post was near to Durdham Down, where the Dragooners and
three Regiments of Horse made good a Post upon the Down between him and the
River Avon on his right hand, and from Colonel Rainsborows, Quarters to Froom
River on his left: A part of Colonel Birch, and Major General Skippons
Regiment were to maintain that Post; these Posts being thus settled, our horse
were forced to be upon exceeding great duty to stand by the foot, least the
foot being so weak in all their Posts, might receive an affront; and truly
herein we were very happy, that we should receive so little loss by Sallies,
considering the paucity of our men to make good the Posts, and the strength of
the Enemy within, by Sallies, (which were three or four) I know not that we
lost thirty men in all the time of our Siege; of Officers of quality, only
Colonel Okey, was taken by mistake going to the enemy, thinking them to be
friends, and Captain Guilliams slain in a charge: We took Sir Barnard Astley,
and killed Sir Richard Crane, one very considerable with the Prince: We had a
Council of War concerning the Storming of the Town about eight days before we
took it, and in that there appeared great unwillingnesse to the work, through
the unseasonablenesse of the weather, and other apparent difficulties. Some
inducement to bring us thither, was the report of the good ^ffection of the
Townsmen to us, but that did not answer expectation: Upon a second
consideration, it was over-ru^^d for a ^^orme, which no sooner concluded, but
difficulties were removed, and all things seemed to favor the d^signe^ and
indeed there h^th been seldom the like cheerfulness in Casticers and
Soldier, to any work like to this, after it was once resolved on. The day and
hour of our Storm, was appointed to be Wednesday morning the 10, about one of
the clock; we chose to act it so early, because we hoped thereby to surprise
the Enemy, with this resolution also ((...) avoid confusion, and falling foul
upon one another) that when we had recovered the Line, and Forts upon it, we
could not advance further until day: The Generals signal unto the Storm was
the firing of Straw, and discharging four piece of Canon at Prier hill Fort,
the signal was very well perceived by all, and ^ruly the men went on with
great resolution, and very presently, recovered the Line, making way for the
horse to enter, Colonel Montague and Colonel Pickering who stormed at
Lawfords gate, where was a double work well filled with men and canon,
presently entered, and with great resolution be at the Enemy from their works,
and possessed their canon, their expedition was such, that they forced the
Enemy from their advantages, without any considerable loss to themselves, they
laid down the Bridges for the horse to enter; Major Desborough commanding the
horse, who very gallantly seconded the foot; then our foot advanced to the city
walls, where they possessed the gate against the Castle-street, whereinto were
put a hundred men, who made it good: Sir Hardresse Waller with his and the
Generals Regiment, with no less resolution, entered on the other side of
Lawfords Gate toward Avon River, and put themselves into an immediate
conjunction with the rest of the Brigade: During this, Colonel Rainsborow and
Colonel Hamond attempted Prior-hill Fort, and the Line downwards toward
Froom, Colonel Birch, and the Major Generals Regiment being to Storm toward
Froome River; Colonel Hamond possessed the Line immediately, and beating the
Enemy from it, made way for our horse to enter: Colonel Rainsborow, who had
the hardest task of all at Prior hill Fort, attempted it, and fought near
three hours for it; and indeed there was great despair of carrying the place,
it being exceeding high, a Ladder of thirty rounds sca^ce reaching the top
thereof; but his resolution was such, that not withstanding the
inaccessablenesse and difficulty, he would not give it over: The Enemy had four
piece of canon upon it, which they plied with round and case shot upon our men,
his Lieutenant Colonel Bowen, and others, were two hours at push of Pike,
standing upon the Pallizadoes but could not enter; Col: Hamond, being entered
the Line, and Capt. Ireton with a Forlorn of Col: Riches Regiment, interposing
with his Horse between the Enemies Horse and Col: Hamond, received a shot with
two Pistol bullets, which brake his Arm, by means the entrance of Col. Hamond
did Storm the Fort on that part which was inward: By which means, Col.
Rainsbrough and Col: Hamonds men entered the Fort, and immediately put to the
Sword, almost all in it; and as this was the place of most difficulty, so of
most loss to us on that side, and of very great honor to the undertaker. The
Horse did second them with great resolution; both these Colonels do
acknowledge, that their interposition between the Enemies Horse and their Foot,
was a great means of obtaining this strong Fort, without which, all the rest of
the Line to Froom-River, would have done us little good; and indeed, neither
Horse nor Foot would have stood in all that way, in any manner of security, had
not the Fort been taken.

Major Bethels were the first horse entered the Line, who did behave himself
very gallantly, and was shot in the thigh, had one or two shots more, and his
horse killed under him.

Colonel Birch with his men, and the Major Generals Regiment, entered with
very good Resolution, where their Post was, possessing the Enemies Guns, and
turning them upon them.

By this all the Line from Priors-hill Fort, to Avon, which was a full mile,
with all the Forts, Ordnance, and Bulwarks, were possessed by us; but one
wherein there were about an hundred and twenty men of the Enemy, which the
General Summoned, and all the men submitted.

The success on Colonel Weldens side, did not answer with this, and although
the Colonells and other the Officers and Soldiers both Horse and Foot,
testified very much resolution as could be expected; Colonel Welden, Col.
Ingoldsby, Col. Herbert, and the rest of the Colonells, and Officers, both of
Horse and Foot, doing what could be well looked for from men of honor, yet
what by reason of the height of the Works, which proved higher then report made
them, and the shortness of the Ladders, they were repulsed with the loss of
about 100. men, Col. Fortescu^^ Lieutenant colonel was killed, Major Cromwell
dangerously shot, and two of Gol. Ingoldsbies brothers hurt, with some Officers.

Being possessed of thus much as has been related, the Town was fired in three
places by the Enemy, which we could not put out, and this begat a great trouble
to the General, and us all, fe^ring to see so famous a City burnt to ashes
before our faces, whiles we were viewing so sad a spectacle, and consulting
which way to make further advantage of our Success; the Prince sent a Trumpet
to the General, to desire a Treaty for the surrender of the Town, to which
the General agreed, and deputed Colonel Mountague, Col. Rainsborow, and Col.
Pickering for that Service, Authorizing them with Instructions to treat, and
conclude the Articles which are these enclosed: For performance whereof,
Hostages were mutually given on Thursday about two of the clock in the
afternoon. The Prince ^^rched out having a convoy of two Regiments of Horse
from us, and making Election of Oxford for the place he would go to, which he
had liberty to do by his Articles.

The Canon which we have taken are about one hundred and forty mounted, about
100. barrels of Powder, already come to our hands, with a good quantity of
Shot, Ammunition, and Arms, we have sound already between two and three
thousand Muskets. The Royal Fort had in it victuals for one hundred and fifty
men, for three hundred and twenty days, the Castle victualled for near half
so long: The Prince had foot of the Garrison as the Major of the City informed
me, two thousand five hundred, and about one thousand horse, beside the Trained
bands of the Town, and Auxiliaries one thousand, some say fifteen hundred; I
hear but one man has died of the Plague in all our Army, although we have
quartered amongst and in the midst of infected persons and places, we had not
killed of ours in this storm, nor all this siege two hundred men.

Thus I have given you a true, but not a full account of this great business
wherein he that runs may read that all this is none other then the work of
God, he must be a very Atheist that does not acknowledge it.

It may be thought that some praises are due to these gallant men, of whose
valor so much mention is made, their humble suite to you and all that have an
interest in this blessing is, that in remembrance of Gods praises they may be
forgotten: Its their joy that they are instruments to Gods glory, and their
Countries good, its their honor that God vouchsafes to use them: Sir, they
that have been employed in this Service know, that faith and Prayer obtained
this City for you; I do not say ours only, but of the people of God with you,
and all England over, who have wrastled with God for a blessing in this very
thing. Our desires are, that God may be glorified by the same Spirit of faith,
by which we ask all our sufficiency, and having received it, it is meet that
he have all the praise.

Your humble Servant, Oliver Cromwell.
From Bristoll, 14. Sept. 1645.
17. September, 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That on the next Lord's Day
thanks be given unto God for the great Success he has given unto the
Parliaments Forces under Sir Tho. Fairfax their General, in taking in the City
of Bristoll, with the Castle and Forts, in all the Churches and Chapels within
the Lines of Communication, and Bills of Mortality; and that the next Lord's Day
come Fortnight, being the fifth day of October, in all the parts of the Kingdom,
within the power of the Parliament; And that the Lord Major of the City of
London, do give timely notice hereof, to all the Ministers within the Lines of
Communication, and Bills of Mortality; And that the Knights and Burgesses of
the several Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, do give notice hereof, and send
Copies of this Order to the several Counties, Cities and Buroughs: It is
further Ordered, That-the Relation sent up from Lieutenant General Cromwell by
the command of the General, of September. 14. be Printed, and Read upon the
days on which public thanks are to be given unto God, for his great blessing
in this Success given at Bristoll,

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

17. September, 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That on the next Lords day on
which public thanks is appointed to be given to Almighty God, for the great
Success at Bristoll, a collection be made in all the Churches and Chapels
within the Lines of Communication, and weekly Bills of Mortality: And the
Moneys collected, paid into the Treasurers for maimed Soldiers, at
Tallow-chandlers Hall, by the several collectors and receivers of the said
Moneys, within two days after the said collection, and by the said Treasurers,
distributed for the Relief of many distressed and Plundered people of Bristoll
and the places adjacent.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

