A NON EST INVENTVS Returned to Mr. EDWARD BAGSHAW'S ENQUIRY, AND Vainly
boasted DISCOVERY Of weakness in the Grounds of the CHURCHES INFALLIBILITY.

ALSO His Seditious INVECTIVES Against the Moderate Sincerity of PROTESTANTS,
and savage Cruelty against ROMAN CATHOLICS Repressed

By a Catholic Gentleman.

PSALM. LXIII. v. VI. Scrutati sunt Iniquitates; defecerunt Scrutinio.

They made an Enquiry after Iniquities; but the Enquirers failed in the Enquiry.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXII.

Mr. Edward Bagshaw,
THe Title of your Book is not immodest, being called only An Enquiry into the
Grounds of the Roman Churches Infallibility; But by pronouncing in the
conclusion those fatal words, MEAN TEKEL, you confidently declare, it cannot
be answered: The destruction of the Babilonian Monarchy was not more inevitable
after the writing that Decretory sentence by an invisible Angels fingers, than
is the Roman Churches now. You have compiled and published this your Book,
which you judge unanswerable, and (to deal ingenuously with you) so may I too,
though I be as good a Catholic as the Pope himself. What would you have more?
A reason for it? Have but a little patience and you shall not fail of one,
better then you expect, or have knowledge to foresee.

2. Yet I conceive it concerns not Catholics only, but the whole Kingdom, I
mean all good Subjects in it, that such a book, though pretendedly against
Roman Catholics only, yet full of pernicious invectives, malicious complaints,
and seditious reflections against the State, should with a barefaced impudence
stalk abroad in the public view, as fearless of a censure. Nor is the Book in
it self so highly provoking, as in respect of the abominable Preface that no
honest subject, Protestant or Catholic, can read without indignation, no
reader justify or not mislike without declaring his Thirst after the public
ruin.

3. The Apostles advice of redeeming the time forbids me to mispend it by
replying line after line to what you have written: That therefore which I have
to say to you shall be to make good these positions in direct opposition to
what you have written, viz. Churches Infallibility only proves that you have
nothing to say to the purpose against it.

I.
That it is a public mischief that Mr. Bagshaw, or any such as he, should be
permitted to call themselves English Protestants.

1. IF common fame be true, Mr. Bagshaw, you are the same person that published
so petulant and uncivil a Libel against my Lord Bishop of Worcester, and not
for that fault alone have been so deservedly Disciplined by Mr. l'Estrange, and
so smartly whip't, that the whole Town has heard your cries. How then comes it
to pass that you can find leisure to seek out, and defy to the combat other
enemies? But it may be the demolishing of the Roman Church is but an excursion
in a Parenthesis, whilst you are, for your divertisement, unbending your
thoughts, or taking breath awhile against a new combat, with an Adversary that
has a great deal more zeal, sharpness, honesty and courage then is for your
purpose, who hope not to be discerned, whilst in despite of the Act of
Oblivion you will not suffer either the King or any of his faithful Subjects
to forget what they have suffered, and must expect, but still work and preach
and print, almost totidem Verbis as you did when the horrible Covenant was the
only Religion and Gospel of the three Kingdoms.

2. These practices, Mr. L 'Estrange, if he cannot interrupt, yet he can call
company, and bid them take notice of them. He will not permit you to Glory as
if you could once more cousen the Kingdom into a new Rebellion. Never hope to
find so much as one English Protestant that will once more be cheated to look
upon you as the Assertors of the Subjects Liberties, or maintainers of pure
Protestant Religion. If the Civil Authority will for ever wink at your Caballs,
and the Ecclesiastic leave open the Pulpits to your Sermons of the old style,
and the Presses to your Pamphlets against Bishops and indifferent Ceremonies:
If you expect Indemnity must be interpreted to regard the future also, all that
can be said will be, Sani, Sobrii, vigiles perimus. We shall not, as
heretofore, be surprised: but we make a Covenant with destruction, as if we
were afraid it would escape us.

3. As for your Pamphlet touching Infallibility, though by the Title you
pretend to attacque only Roman Catholics, and to demolish the Grounds of the
Churches Faith, yet in the whole Book there are not quite two small leaves
wherein the Church is concerned at all either in its Grounds or Superstructure.
Therefore I am confident, and it may be Mr. L'Estrange (who knows your ways
and Arts much better then I) may in a far neater, that is, his own style tell
you, your real Design was to write a Book with the Title against Catholics,
merely to have an opportunity to stuff the Preface with malicious glances
against Protestants too, and incense vulgar minds, as if Popery (forsooth) were
ready to be introduced.

4. Now though my self, purely as a Catholic, am little concerned in that part
of your book which you purposely wrote against Catholics; and not very much in
those passages against Protestants, except only in this consideration, that you
would fain make Catholic Religion your Engine to raise troubles, yet as a
faithful Subject to his Majesty, and a lover of my Countries peace, I cannot
but inwardly bewail, and must take leave thus publicly to justify the too
reasonable cause of my grief, when I see an English Subject openly professing
his name, and pretending to the Protection of an Honorable Counselor of
State, renew the old seditious practice of inflaming the Peoples minds with
rage against their Teachers, and murmuring suspicions against their Governors:
A practice that above all others contributed to the raising of the late
Rebellion, and to the ruin and murder of our late Sovereign of happy memory,
and his best Subjects and Servants, the late Archbishop of Canterbury, Earl of
Strafford, etc. Here are still among us God knows how many Sects, that if any
Protestant Doctors shall presume to speak or write otherwise, then according
to what the furious zeal of Sectaries against Ecclesiastical Unity and peace
suggests, they must presently be exposed to a general suspicion, the Country
must be raised upon them, and upon the Bishops if they not discountenance them,
and upon the King unless he punish them for no fault at all.

4. But give me leave now, Mr. Bagshaw, to ask. Who are you? of what Sect? Of
what Church? Common report gives you for a Presbyterian, a man formerly very
busy in the Intrigues of that Faction. Yet some passages in your Preface and
Epistle Dedicatory speak you an Independent: in which you call your self an
Assertor of Christian Liberty, complaining of the keenness of Laws against
such; a disliker of Episcopal Authority as settled in England; and one that
refuses to admit the interpretation of Scripture from any Person or Church, but
only from your own private Reason. Most likely it is, you reserve in petto a
Declaration whether party you mean to adhere to, till you see how they are
likely to thrive: till then you would pass for an Amphibion. And truly such a
temper among you threatens much danger to the State. When Pilate and Herod are
made friends, Christ must look to himself.

5. If you be an Independent on all others, will you not suffer others to be
Independent likewise on you? Or if you be a Presbyterian; are you not content
with enjoying hitherto the fruits of his Majesty's most gracious promise from
Breda? None pretend more then you to tender consciences. Have any called you in
question for differences in Religion? But this it seems will not serve your
turn: Nor an Independents turn. Your tender conscience will not accept of the
only condition that his Majesty annexes to this his Grace, which is, That you
must not disturb the peace of the Kingdom. This most just and necessary
condition you here in your Preface renounce, in which you again blow the
Trumpet to sedition, by telling the World that English Divines are bringing in
Popery. If that were true, as long as it may be permitted to you to be
Presbyterians or Independents among your selves, what do you complain of? Will
you never leave this peevish, this malicious envy, not to content your selves
with your own safety unless others be ruined?

6. But it is intolerable that you should call your selves in your Preface, We
Protestants: and talk of our Reformed Church of England, or our Ancestors, Our
primitive protestancy, etc. Are you an English Protestant? a member of the
English Church established by Law and Canons? Why then do you not submit
peaceably to the government of your Bishops, and indifferent Ceremonies? Why do
you reject the Book of Common Prayer enacted by supreme authority both
Spiritual and Temporal to be the public Liturgy of the protestancy of England?
Why do you find fault with the keenness of Laws against such Assertors of
Christian Liberty? The very titles you assume of Presbyterian or Independent,
declare that your formal essence consists in an opposition to English
protestancy and prelacy. You pilfer therefore the name of an English
Protestant, ut sportulam furunculus, to use Tertullians phrase: Or rather you
are English protestants, as Salvian says some in his time were Christians, in
opprobium and contumeliam Christi.

7. But you are wise in your generations: you know you could do no mischief,
unless you took a vizard. For if you had spoken in your Preface the true
Language of a Sectary; if directing your speech to English Protestants you had
said, I Mr. Edward Bagshaw, Student of Christ-Church, a very Presbyterian (or
Independent) a professed Rebel against the English Church, do out of my tender
love and care of the welfare and promotion of the said Church, give you, O
English Protestants, warning to take heed of Popery, for the bringing in of
which among you Doctor Gunning and Mr. Thorndike, and God knows how many more
are preparing way; the Bishops are of intelligence with them, and the State
connives at them: Therefore look to your selves. All we can do is to blow the
Trumpet, and tell you once more how courageously we will lead you to a thorough
Reformation: If you have neither zeal for God, nor knowledge of your own
strength, it is none of our fault, Little do you know that we Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists Quakers, ande. are again become good friends, and
will join together to put down this Antichristian Hierarchy; and when we are
to divide their lands it will be time to try which of us can get most. Now a
beater Mean we have not for such a purpose then, as formerly we did, to cry
out, Beware of Popery, Take heed of your Antichristian Clergy, etc.

8. If you had unwisely discovered your thoughts with such plainness, your
open dealing would have showed some sincerity, some appearance of the
simplicity of the Dove, but little of the subtle wisdom of the Serpent, a
quality much more for your purpose. Notwithstanding, your vizard being quite
worn out, your calling your selves English Protestants will not have the
effect it had in your former happy days twenty years since. Your Voice is too
well known now not to be Jacobs, There is scarce an English subject so
ignorant, or of so short a memory, but can take notice that this was the Old
Tune that sounded to a charge, and invited them to kill one another for
Charities sake, and to suffer you know whom, to murder the best King that ever
reigned before him. The difference between the two Brethren in iniquity, being
only this; One did but fight against him, and the Other killed him; One bound
his hand, and the other cut off his head: They will be so far from startling at
the name of Popery out of your mouths, that perhaps they may begin to
entertain a better opinion of a Religion so persecuted by you, especially
remembering that the Papists never separated their interests from the Kings and
Theirs, but unanimously ventured their lives and estates for them, and this
purely out of love, Duty and conscience, even when all they could expect by a
victory was to remain still under the penalty of the Laws.

9. Therefore a disguise is necessary for you whenever you would speak,
except to your own Party in private. It had been folly in extremity to say, We
Presbyterians, Independents, etc. do give you English Protestants warning to
beware of your Doctors that would bring in Popery, It had been apparently to
your own prejudice, unless you had said, We tell you this who are true Reformed
English Protestants, of the same Church with you, your Pastors, who have care
of your souls, whom you see no man hinders from preaching in your Pulpits, and
writing Books to Preach to those that cannot hear us in Pulpits. If we were
enemies would the Civil or Ecclesiastical State, think you, allow us such a
liberty, and maintain us at their charges to Preach and Print as we do?

10. But I do assure you Mr. Bagshaw, you are no English Protestant, For what
is it to be an English Protestant, or a member of the English Church? This is a
question of greater moment then ordinarily is believed: The very subsistence of
Protestant Religion in England now depends upon the right stating of it. Nay I
may truly say, that even we Roman Catholics are much concerned in it, and
therefore I may be pardoned if I insist upon it; because unless this question
be resolved, all our disputes with Protestants are likely to prove mere beating
of the air, contentions utterly wandering from the purpose. Therefore I may be
excused, if I take the trouble upon me to resolve it: and this I must do, not
upon Catholic grounds, or notions of the phrase [being members of a Church]
but only the notions which Protestants and generally all Sects divided from the
Catholics have entertained of that phrase. For Catholics do not esteem any
one a member of the Roman Catholic Church, that does not profess all Doctrines
without exception taught by it to be true, and submits not to all the Laws and
Ordinances of it. There is no distinction to be made, as to this matter,
between Doctrines in themselves Fundamental or non-Fundamental, between Laws
in themselves necessary or not: because a refusal to accept any one of those
Laws or Doctrines does vertually destroy the Authority of the Church, of how
little concernment so ever such a Doctrine or Ordinance be in it self. There
may be differences and even dissentions among Catholics, about points of far
greater moment in themselves, and yet neither of the parties be in danger of
being excluded from the Title of Catholics, or members of the Roman Catholic
Church, because the Churches Authority has not interposed it self in those
disputes either way, and therefore is untouched by either.

11. But generally all Congregations divided from the Catholic have a quite
different conceit of the Phrase [being Members of a Church:] And this conceit
is either general, or more special. According to the general conception of that
phrase they acknowledge all to be members of their Church (or rather co-members
of the Church of Christ) that do not teach doctrines or make ordinances
excluding all right and interest in the common salvation: and thus English
protestants esteem themselves members of the Catholic Church, and Lutherans of
the Calvinists Church, and you Presbyterians, Independents, etc. of the English
protestant Church: because they do not deny a possibility of salvation to one
another notwithstanding the differences among them.

12. The second and more special notion of the phrase [being Members of a
Church] entertained by all particular Congregations not Catholic, does import
an external conformity in all Doctrines without exception, and all practices
determined by each congregation respectively, a renunciation of any excluding
the refusers from an external communion and participation of the privileges of
that Congregation, who notwithstanding may be acknowledged to be almost in as
good a condition as to salvation, as those are which exclude them from their
external Communion. Thus Lutherans are not Calvinists, though they believe
Calvinists may meet them in heaven, because they will not admit them to their
communion. Thus you Presbyterians and Independents, etc. are no English
protestants as long as you are Non-Conformists. Let the differences between you
be never so small [as wearing a Surplice, Kneeling at Communion, etc.] if these
Ceremonies be established by Laws Ecclesiastical or Civil, the non-submission
to them is a manifest dividing from that Church: and the less considerable the
quarrels are, the greater is the guilt of those that publicly dispute or write
against that Church of which they desire to be thought members. True it is you
would seem to have some reason to complain against the English Church, if for
such trifling differencies only, they should pronounce you excommunicated from
Christ's Mystical Body: (though they must give me leave to say, That by not
doing so, but acknowledging your Congregations to be members of the Church,
they do manifestly conclude themselves guilty of Schism by such a
communication with you, whom they cannot deny to be Schismatics:) But it would
be ridiculous in you to accuse them of Tyranny for excluding you from their
External Communion, when you your selves will not embrace it. They do not
pretend to an Authority to oblige you in conscience to believe that their
Doctrines are true and their Ordinances just: but they would be no Church, they
would renounce all Order, if they did not maintain the laws and customs with
so great deliberation, and after so many disputes with you, framed and renewed.
Where there is no Uniformity even in external matters, there is no Church, but
a Babel. If at Communion some should sit, others stand, others lie along, (as
our Lord did) and others kneel, if some should be bare-headed, others with
their hats on, would it look like an assembly of men that served God?
Therefore complain not, but rather thank God and them, if they force not your
consciences, but permit you to abstain from things you do not like, and to
practice among your selves things you like better. But to expect to be
acknowledged members of a Church, whilst you refuse to submit to the authority
of that Church in things of themselves not evil, much more whilst you write
publicly against them, is to desire them not to pretend to the name of a
Church. Therefore, I conclude, that you Mr. Bagshaw are no more a member of the
English Church, then I am: and my proof is this very Preface of your Book that
I now write against. Your saying that Episcopacy is lawful, or your being
ordained by Bishops, signifies nothing; as long as you disobey them, you are
none of their subjects.

13. However I cannot blame you, if in despite of English protestants
themselves you will needs be called English protestants. For if being, as
really you are, no true members of the English Church, you were treated as
such, that is, excluded from a participation of the emoluments of it, and
obliged to a separated exercise of your ill-natured Religion, two great
incommodities would ensue to you, and withal two as proportionably great
benefits to them, and the whole Nation.

14. For First, What pitiful Congregations would you in a short time appear to
be? At present your numbers, especially in Cities and Towns are not
unconsiderable. Whereas, if being no members of the English Church, you were
excluded from participating Tithes, Benefices and other preferments, not at all
due to you, and had no other maintenance but the Voluntary contributions of
your own party, you would quickly find that Party weary of you, and become
rather content to hear a sermon in the Church, and wholesome prayers in a
Surplice, then to pay so much overplus for far worse stuff in a parlour, from
a short cloak and no cassack.

15. The Second Mortification thence flowing would be yet more intolerable.
Hitherto the facility of Bishops giving you leave to call your selves English
protestants and members of their Church enables you to defile their Churches by
doing your own business in them to their great prejudice and danger. In their
pulpits you cry down Ceremonies, you preach against their government, you sow
sedition in the hearts of their flock, you instill discontent against the
State: In a word you do all the mischief you can, both to it and them. And all
this while you enjoy their Livings: they maintain you to destroy them. Whereas
if at the charges of your own patrons only you were to preach and pray in
private parlours, your peculiar Gifts in both would quickly vanish: for there
would be no use of railing, and blowing up discontented passions in an
Auditory, where most of your hearers can rail as well as your selves, and are
perhaps already more discontented: You would lose the pleasure of gaining
Proselytes to your Faction; because none will hear you that are in danger of
being seduced. On the contrary to your hearts torment you would see even
City-Churches every day more and more filled with your dearest friends; nay
your own Stomachs would come down, and for preferment, yea even bread, you
would quickly digest both Cross and Surplice.

16. Before I leave this Argument, I would fain with your permission propose a
Question to You, though I fear the very proposal will anger You, and I do
scarce hope for an Answer, though if you had a mind to it, nothing is more
easy to be answered: and in case you reply to this paper, remember, I summon
You not to forget this question.

17. Suppose then His Majesty and the Parliament should by Law confirm to You
the gracious promise from Breda, That upon giving security not to enter into
practices to disturb the public peace, You should not be called in question
for matters of opinion, but should have a moderate liberty to exercise your
Religion at home (or even in Churches to your own party only, with prohibition
to all good subjects to come to your sermons) would you be content with such an
indulgence and mercy from the State? Would You upon these terms engage to
discontinue your sermons and prayers top-ful of the fell draconum?

18. Till You answer this Question, I will tell You the Opinion of many that
believe they know Your temper well enough. They do assure themselves you would
not: You, I mean, Presbyterians and Independents: For as for your natural
brood, and subdivided Sects of Anabaptists, Quakers, etc. I conceive they are
more reasonable in this matter of Liberty of conscience. They would be content
to serve God after their fashion in their own Chambers, and would maintain
their own Ministers, and poor too, paying withal the dues which by Law belong
to Parishes. Whereas there is but too good ground to believe that there is
nothing more apprehended by You Presbyterians and Independents, then such an
Indulgence: because that would disunite from you all other Sects, and make them
sure to the State against You: so that You and your Friends would stand
miserably and contemptibly alone.

19. True it is, you would fain seem somewhat inclined to a Conformity of your
fashion, and for that end You demand Conferences and Treaties with the Bishops,
etc. But withal You require a condescendence from them in such things, as both
honor and truth forbid a compliance in, and which cannot be granted without a
secret acknowledgment that they have been faulty hitherto in oppressing You
with undue burdens. And as for other trifling scruples of yours, You are more
troubled when they yield any thing, then when they refuse all. However by such
Treaties You gain this, that among Vulgar minds You may sometimes pass for
zealous persons in all things pertaining to God, and withal no enemies to
peace: And besides; You may have occasion thereby to complain yet more against
Bishops, for not submitting to your conditions, so easy and reasonable. For
alas! You desire ease only in indifferent trifling matters: whereas in all
necessary Ordinances for Gods glory You are ready to comply. What a great
matter, say You, is a Surplice, or refusing a Papis^ical Cross? For peace sake
You will even digest Episcopacy. Let there be Bishops, but not jure Divino, or
if jure Divino, not such as Law has established. Let them be countermanded
each Bishop by a dozen Presbyters, and subject to their Classes, and you will
not stand upon the Title.

20. I dare say, Mr. Bagshaw, You are very angry now to be told thus
publicly, that you are more afraid of Liberty of Conscience then of
persecution, unless You might have leave to interpret Liberty of conscience, to
be a free permission to do mischief, not to serve God. And much more, to be
told, You are no English protestant. But You must pardon us, that cannot but
think so, till You tell the World what You mean by an English protestant, and
what that English protestancy is which You profess and maintain, and have
been so busy Twenty Years, almost to the ruin of the Kingdom, to set up
against Prelacy.

II.
That Mr. Bagshaw 's insttilling supicions into the Peoples minds, as if
English Divines, etc. had a design to introduce Popery again, is a mere acting
over the late Rebellion.

1. IT is now time to take into consideration the zeal, Mr. Bagshaw, that You,
as a good English Protestant, have showed against those that have a liking to
the pomp of popery, and are so hardy as to make some attempts to bring it back
into your Church. In this zeal You spare neither Gentry (including I suppose
the Nobility) nor Clergy.

2. First as touching the Gentry, You tell the Kingdom that too many of our
unwary Preface.
Gentry begin already to be taken with the outward pomp of popery. Who are
these many, too many? They are Gentlemen. The Gentry indeed are not so apt to
be wrought upon by You, as Inferior Tradesmen and day-laborours: and therefore
it is much for your purpose, that the general rout should have a suspicion of
them. Well though there be many of them, yet You name none: whereas there are
but two of the Clergy, and You name them both. There is some Mystery in this.
Would You not have it believed, but dare not speak out, that these too many
Gentlemen are some members of the present Parliament, that you covertly desire
the Kingdom may suspect, and have an ill opinion of, because they will not, in
compliance with your slovenly devotion, suffer you to burn Surplices and
Copes, or abrogate decent Ceremonies? but much more because several Honorable
persons among them have expressed some pity to Roman Catholics, and an
inclination to requite their fidelity with some small ease from the heavy
burdens laid on them by the Laws? It is a greater torment to You to see their
Fidelity rewarded, then their Religion not persecuted. But it is intolerable to
you, that no good Christian now can be unsatisfied in the way that Roman
Catholics have taken to appear fit objects of mercy, since they have both
publicly in the house of Lords Viva voce, and by many Treatises and
Protestations in writing given such security of their unalterable Loyalty and
Obedience to his Majesty, and the State, as not any Christian can possibly
give greater, and I much fear You will never have the honesty to imitate them.

3. Observe one thing I pray You, in such Protestations and writings of Roman
Catholics. They do not deprecate any former faults committed, because they are
guilty of none: they protest their clearness from those crimes of a few
desperate unhappy monsters, and writings of their traitorous Masters, that
occasioned the severity of Laws against all: They do not mention their
universal fidelity to the King these last twenty Years, as an obligation or
merit, for which they expect reward from men: but as a necessary duty to which
their Religion bound them, and which if they had not performed, they should
have incurred a curse from God. Yet all this perhaps will not satisfy You. But
see our different Complexion: for my part though there were not one of Your
(supposed) Religion, but were deeply engaged in infidelity to the King, yet if
You would only acknowledge that a fault was committed, is repented of, and a
promise made of Loyalty for the future, I should hope well, and wish You might
be believed and confided in for the future.

4. Next as to the Clergy, Your accusation Preface.
is most heavy and punctual when You say, I need not plead for the not
persecuting of Popery, etc. when some that yet profess themselves to be of
our Church, and those of good note too, are not afraid to plead for something
more then its Toleration. Since by telling us in print, that the Pope is not
Master Thorndike in Weights and Measures.
Antichrist, That Papists are not Idolaters; nay by affirming, That all are
schismatics who upon that score do refuse communion with them, they not only
blemish the virtue and piety of our first Reformers, who all built upon that
foundation, but likewise show how willing they are upon any terms how wretched
and unworthie soever, to return into Egypt, and bring us to our Brick and
bondage again. If this be not the interest of some, I cannot imagine what means
the crying up of that Great Diana of the Papists, the Churches Authority, and
making that the sole Interpreter of Scripture, The Dr. Gunning upon Math. 9.
preaching up of Lent, and other political Fish*daies, as Religious Fasts, and
of Apostolical Institution, quite contrary M. Thorndike ut supra.
both to express scripture, and an Act of Parliament. The insinuating, that we
may lawfully pray for the dead, and likewise expect some benefit by their
prayers, which in time may easily be improved to our praying unto them. These
with some other opinions of the like nature, so far degenerating from our
primitive protestancy, do show that if the Age is willing to be deceived, there
are not wanting learned men who are willing enough to deceive them.

5. This authority that You, Mr. Bagshaw, take upon You to proscribe all
protestants that dare not profess such a detestation of Catholic Unity as Your
party does, is alone sufficient to demonstrate how much the English Clergy does
neglect their own preservation, whilst they permit such as You to call your
selves protestants, and members of their Church: your ways and interests being
so directry opposed to theirs.

6. All England almost has lately heard Archbishop of Canterbury.
laid to the charge of the late most unjustly murdered Archbishop of
Canterbury, as the most heavy point of his accusation, that he had a desire of
restoring England to Catholic unity. Yet there was not produced any proof at
all, that for that end he deserted any necessary and essential Doctrines of
his own Church: the mere desire of unity was his crime. A crime that he
willingly acknowledged, and as he had reason joyfullie boasted of. And
certainly, that Christian must needs be full of a Spirit not from heaven, that
hates unity, quatenus ipsam. Now, what my Lord Archbishop desired, and died
for, I am persuaded there is scarce any true genuine English protestant but
does commend in him, and would not refuse, occasion being given, to imitate him
in.

7. If you read Bishop Andrews his works both English and Latin, You Bishop
Andrews
will, even in his Controversies against Catholics, find a wonderful caution
not to aggravate, or multiply differences, great care to prevent
misintelligence, and an exactness in stating disputed points with a most
studied impartiality, and very often with condescendence. Nay even in his sermons
before the Court, in which his heart only spoke as as an Ambassador for God,
what pangs may one perceive in his soul when he speaks upon this subject, and
reflects on the aversion that some who like You, call themselves protestants,
have from Catholic peace and Unity. Hearken to this one passage in his first
Sermon on Pentecost: Who shall make us of one accord? High shall his reward be
in heaven, and happy his remembrance on earth, that shall be the means to
restore this accord to the Church; that once we may keep a true and perfect
Pentecost, like this here, Erant omnes unanimiter. It was a restoring of unity
that he so much thirsted after: which word shows, that he had a respect to the
Catholic Church from which only a separation was made.

8. And Doctor Steward likewise, a person as replenished with learning,
prudence Doctor Steward.
and virtue as any of his time, he so longed after this unity, that in his
last Will he gave order it should be the argument of the Inscription on his
Tomb. And no doubt there is, but such an Inscription would make it lighter,
that is, render his future condition better.

9. These wothy persons were indeed English protestants, like those You now
arraign. They knew the true composition of their own Chuch: A Church, though I
must needs say, not firmly built yet however erected by advice of persons in
Authority, persons of honor and judgment: not as Geneva, Holland, and Cromwels
Independent Church, by a rebellious Army of Tradesmen. They knew that at the
first framing of the English Church a way was not so wholly given to passion,
but that when certain interests of a few great persons were complied with, and
several too justly complained of Gravamina from the Roman Court remedied, there
might be a possibility of closing again with that Church which they then only
so far deserted. They knew there was never any intention so to forsake the
Roman Church, as if it were a Babel, or seat of Antichrist, but ever
acknowledged it a true Church, though not so well Reformed. On the contrary
they knew, and their successors do still to your hearts torment acknowledge,
that all the Ordination and spiritual Jurisdiction of the English Church is
derived from the Roman: which therefore must be a true Church if theirs be any.

10. Upon such grounds as these, no question, my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury
not only desired, as all honest well minded Protestants do, but also hoped,
that if by his authority and skill he could reduce the English church to that
primitive State before your Calvinistical dregs and poison were instilled into
it, he might, upon warrantable terms, procure a Reunion with the Catholic
Church. But how should this Reunion be made? By giving up to Roman Catholics
all the points of English Doctrins and Discipline? No such matter. But this he
knew, That in Books of Controversy, among ten Points disputed, there are not
two wherein either of the Churches are interested: and that most of the few,
real, Substantial differences might be qualified by a moderate interpretation
and condescendence.

11. But whenever such a business as this is either agitated or talked of,
you Mr. Bagshaw and your party smile, and deride us poor Roman Catholics, as
if we vainly framed to our selves great hopes and advantages by such good
Christian designs, or Writings of Protestants. But truly you are deceived. We
indeed, as we ought, are glad, purely for their sakes that either design or
write sincerely and ingenuously in matters of Religion. But such designs and
Writings are harmeful to us in our present condition: and the reason is plain:
because they being the works of particular persons without any public
commission; of persons that have no sufficient influence upon the whole English
Church and State, they produce little effect: On the contrary they give only an
opportunity to such malicious tongues and pens as Yours to Alarm the whole
Kingdom both against them and us.

12. But if it would please his sacred Majesty or the Parliament to allow a
modest Conference (not Dispute) between a certain number of sober learned
English Protestants and Catholics, by means of which a clear view might be
given what the peculiar Doctrines by Authority established on both sides are,
and what place may be allowed for moderate Interpretations and Condescensions,
in all probability the success could not but be most happy: the whole Kingdom,
yea all Christendom would stand in a maze to see what an inestimable blessing
has been so long wanting to England, and how little cause there was it should
be refused. How would the Civil and Ecclesiastical State of these nations be
established and united in interests with all the Christian world almost? How
free should we all be from the least danger of being infected with the venom of
Sectaries, and how secure from their designs? For then they would to all eyes
appear in their distinct bodies: it would be seen who, how many, and how
qualified they are: and permission being allowed them for a private liberty of
exercising their Religions respectively, any succeeding tumults would be both
easily repressed, and their cause appear inexcusable. In a word Religion as it
might by common Advice be settled in this Kingdom, would deserve to be the envy
and pattern to all the world besides, being easily freed from many abuses much
complained of, but hard to be rectified in other Catholic Countries.

13. And whence comes the obstruction to so inconceivable and universal a
blessing as this, but merely from such, English Protestants as You and Your
party are permitted to call your selves. From You it proceeds that the
Ecclesiastics of this Kingdom have not hitherto so much as endeavored to
convert us Roman Catholics to their Religion: They have been unwilling to be
informed what the true Differences between us and themselves are. As if true
Reformed Religion did formally consist in a blind, heady, and voluntary breach
of Unity with all Churches before them. They have condescended to admit
conferences with Sects, whose peculiar complexion consisting in an
incompossibility with their government renders them irreconcilable, unless
they yield up both their Faith and Estates. Yea for such Enemies satisfaction
(if any thing could satisfy them) they have submitted to alterations even in
their Church office and Discipline. Lastly to content such English Protestants
as You, they have connived at your defiling, altering and destroying that which
heretofore was called, and by Law still is truly the English Protestant
Religion: As will appear even by what You are suffered here to write against
eminent persons of their Church.

14. You proscribe and expose to public hatred Doctor Gunning and Master
Doctor Gunning.
Thorndike, as persons that would seduce English subjects to Popery. And what
are your Proofs? Forsooth Doctor Gunning has preached before the King, and
since printed, and beyond your skill to disprove, has demonstrated that the
Lent fast is an Apostolical Institution. Where lies the Popery? It is, You say,
against express scripture. But is it therefore popery? Do no Sects contradict
express Scripture but Roman Catholics? Behold the natural Logic of a
Fanatic. However, let this express scripture be produced. Non liquet, either
in your Text or Margin. Well at least, say You, it is against an Act of
Parliament. Let me ask You and Your fellows a Question. Will You be content to
stand to all Acts of Parliament, both as to their Prefaces and Clauses, as
Declarations of Faith: and this under the penalty of being esteemed Papists:
Then I here denounce You a Papist: For has not the whole Liturgy and Discipline
of the English Church been ratified by Acts of parliament? But what will You
say to an Act of Parliament that has declared, and like a Heretic burnt Your
Covenant as a damned, traiterous conspiracy? Take heed therefore You be not
found your self a papist. As for the Lent fast, You know that by the Laws of
the Kingdom Bishops are appointed the exacters and dispensers of the Observance
of Lent: which shows it to be esteemed an Ecclesiastical observance as well as
Civil, So that I believe Dr. Gunning is in little danger from your charge.

15. God send Mr. Thorndike as good a deliverance: For his Charge consists M.
Thorndike.
of more then one, or two, or three points of Accusation: and every one of them
seems to have an air of popery. Let them be examined. First, say you, he tells
us in print that the Pope is not Antichrist. Item, That Papists are not
Idolaters. Item by consequence, that all are Schismatics who upon that score
do refuse Communion with them. These are terrible points against good Mr.
Thorndike: Yet, alas, not all his popery neither.

16. A time was when such as You, Mr. Bagshaw, could both undo and destroy
English subjects merely upon an accusation of Popery, without proof. God be
thanked it is otherwise now. Therefore You ought at least to have produced some
proofs that these Assertions are direct popery. But not having done it: let me
advise you what kind of proofs will be expected. You must know therefore that
it is a Law of the English Church, that whatsoever is found in the Ancient
Canons, and is not expressly revoked by Ecclesiastical Authority in England, is
to be esteemed still in force. And common sense and reason will tell you, that
before you can by such allegations as these prove any one to have deserted the
English Churches doctrine, and be turned a papist, you must produce some
Authentic Declaration of this Church by which the Pope is decided to be
Antichrist, and the Papists, Idolaters. But that is impossible for you to do.
You will perhaps, to little purpose, cite the names of certain Calvinistical
Writers, that, as you, hypocritically called themselves English Protestants:
but withal you will take notice that all very Protestants have laughed at
them, some have been angry, and demonstrated the direct Negative. If you were a
live member of the English Church, you would know that the English Church would
be no Church if the Pope were Antichrist, and the Papists, Idolaters. For would
you acknowledge that to be a Church that enjoyes her whole Authority and
Jurisdiction from Antichrist and Idolaters? Is she not rather a member and
abortive of Antichrist? This is plain reason Mr. Bagshaw: and consequently the
inference is undeniable, That all are schismatics who upon that score do
refuse communion with the Roman Church.

17. You proceed against Mr. Thorndike, He insinuates, say you, that we may
lawfully pray for the Dead. Your proof, I told you, that this is against
Protestancy, must be to show where the English Church has repealed the Ancient
Canons commanding Prayer for the Dead. That will be a hard task. On the
contrary You your selves object against the Common Prayer Book that there is a
clause in it, that not only insinuates it to be lawful, but actually exercises
prayer for the dead. And you know that within the time of the four first
General Counsels (received in England) above twelve hundred years ago your
Progenitors were by the Universal Church declared Heretics for denying it. Yea
moreover that there was never extant any Liturgy or Missal in the Church of
Christ, Eastern or Western, wherein there were not prayers for the dead.

18. You go on. Mr. Thorndike against the Doctrine of the Church of England
says, That we may expect some benefit by the prayers of souls departed (I
suppose, holy souls are meant.) Where does the Church of England contradict
this? nay more, except you will acknowledge your self to be a Socinian, and deny
that the souls of dead persons have any subsistence at all with perception, and
use of rational faculties, you your self will not be so shameless as to deny
what you here lay to Mr. Thorndikes charge. For I know none that call
themselves Christians, except Socinians, but acknowledge that the glorified
Saints do pray at least in general for the Church Militant. Now if they all do
pray for us all, will you not permit us to expect some benefit by their
prayers? Must we maintain that all their prayers are to no purpose? O but you
infer, That this in time may easily be improved to our praying unto them. As
for this inference which is not your defendants, but only your own, give me
leave to tell you: That if you believe that the Saints pray for the Church in
general, it would be no hard matter by one Syllogism to oblige you to
acknowledge that we may pray to God that he would hear and grant their prayers,
making them beneficial to us. And now search all the Solemn Offices and Missals
of the Roman Church mark the prayers that occurrs every Saints Feast, you will
find no other forms but such as that: The prayer is always directed to God
alone immediately, and he is desired to grant us such and such blessings by the
intercession of such Saints. And if in less solemn Devotions, as Litanies,
Antiphons, etc. we say, Sancte Maria, Sancte Michael, Sancte Petre, ora pro
nobis: we are by the Church obliged to no other meaning then as before: and we
imitate express Scripture, Laudate Deum omnes Angeli ejus, omnes Sancti ejus,
etc. Cardinal Perron will assure you that our prayers to Saints is only prier
pour prier, a devout wishing that they would pray for us: And truly for my part
I do heartily wish all the Saints in heaven to intercede in their prayers with
God, that he would vouchsafe to give you (and us all) a sincere love both to
truth and peace.

19. I have reserved your most criminal charge till the last, which you thus
express, If it be not the intent of some to return into Egypt, I cannot
imagine Preface.
what means the crying up of that great Diana of the Papists, the Churches
authority, and making that the sole interpreter of Scripture. What Religion can
you possibly be of, and talk thus? You in your own person, standing alone, are
not a Church. If you be but one member of a Church, what ever it be, as long as
you are so, you are subject to it, it must have Authority over you: the Spirit
of one Prophet must be subject to an assembly of Prophets are you an
Independent? much freedom is employed in that Title: yet I believe your Lay
Church will think it has authority enough to oblige you not to interpret
Scripture for the advantage of that court of Inquisition, the Classes of the
Presbytery. Are you a Presbyterian? Your private reason shall be yoaked and
chained with bonds strong enough, and heavy enough to keep it from stirring to
the prejudice of the Holy brethren and Sisters. But you will needs call your
self an English Protestant, and yet will dare to revile all the Authority in
your Church, boldly protesting that it shall not interpret Scripture for you:
Your private reason shall over-master it. Unless it confess it self to be no
Church, that is, to have no Authority to oblige its members to receive the
sense of scripture from her, you will be revenged by bellowing aloud This is
the crying up of the great Diana of the Papists. Truly I must needs say, the
Church of England is a very patient Church, if she suffer you to speak this
Bedlam language and enjoy a Benefice too.

20. But you do well, though you mean very ill, when you call this the Diana of
the Papists: Since you imply that a true obliging Authority, if any where, can
only be found in the Catholic Church. As for Sects that have no Succession of
Ordination for such to assume Authority and Jurisdiction in matters of
Religion, is ridiculous even to common sense: for it implies, that to be men
which have an ordinary use of reason, is a sufficient qualification to become
Ecclesiastical Teachers and Governors. The Clergy of England challenging a
lawful Ordination, have some pretension to a real Authority: and if they could
justify themselves free from the guilt of Schism, even we Roman Catholics
could not deny but their Authority would oblige in conscience, and under the
penalty of damnation, because then it would be an Authority participating that
of the whole Catholic Church, and acting in union with it But of this somewhat
more in the last part of this Discourse.

21. I do apprehend, Mr. Bagshaw, that if you make any reply to this, you will,
instead of speaking to the purpose, endeavor to aggravate the cause of Doctor
Gunning and Mr. Thorndike, by saying at adventure, that there is a secret
intelligence between the Papists and them, and that they do mutually maintain
one another quarrels. On the other side I am not without suspicion that some
even of my own belief and Church, will think that it did not become a Catholic
to busy himself with justifying the writings of protestants, especially when he
endeavors to show that such Writers are no Catholics, though the particular
points taught by them be real Catholic verities.

22. Now to both these I must say, that I never had the happiness to know or
see either Doctor Gunning or Mr. Thorndike: never was there any message or
intelligence between us. But my only Motive to write as I have done, was to
comply with that precept of God (Pacem and veritatem diligite) Love peace and
Truth. As a true faithful English subject, I could not see so professed a
disturber of peace without reproving him. As a catholic I could never hope
(what I am bound to desire and aim at) that both truth and peace would find
admittance into England by any endeavors either of Protestants or Catholics
till it was apparent what the true grounds of our separation are: and this
never will be known till other Sects be made to blush, when they impudently and
perniciously both to the Church and State, call themselves English protestants,
and pretend to be judges of what is to be esteemed in the English Church
Catholic Doctrine.

23. Therefore for a conclusion of this argument touching your charge against
Dr. Gunning and Mr. Thorndike, I will once more protest, that unless either the
Civil or Ecclesiastical Authority do in time provide against such writers as
you, the whole Kingdom in a very short space will be in iminent danger to
become a mere Babel. For if it shall be permitted to such men, to defame any
English Doctor or Writer that shall not conspire in all the furious positions
of Presbyterians, Independents, etc. against the Catholic Church, there will
not be a Bishop or sober Divine in England that will not be at your mercy, both
for his fame and subsistence, nay his life also, when you can either raise a
tumult, or which is more dreadful, a new Tribunal of Justice.

III.
That Mr. Bagshaws attempt to render only the Roman Catholic Subjects, in an
incapacity of Toleration is in it self most groundless, and in his mouth most
ridiculously malicious.

1. WE poor Roman Catholics could not but be strangely surprised to see such
a Protestant of the Church of England, as you Mr. Bagshaw are, to become our
Advocat, and to beg our pardon saying, How ill an opinion soever I have both of
the Papists Religion, Preface.
and of the unchristian ways they take to propagate it, yet far be it from me
to wish, that amongst us they may suffer the same hard measure, which I know by
their Principles, they are always ready to inflict. For so much do I desire
their conversion (which can never be sincere, unless it be voluntary and
unconstrained) and so little fear their power of seducing (since their greatest
strength lies in the ignorance of their followers, rather then in the cunning
of their guides) that I heartily wish all penal Laws against them were utterly
taken away: For I never yet saw any Argument that could clearly evince, why any
sort of men who would profess a peaceable subjection unto the Civil Government,
might not in all their Civil Rights be protected by it.

2. What a kind wish is here, and a reason for it truly unanswerable? Indeed
here is Charity, a point too high to be believed sincere. Therefore to the end
your Charity may be rational, do not deprecate the inflicting of all punishment
upon any, if you can indeed prove that by the Principles of their Religion they
are obliged to inflict the like punishment on others. As for our Principles, we
protest unto you they are very innocent in this point. Laws indeed have often
been made in Catholic Countries very severe against those that the Church
calls Heretics. But they are none of the Churches laws: they were not enacted
by Ecclesiastics but by Civil Governors only. You know that by the Canons of
the Church ever in force, the Clergy under penalty of Irregularity are
forbidden to have any hand, either by Counsel or otherwise, in blood. And
whatsoever Laws have been or shall be made by Catholic Civil Governors,
especially such as reach to blood, if the Motive of them has been pure
Opinions of the Understanding, not prejudicial to Government, or any thing
except a prudent mean to prevent Sedition or Rebellions justly apprehended, we
assure you they are not made by the Principles of Catholic Religion, but
against them.

3. You will object the Spanish Inquisition. But withal be pleased to
consider, that almost all the Catholic Kingdoms in Europe besides do abhor
the cruelty of that Inquisition, and have often declared they will suffer the
utmost extremities, rather than admit it.

4. This Charity of yours therefore was too excessive to be long-lived, or
deserving to be esteemed sincere: for you presently repent and revoke it,
whilst immediately after you add, I must confess there are two things which do
much difference the case of the Papists from that of any other Religious Sect
Preface.
this day in the World, and which renders the Toleration of them very unsafe,
if not unwarrantable.

5. How was it possible for one that wrote this cruel passage, not presently to
blot out what with the same ink he had written immediately before? The King and
State are little beholding to you, when you wish that may be done, which is
both very unsafe and unwarrantable: and besides, that may be done for Roman
Catholics, which you say are the only Religous Sect in the World, which it is
both very unsafe and unwarrantable to tolerate: you except not even the
Fifth-Monarchists, whose Religion forbids subjection to all Civil Governors
whatsoever, and commands by Fire and Sword to erect their new spiritual Kingdom
of Christ, which is to last a thousand years. Let but Papists be excluded, and
all the monsters of Egypt are welcome to Mr. Bagshaw: Yet he must know that if
there had been no Papists in the World, no other Sect among us had ever heard
of Christ. Behold the mercies of a Presbyterian (or Independent, I know not
whether) how cruel they are.

6. And all this he writes to prevent the benignity of Protestants, which he
suspects may in some measure be extended as well to Roman Catholics that
suffered with them, as to his own party that still grieve they had not
swallowed up both. He forgets what a converted criminal (as if it were some
honest Anabaptist, or Quaker, one that had been, but now is no longer, a
murderer and seditious person) said to his obdurat companion, Do thou not
fear God, since thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly: But
these Men what have they done? But we should not much apprehend that his
persuasion should prevail with persons that sure should now know us both, were
it not that (by what unlucky star we are ignorant) a persuasion has entered the
minds of not a few among them, that there is a secret intelligence and Union of
interests between Roman Catholics and all our Sects, even to Fanatics, and
that they do all jointly conspire against Protestants. This opinion is imbibed
by persons of prudence, and otherwise well disposed to contribute to the ease
and comfort of Catholics, were it not that the proofs of this accusation are
said to be unanswerable. Many Priests say they, are known to have been busy in
Cromwels Army: and even of late some Catholics have sided with Presbyterians,
etc.

7. Now what is left for distressed Roman Catholics to do in this case?
Protestations and Oaths to the contrary, will not serve. Writings of this
nature, if they be read by such, are slighted. Quid verba audimus (say they)
cum facta videmus? But if they see them, let the state see them too: Let some
delinquents be produced. No: yet the thing is certainly true. But how comes
this ttuth known to Protestants? Have the Sectaries discovered it? It is hard
that their testimony should be taken: and though their professed hatred be
notorious, it is unlikely they would forfeit their privilege by the Act of
Indemnity, merely to do mischief to others. Are they Catholics that have
discovered this? They may easily be brought to a trial: no Troops need be
employed to apprehend them. And an unanswerable way of justifying the past
severity of the State against us all, would be the arraignment of them, in case
they can accuse any that have instilled unlawful principles or encouragements
into them. If all the several bodies of Ecclesiastics be not able to justify
both their Religion and practice, we renounce all mercy. But let it be granted
that some Priests were in Cromwells Army: who were they? Either sensual
Apostates, or I am loath to say who, and they perhaps with a mind to serve the
King: Or in case it should happen, as possibly it may, that three or four rash
persons, out of a tender affection and devotion to one party among Catholics,
whose exclusion they fear, to prevent that, should enter into any practice
without commission even of that party it self, hoping that such an Act of
theirs would be imputed to all Catholics, and by that means hinder their
Friends from being treated more severely then all the rest; would not Justice
it self complain, if even that party should suffer for the rash misdemeanors
of a few: but Justice would forsake the earth, if all the whole innocent body
should be made a sacrifice for a crime so committed. It is a hard condition we
are in: We actually suffer as if we were guilty of a crime, and are forced to
guess what that crime (utterly unknown to our selves) can be supposed to be.
All that can be said in the present circumstances must be, That if in reality
we can be proved deservedly obnoxious to a condemnation upon this charge, both
the present and future Age ought to stigmatize us and our memories, as persons
not only in the highest degree criminal, but as such who in a blind frenzy,
after they had by suffering all extremities from powerful enemies twenty Years
together for their Sovereign, obtained a sufficient reward in being esteemed by
him constantly Loyal Subjects, and (as their hopes were) had withal
sufficiently freed their Religion from the scandal of infidelity: afterward
when his Majesty was restored to his power, and treated them with a mercy never
before experienced by them, yea moreover when the Honorable Lords in
Parliament after a gracious hearing of their defense, gave them hopes of future
favor, just then they deserted their Loyalty to the King: and entered into a
combination with enemies always implacable to themselves, and at a time when
those Enemies had all power taken from them. This would be a complication of
all crimes in one, a Treason joined with the most prodigious ingratitude, most
scandalous impiety, most barbarous inhumanity, and most brutish stupidity that
ever was.

8. But Mr. Bagshaw (who, I am assured, does not suspect us, nay knows we are
not guilty of this crime) calls me to hear his Reasons why Papists alone should
be ill-treated: and I obey. You say, Sir, you have more then one reason Preface.
which does difference the case of Papists from all other Sects, etc. If this
be true, then You had not so much as half a reason to wish sincerely that the
penal Statutes should be taken from them: Nay that unlawful wish deserved
punishment.

8. Let us see these Your evincing reasons. One is, say You, their depending
upon and owning a foreign power, etc. If you had stopped at these words, we
should have found no reply. For we confess, such a power we depend upon and
own; but we utterly deny that that should put us in a worse condition then
others. For if that Power be purely spiritual, that is, of a quite different
nature, and not in the least degree prejudicial to the Kings Civil Power, but
rather obliging those that acknowledge it, faithfully to obey the King, the
owning of it surely ought to be no hindrance to a Toleration. If you think
otherwise, then I must tell You that no Sect of Christians whatsoever ought to
be tolerated in England. For let me ask You (who ever you are, whether
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, Quaker, or even English Protestant) Do
not you, and all of Your persuasion with You, depend upon and own a power
distinct from his Majesty's Civil power, I mean, a power merely Spiritual, or
Pastoral, not subordinate to the Kings, but to which the King himself, if he be
of your Religion, ought to be subject, as being no Pastor, but a Sheep, no
Teacher, but a Hearer; no administrer of Sacraments, but a receiver; no
Excommunicatour, but liable himself, as all Christ's flock are when they demerit
it, to have Ecclesiastical censures inflicted on him? Such a power, I am sure,
you all acknowledge: And no other power do Roman Catholics depend upon or own.
Be not then so manifestly, so affectedly partial, as to allege that to the
prejudice and destruction of Roman Catholics only, which must as well exclude
all Christians out of England.

10. But it is a foreign power, You say, that Papists depend upon and own, and
this word Foreign makes the difference. It does indeed: But the difference is,
I suppose, much to the advantage both of the King and Roman Catholics too. For
tell me for Gods sake since there is indeed a spiritual power from which
Princes themselves ought not to be exempted, nor can free themselves from it
without infinite prejudice to their own souls, is it not more for their
temporal peace and security that this Spiritual power should reside in one
single person that usually is both learned and discreet, and withal is a
thousand miles removed from our King, then in many thousands within his own
Kingdom, not all of them Angels, that if they have a mind to do him a mischief,
have all the means and opportunities imaginable? The King of France esteems it
a great privilege granted him in a Concordate by the Pope, that no particular
Bishop should have power in any case to excommunicate him: this power being
reserved by the Pope alone.

11. Thefore you do very well when for an escape to your selves You add, but
very ill, when most calumniously to us You add, That Catholics depend upon and
own such a power which according to the opinion of their teachers Preface.
can when he pleases dispense with them for, and release them from their most
sacred engagements: So that a State can have no security, but that when ever
they have opportunity they will endeavor a change: And their present
peaceableness may justly be attributed merely to their want of strength: which
Bellarmine is not ashamed to say was the sole cause why the primitive
Christians were content to suffer without resistance. From which position what
can follow, but that it concerns the wisdom and policy of every State to keep
those under, whom as to Temporal Subjection it cannot confide in.

12. Imperet tibi Dominus. Here the world sees the charity of a Presbyterian,
etc. in its natural colors. The Christian charity so divinely commended by St.
Paul has these qualities, Non cogitat malum, etc. It thinks no ill: It does not
rejoice in iniquity, but rejoices 1 Cor. 13.
with the truth: It suffers all things; it believes all things, it hopes all
things. But this man's new fashioned charity thinks nothing but ill of all
divided from his interests. It rejoices only when any of them fall into any
defects, and never rejoices at their well doing. It suffers nothing, whatsoever
good they promise it believes nothing, it hopes nothing.

13. But truly, Mr. Bagshaw, You have made choice of a most unseasonable time
to vomit forth these most spightful untruthes against Catholics, with any hope
they should be believed. In the last age indeed when the criminous Writings and
practices of four or five Catholics of one peculiar Order had justly incensed
the State, and no way was afforded to all the rest publicly to defend
themselves from an imputation of concurring with, and holding the wicked
principles of a few Traitors, such a bloody accusation as this might perhaps
find entrance into the minds of some few unwary persons. But now when such
practices and principles have been he artily disavowed by all sorts of
Catholics: When the honorable Catholic Lords, have in the name of the whole
body of the Catholics, before a most glorious Tribunal made most confident
protestations of an Eternal fidelity to the King, and of renouncing all
dependence on a foreign Authority that can any way be prejudicial to him: When
so many professions have been printed by several sorts of Catholics declaring,
That no power upon earth can absolve them from their most necessary and natural
Allegiance, nor so much as free them from the Obligation of any Promise or
Engagement made to any private person: When his Majesty himself has honored
his Catholic subjects with such a confidence in their Loyalty and sincerity,
as to trust his life into their hands, when some (Mr. Bagshaw knows who) sought
and hunted after that most precious life; Lastly when for the space of twenty
years a fiery trial has passed upon the fidelity of Catholics, and never
could diminish it: Now, I say, after all this to hear this accusation against
them, out of such a mouth as Mr. Bagshaws, that they depend on a Power that can
release them from their most sacred engagements, is beyond all sufferance. What
name can be found out worthily to express such a shamelessness in a
Presbyterian or Independent, none of whose party ever assisted, but rather used
all their power and skill to ruin the King, and after their Indemnity not one
has appeared to make a public promise of dealing better with him for the
future? Who can with patience hear such an one, tell the State, that it is
concerned in wisdom and policy to keep Roman Catholics under, whom as to
temporal subjection it cannot confide in, when as not any one of them disserved
the state, but many thousands have lost their lives, and far more (almost all)
are ruined in their estates for their fidelity only; and moreover to show that
this Fidelity was a Duty of their Religion, have and ever will be ready to give
all security of peaceable obedience and sincere integrity that Words or Actions
can confirm? What can You expect, Mr. Bagshaw should be the fruit of such a
passage as this in a Book of Yours, but a guilty blushing in Your own party,
indignation in loyal Protestants to hear such as You become accusers in such a
cause as this, and joy in Roman Catholics, to see that none have of late taxed
them as persons not to be confided in, but such old confiding men, as after
oaths of Fidelity have taken the Covenant and Engagements worse then that, and
but for an Act of Oblivion, etc. would in Westminster Hall hear, and not be
able to answer a far heavier accusation then this?

14. There are but two Oaths by the State accounted trials of an English
subjects fidelity, that of Supremacy and of Allegiance. If the former were but
so expressed as to require an acknowledgement of a Civil Supremacy in his
Majesty only, exclusively to the Pope: And if the unfortunate word, Heretical
were left out of the other, no honest Catholic would desire to be allowed the
privilege of a subject if he refused either. And more then this, not any one
Protestant, Presbyterian, or whosoever he be that freely takes them, can intend
by them. For not any of these will say that the Catholic Church of any Age has
defind this Assertion to be Heretical, That Princes excommunicated or deprived
by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects: It being an
assertion they never dreamed of: Neither will any of those that make no
scruples at either of the Oaths, allow a spiritual power, much less a
Supremacy in that power to the King. So that it is evident that Catholics are
exposed to the extremity of sufferings for not taking oaths in the full
importance of whose sense they agree with all those by whom they are persecuted.

15. But truly now, fince the State has most graciously been pleased to give a
public hearing to the Catholics, speaking by the Tongues of the Catholic
Lords, etc. who have against all possible objections maintained the innocence
of our Religion in the point of Fidelity: And since it has been a general
asseveration of Magistrates and the State, that they never had any intention to
take away any man's life merely for his Religion and conscience, as long as he
was free from practicing sedition: Me thinks hereafter our Justitiae
Sacerdotes, the Reverend Judges should find a great difficulty to persuade
their consciences to permit their tongues to pronounce a condemnation, as for
treason, against any English subject, merely for having a scruple in an Oath to
bring forth the word Heretical, he being at the same time ready to acknowledge,
as due to the King, all the authority and right that the Judge himself does,
when he condemns him for a traitor.

16. Therefore, Mr. Bagshaw, if You would persuade the State that it cannot
confide in Catholics, You must study some other motives: For we heartily
renounce the acknowledgment of any power that can dispense with us, or release
us of our Engagements to his Majesty. They are none of our teachers that hold
such opinions. And what Bellarmine says, That the sole cause why the Primitive
Christians were content to suffer without resistance was their want of power,
we abhor, as a speech blasphemous to the Holy Martyrs, and scandalous to the
Church. Yet let me tell You, this was a Doctrine that Bellarmine might have
learnt from Your Forefathers the ancient Puritans, for out of them it is that
Archbishop Bancroft quotes such unchristian sayings and words, as this for one,
Paul commanding us to be subject and obedient to Bancroft in Dangerous
Positions p. 17
Princes, did write this in the infancy of the Church: there were but few
Christians then, and not many of them rich, or of ability, so as they were not
for such a purpose. As if a man should write to such Christians as are under
the Turk, in substance poor, in courage feeble, in strength unarmed, in number
few, and generally subject to all kind of injuries, would he not write as Paul
did? So as the Apostle did respect the men he wrote unto, and his words are not
to be extended to the body or people of a Common wealth or whole City. For
imagine that Paul were now alive, etc. and that there were such Kings as would
have their becks stand for Laws, as cared neither for God nor man, etc. what
would he write of such to the Church? Surely except he would dessent from
himself, he would say, that he accounts not such for Magistrates, etc, he
would leave them to their subjects to be punished, etc.

17. What think You of this Mr. Bagshaw? Yet I will not accuse You of holding
the same. Nay more, though I can demonstrate tuat there is not a Country or City
in Christendom into which Your Sect or Religion ever entered by any other ways
but sedition and Rebellion, witness France, Geneva, Holland, several States in
Germany, Switzerland, Scotland, and (for almost twenty Years space) England,
yet if You would renounce that abominable principle, That it is lawful to
defend Religion by arms against a lawful Prince, I should have a scruple to
say, that a State cannot safely or warrantably confide in you, as You have most
unjustly said against Roman Catholics, taking advantage from one or two
Writers generally disallowed by us, though You can not name any one City or
Country in Christendom into which Catholic Religion ever entered but by
suffering.

18. Do not therefore endeavor to make all Catholics answerable for the
wicked assertions of a few Authors, when you know they have been condemned by
whole Kingdoms. You have eyes sharp enough to spy even in the Catholic Church
our sort of Presbyterians and Independents, Yea even Quakers too: If any such
be in England, the State may easily convert them. However God be thanked their
teachings are out of fashion: and I would to God they displeased You as much as
they do us. You know we can lay to your charge ten seditious Authors for one:
and which is mainly (indeed, only) considerable, You are not able to produce
one of your party that has condemned their horribly Rebellious principles. And
as to the point of defending Religion by Arms, if by a Reply You will summon me
to produce the particular passages, I will at large inform You, that during
the reign of the last King of France, there was by his order proposed to an
Assembly of Catholic Bishops this Question or problem, If it were supposed
that the King of France became Mahumetan, and by his power endeavored to force
his subjects to that infidelity, Whether they might lawfully, according to the
principles of Christianity, by arms against their Sovereign resist such an
attempt of his? To which Question the unanimous answer of the Bishops was, That
such a resistance would be unlawful: since Christian Religion allowed no other
way of maintaining the faith against lawful Sovereigns, but prayers, tears and
suffering. When will England be so happy as to see such a resolution to proceed
from a Synod of Presbyterians, etc. It would be some comfort to see but one,
Mr. Bagshaw, publish a little book to that purpose. Never certainly was there a
more seasonable time then now. That would be a powerful expedient to imprint
the Act of Oblivion in the very hearts of all English subjects: And till some
such thing be done, Quis Caelum terris non misceat to read from such an one as
Mr. Bagshaw's pen a Lecture of Fidelity to the King, and a warning given to the
State, who the only persons are not fit to be confided in?

19. You add, Mr. Bagshaw, But could our Papists in England give sufficient
evidence of their hearty disowning such an irreligious Tenet, yet there is
another thing, Preface.
etc. What say You Sir; Could the Papists? Why, have they not? Is their an ear
in England that can perceive sense, and has not heard what a profession was
made by the Catholic Lords in the House of Peers? Is there an eye that can
read, and has not seen their printed Declarations in which that irreligious
Tenet was confidently, clearly and heartily Disavowed? They have, do, and will
protest, that if they be not ready to give all possible security of disavowing
that, and all other Principles prejudicial to Authority, Justice, and Peace, it
would neither be prudence in his Majesty, nor a just care of his Kingdoms
welfare, to tolerate them among his Subjects. What would you require more?

20. If You think, or however, if You be resolved to say, though You do not
think so, that we lie when we both make such protestations, and withal offer
to confirm them by Oaths, You will put us into some puzzle how to give You
satisfaction. Yet in order thereto, even to You that perhaps are unwilling to
be satisfied, we tell You this. You cannot but know that Catholic Religion
utterly forbids all lying, and above all, Perjury. If therefore You will judge,
that neither the Protestations, nor Oaths of Catholics, are to be credited,
you will condemn the State of want of prudence in contriving Oaths for trials
of their Fidelity: and moreover you must needs esteem us the most impertident
Liars in the World, that is, such as only lie when it is for our disadvantage.
If we durst lie, we would much rather choose to lie by taking the Oaths in the
forms as they are expressed, then make voluntary false protestations of the
same duty that the oaths require: because by taking the Oaths we should free
our selves oftimes from the loss of our Estates, and sometimes of our lives:
whereas by such Voluntary protestations we cannot challenge any temporal
commodity: nay perhaps we anger those, that take it worse from us that we prove
our selves good subjects, then they would, if we had been ill ones. This is all
I can at present say to such a scruple. If this satisfy not, God mend those
that are in fault.

21. Let us now see Your second reason why only Papists must not be tolerated
though they were never so good subjects. That You deliver in these words. There
is another thing practiced by Preface.
them, which makes it highly questionable, whether a Kingdom professing
Christianity ought to tolerate them in, and that is their Worshipping of
Images: which is a sin so contrary to the express letter of the Divine Law, and
so repugnant to the common sense and reason of all men, that God punished it
severely even in the Heathen Chaldeans, as well as in his own people the Jews.

22. You are hard put to it, Mr. Bagshaw, to find reasons to kill Roman
Catholics. The saying is Furor arma; but it has put a straw into Your hands,
to wound us with. Yet I am likewise hard put to it too, how to defend my self
against even such a weapon: that is, how to discourse upon this point of Images
with one that professes he will neither accept Fathers, Councels, nor the whole
Church it self for an Interpreter of Scriptures, or Decider of Controversies,
but only his own private enlightened reason. It cannot be helped therefore:
Reason alone must be judge between us: You will needs have it so. Let reason
then be our judge, but upon condition that You will not call that reason which
is against common sense.

22. You say, The worshipping of Images is a sin repugnant to the common sense
and Fres^
reason of all sober men: so that your common sense and reason concludes, that
there is not a Catholic in the world that is a sober man, and not devoid of
common sense and reason: and by consequence, all France, Spain, Italy, Germany,
Savoy, Greece, etc. are but one large Bedlam.

Bedlam men leave to propose to such a sober man as you are, that is all
compounded of Reason, some few Questions, First, then suppose there were
represented to you while You were thinking of other matters, or talking, a
picture of our Lord hanging on the Cross: could you possibly avoid the calling
to mind who our Lord was, and what he had done or suffered for you? And if not
being able to forbid the entrance of such thoughts into your mind on such an
occasion, would your reason dictate to you that you had done ill in changing
your thoughts from the world to God, would you repent of it, asking pardon of
God, and praying that such a tentation might never befall you afterward? Does
your enlightened reason suggest this to you? Truly if it do, I believe you are
of a temper of mind almost specifically different from all mankind besides, and
must change their nature before You make them of your persuasion, or Church.
And yours is not a common sense, if it either tell You that by Your beating
down Crosses and breaking Church windows, our good Countrymen think more of God
then they did while those remembrances were standing: or if they think less,
that it is better for them, to forget him.

Peter and Judas, of our Late Sovereign and Bradshaw: (you are beholding to me
for this example:) Or put case you had in one hand a Bible and in the other the
infamous story of Pantagruel: does not your common sense and reason tell you,
that such pictures or books force upon your mind quite contrary thoughts and
affections, the which regard those pictures or books not simply considered, but
as representing such persons, and containing such matter? The which thoughts
being just, and not at all harmful to you, and withal almost impossible to be
avoided, I cannot find any reason why reason should forbid them: I am sure
common sense will not.



Peter's picture, or the Kings in an unclean, dishonest place. If any one should
spit upon either of them, your heart would rise against him, and tempt you to
strike him: which it would not do, if the same contemptuous usage were showed
to the picture of Judas or Bradshaw. Now this is so naturally imbibed in the
hearts of all mankind, that in all Kings Courts a respect and outward mark of
reverence is required to the Chamber of presence, or Chair of State: and a
refusal of it, much more a contemptuous behavior, would be criminal. To apply
this to the forementioned Books: You could not bring your reason to permit You
to tear out a leaf of the Bible for an unclean use, as you could without the
least remorse do to the story of Pantagruel or Aesops fables.

Peter and our Sovereigns together, we find that a respectful regard is had to
both, and a contemptuous usage of either would displease us: Yet it is not the
same kind of respect: For St. Peter's image we consider as of a man that puts us
in mind of heaven and heavenly things, one highly favored by Almighty God, a
principal Courtier in his Kingdom, and one that by his writings and example has
been a great instrument of promoting our eternal happiness. We do not so esteem
of every good King. Therefore to show the difference of our respect to each, we
would choose to give St. Peter's picture a place in our Oratory, and the Kings
in our Gallery. But what names to give to these different respects is not easy
to determine. It is plain, that which is given to the Kings picture is purely a
civil respect: but what shall we call that which is given to St. Peter's? If we
say it is Religious, you will quarrel, as derogating from God. Let us therefore
call it a sacred veneration, or honor: For since all things that are appointed
on purpose to mind us of God, of heaven and the salvation of our souls, we call
them sacred, this name may well be applied to such a picture. But moreover,
because there are not invented such variety of names as there are things, and
there are far fewer sorts of outward postures of our Bodies denoting respect,
then there are Names or Words: Hence it comes to pass that when we would
express a Civil and a Sacred, yea a Religious respect, we are forced to use the
same outward behavior of bowing, kneeling, etc. to Fathers and Magistrates,
that we do to God himself: Yea we find in the Scripture Kings adored, and a
prostration of bodies paid to them. Yet for all this no man will suspect that
thereby any dishonor was intended to God, or the Honor due only to him was
paid to creatures.

Peter, and that which ought to be paid to himself in case he appeared to us
glorified as he is. A Divine respect we pay to neither, though sometimes we use
such postures as we do when we pray, or worship God. It is then a sacred
veneration only: but yet there are some expressions of respect that we would
use to the person, that would be ridiculous to the picture, as reverently to
speak to him, to beg his prayers to God for us, to ask a Question, etc.

Peter's, the former representing to us him that is both God and man, the
latter, merely man. However we shall find that the regard to both the pictures
is of the same species and nature, that is, only sacred: because a picture we
never look upon but as an instrument to put us in mind, or to call to our
memories an object: and therefore it being of our own frameing is not capable
of any respect beyond that which is due to so material, inferior a thing, what
ever the object represented by it be. True it is that the internal affections
and thoughts occasionally raised in our minds will be infinitely different, for
we shall think upon Christ with Adoration, Love, Resignation and Obedience due
to God only: not so of St. Peter: but the pictures themselves will be treated
by us as sacred pictures only, that deserve a respect proportionable: And since
it is evident they are capable of a sinful disrespect, consequently a due
respect may be paid to them. I say, may be, not always ought to be: for then
it would never be fit to put on ones hat, etc. in a room where there hangs a
crucifix.

31. To sum up briefly our meaning in this whole matter: We find our minds
too apt to be distracted from meditating on Divine things: therefore we help
our selves by such things as will call to our memories, and fix our thoughts
upon Objects good for our souls to be thought upon: Such are holy pictures both
in times of prayer and out, we find this benefit by them. Being such sacred
things, we must renounce our reason, if we deny a respect may be due to them:
but by honoring with an outward regard a picture, we intend only to give a
testimony what respect we bear to the person or holy thing represented: And
though for want of variety of postures, we show some part of the same outward
Reverence to the pictures of St. Peter and our Lord, yet that signifies, we
only venerate St. Peter as a glorious Saint, yet a creature, but that we adore
Christ as God: And no man that sees or knows us can think otherwise. So that
unless it be a sin to show outwardly what we are obliged to think inwardly,
there is not the least fault committed.

32. And now Mr. Bagshaw, give me leave to acquaint You with Your mistakes.
First, this respect called by the Church, Honor and Veneration, which We
affirm may be paid to sacred Images, you call Worshipping of Images, merely to
make us odious to your ignorant Proselytes: For Worship is commonly taken to be
that Honor which is due only to God, and which we abhor to give to Images. But
Secondly, you give it another name more abominable, calling it, Idolatry such
as God punished in the worst of Pagans. Once at least in your life speak your
conscience: Do you think, or only suspect that we Roman Catholics do worship
false Gods, and true Devils? Do we consider our Images, as they did their
Idols, to which by Magical conjurations they annexed an evil Spirit to do
wonders, and to extort Divine worship from the seduced people? Take heed Sir
how you persist in so unjust a blasphemy against Gods Church: A time will come
that You will be called to a strict account for it: it concerns you therefore
to make some reparation.

33. But after all this, take notice that the Catholic Church, though it
declare that such a veneration may fitly be given to Holy Images, as common
Reason, and Humane nature cannot choose but allow: Yet it commands none to
afford them but even so much. You may be a Roman Catholic all your life, and
yet never be obliged to perform any external respect to an Image. There is not
in Catholic countries a Groom or Kitchin-maid so ignorant, but would rather
burn an Image, then afford it any honor due to God only. And shall those that
think thus, and do only what humane reason generally approves and cannot
hinder, be esteemed and published by you the only Christians in the World fit
to be thrust out of all Christian Kingdoms, and executed as traitors, though
otherwise they be acknowledged most faithful, peaceable men and obedient
Subjects? Are you not afraid of, In quo judicio judicaveritis judicabimini?

34. You see Sir, how since you will not admit of Authorities to justify the
Belief and Practice of Roman Catholics, but only common sense and reason, I
have complied with you: And now in one word tell you, that You must never hope
to make any sober man believe that Roman Catholics are Idolaters, or even
faulty in the matter of Images, till You can demonstrate, 1. That it is
unlawful to make use of our Seeing faculty to put us in mind of God. 2. That he
dishonours the King that shall with reverence, bareheaded, and in a kneeling
posture receive a Letter or Mandate that comes from him. 3. That it is a
contempt of God to go through a Church with ones head uncovered. 4. And that it
is unlawful, and irreligious to make a scruple of using a leaf of the Bible in
the house of Office.

35. For a farewell I will conclude this point with a Story, the truth whereof
several Gentlemen, Protestants too, in this Town are able to justify. In the
year 1651. a devout Italian Friar being appointed to preach in the Great Dome
at Padua, the Archbishop present, and having been informed that among his
Auditors there were some English Protestants, that in discourse had earnestly
objected (as you do) Idolatry to Catholics, He therefore that he might occur
to such a scandal, made choice of the Doctrine concerning Images for the
subject of a great part of his sermon. And when he came to that point, holding
in his hand a Crucifix, he told his hearers, That that Image did in one glance
lively represent, even to the most ignorant beholder, our Lord Jesus, God and
Man, and almost all the circumstances of his most bitter and accursed death so
patiently and willingly suffered for us. Thereupon with great passion and
Rhetoric he magnified the Love of our Lord hanging on the Cross, earnestly
pressing his hearers to return a proportionable Love and Duty to him. And
during this discourse, he often with great reverence and tenderness of
affection embraced and devoutly kissed the Crucifix. Having said much to this
purpose, after a little pause he pursued his Discourse, telling them he could
not believe or suspect, that any one that had heard and seen what he had said
and done, could reasonably imagine that he had any intention to dishonor our
Lord, by that which he had done to the Crucifix which represented him, much
less that he adored it, as if he thought it a kind of God, that he put his
trust in it, as expecting any good from it, as if (he knew not what) Divinity,
Virtue or Sanctity was in that carved piece of wood. Notwithstanding because he
had heard that such a scandalous imputation was by some misperswaded persons
laid on the Church, he would then and there undeceive them. Thereupon he spit
upon the Crucifix, threw it scornfully to the ground, and trampled it under his
feet.

36. You see, Mr. Bagshaw, what kind of Idolaters the Papists are. Against this
Idolatry, let us see what express Scripture you can produce. This is the great
crime, for which there can be no expiation but oppressions, emprisonments and
Gallowses. Now if what has been here said give you no satisfaction, in case
you have a mind to reply, do not practice your old way of snatching a phrase or
expression out of a single Author, a Schoolman or Controvertist, and making
the whole Church answerable for one man's indescretion. But search what the
Church her self has declared in the Council of Trent, and dispute against that
as well as you can: and be assured you shall either be answered, or else told
that you are unconquerable.

IV. VI.

That Mr. Bagshaw's whole Discourse against the Churches Infallibility is
nothing to the purpose.

1. HItherto of your Preface: Now I come to your book: which truly will afford
very little business. And in gross concerning your grave Discourse I must
tell you, That if you would be as merciful to our Estates and our Lives as You
are to this our fundamental Doctrine, we should find You a a very commodious
Adversary: For notwithstanding all your blustering You have not given this
Doctrine one blow that smarts at all: But God bless us from Your Swords, and
Your Sermons.

2. The Title of your book is, The great Question about the Infallibility of
the Pope and Church of Rome: This Question you undertake to determine. We are
likely to have good stuff in a Book that mistakes the subject to be discoursed
on. You should not have said, The great Question about, etc. but Two Questions,
the one a great one, about the Infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church:
which if it be disproved, destroys the foundation of that Church: the other a
very little question about the Popes personal infallibility, in which the
Church it self is not concerned at all, but only Cardinal Bellarmine, and a few
Writers zealous for that Court. And when you had said this, in all reason,
having a design to triumph over Roman Catholics, you ought not to have said a
word about this little, trifling, unconcerning Question, but have bent all your
forces against that Great one which was only to the purpose.

3. But You very wisely have spent your whole book upon it only, though a
subject that You your self in your Preface confess, is not yet decided in the
Schools amongst learned men, which is as much as to say, no Catholic is
obliged to maintain, and consequently no Protestant needs trouble himself about
it: Nay moreover you say the two Councils of Basil and Constance, and (in your
Book) the sixth General Council have (vertually) decided the contrary, having
preferred the Authority of a Council above the Pope, which therefore may
reverse his decisions, and actually condemned a Pope of Heresy: you might have
added the seventh and eighth General Councils which ratifyed the same
condemnation: and to them You might have joined Pope Agathon the successor of
Pope Honorius, that was condemned, and his Successors Pope Leo the second and
the rest till Pope Adrian the second, who lived in the time of the eighth
Council*

4. Why do You write Books Mr. Bagshaw, so confessedly to no purpose at all?
And why do you trouble your self about a subject that the Author whom you
pretend to confute, cannot himself believe, what ever opinion or suspicion he
may have of it? For no Catholic can be said to believe any thing as a
Christian Verity merely upon discourse of Reason, or probable deduction from
Scripture, but only when such a verity appears either expressly contained in
the Bible, or is formally decided by a General Council, or received by
unquestionable Tradition of the Church. Now it is apparent, even out of
Bellarmine himself, that none of these ways the Popes Infallibility has been
confirmed: Nay more, Never yet has any Pope declared that himself is
Infallible. But you are wise in the midst of folly. You write out of all danger
of being confuted, because no body thinks himself touched: so that you have an
easy and cheap triumph of it. Notwithstanding by your own example I do much
doubt your Honorable patron, by whose command, You say, You wrote, finds not
Epist. Dedic.
his expectation answered; if he did expect any great matter: and I am sure
being very knowing and wise he will not believe that (as you brag) you have
killed the Enemy, having left no Argument unanswered: since evidently you have
mistaken your enemies person through your whole book, excepting only the two
last leaves, where obiter, and in answer to an Objection supposed to be made by
moderate and ingenuous Papists you make an offer to speak de tribus capellis,
that is, the Pope's being infallible, not in himself, but in and with a
Council: which though it be the only matter in question, you call only a
Conceit, of which you will speak a little, and you keep your word, you say very
little, and that little to no purpose at all.

5. Therefore to what purpose should any Catholic set pen to Paper to answer
you, since if you be never so evidently confuted, you are excused from yielding
by saying you have said a very little, but could have said more: and Catholics
are forbidden to yield, since they have a world of proofs to demonstrat, the
Infallibility of the Church, far more efficacious then these one or two Texts
of Scripture called out by you for your best advantage. And even these Texts as
they are produced and made use of by Catholics are unanswerable, especially to
those that think it reasonable to admit that to be the sense of Scripture which
all antiquity has given, which all protestants and all reasonable men do. They
could not foresee that there could arise a Disputant so void of reason, as Mr.
Bagshaw, to whom the whole consent of all Ages of the Church, all Councils and
Fathers appeared light and inconsiderable, if compared with his single reason.
Therefore till you have proved that Ground demonstratively, that is, turned
sand into a Rock, you are not in a capacity either to object or answer.

6. And to the end you may set upon such a work to some purpose, I pray please
to enquire out a Book called Exomologesis, or Motives of the Conversion etc.
where your great Lanista Mr. Chillingworths reasons for such a position are
pretended to be answered; and in an Appendix to that Book You will find an
Examination of the Fundamental Grounds of my Lord Faulklands Discourse on that
Subject. These are the men you brag of in Your Preface as your great Patrons,
that is indeed, such Protestants as you are, that lay such grounds as utterly
demolish the whole structure of the English church, denying that any Authority
upon Earth can oblige any man. And this very thing, I mean, the destruction of
the Church of England you Preface.
your self confess in your Preface to have Preface.
been the Design of your small Treatise, though written against Papists: adding
that, Nothing can be more unreasonable ib.
then this, that those (Churches or Church-Rulers) should Lord it over the
Faith or conscientious persuasion of other men, who are not certain but they
may err and be deceived themselves: For that would be to take the Pope's Chair,
and succeed into his room.

7. This therefore having been by your self acknowledged your Design, I must
repeat what I have already said: That the English Bishops and Clergy are far
more interessed in your Book, for all the Title be only against Catholics,
then Catholics are. But as to this horrible position of Yours, which utterly
destroys all Order and peace: Let me tell You that to particular Churches and
Church-Rulers (if they be members of the Catholic Church) infallibility is not
at all necessary to make their Doctrines or Orders obliging even in conscience:
Because all their subjects whilst they remain so, are bound, I do not say to
believe internally, but not to contradict their declared Doctrines, and to
submit to their Orders: the refusing of either perhaps not damning, but
certainly excluding the refusers from an outward communion with that Church. So
that here you plainly, exerto Capite, tell the World you are no English
protestant, though perhaps you would fain have an English Benefice, and preach
against order in English pulpits.

8. Now as for that Great Question of the Infallibility of the Church, which
You consider only as the conceit of some few Catholics, if You have a mind to
write any thing to the purpose, to prevent Your mistaking (if that be a
possible thing) give a well-wishing friend leave to inform you in general,
That there is extant no formal Decision of the Church touching her own
infallibility: Notwithstanding all Catholics are bound to acknowledge her to
be infallible, by a necessary consequence of an essential Article of the Creed.
Which consequence You may conceive to be thus deduced, viz.

First, it is an Article of our Creed Credo unam Sanctam Catholicam and
Apostolicam Ecclesiam, that is, I believe one (and but One) holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church. By which Article sincerely professed, the person, declaring
himself a Christian, signifies a necessity of his being truly a member in
Communion with that One Church, and consequently renounces all other
Congregations, and all Ecclesiastical Communion with persons divided from that
One Church.

10. In the Second Place, Your only Guide, common sense and reason tells us
that a multitude cannot be called One Society, except they be joined and linked
together by a Government and Laws common to all. And therefore the whole
Catholic Church, being indeed one Body (as St. Paul says) and one General
Congregation, it must necessarily have both general Rulers, and Common laws
universally obliging, which does not at all hinder but that under and within
that general Congregation there may be many distinct Societies enjoying
particular Laws, Privileges and Rulers, upon condition they do not
contradict, nor refuse to submit to the said general Laws, Tribunals and
Governors.

Thirdly, our Lord having expressly promised to preserve and continue this
Church, as one Society, to the end of the World, so as that the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail against it: it follows undeniably, that he has provided
sufficient and efficacious means to preserve this unity: for otherwise one
Article of the Creed might happen to fail.

In the fourth place, since universal Experience both in Humane and Divine
matters testifies, that never any Writing, Law, or Science could yet be so
expressed, but that being left to the wits, enlightened Reason, and interests of
particular men to descant upon them, there would follow differences of senses
and interpretations, and consequently Divisions and separated interests
destructive to unity: to provide against which the only possible remedy has
always been acknowledged to be the constituting of an External lasting
Authority of Judges and Magistrates. Hence it is, that the Supreme Tribunal of
a General Council has evermore hitherto been confessed by all Christians to be
the only preservative against a breach in the universal Church: and because it
cannot always be possible to summon such an Assembly, therefore by way of
provision the supreme Pastor of the Church has always exercised, in matters
that concern the common Faith, and Discipline, an Authority, if not to decide,
at least to compose and silence all differences in Opinions, etc. and to put in
Execution the Ordinances of precedent Councils.

13. Now if You will discourse to any purpose in opposition to this (as I know
You have a great Tooth against it) You must either demonstrate that there is no
need at all that controversies should be composed and Schisms healed: Or if
You cannot do this, You must contradict the Experience of all mankind, by
showing that Judges are not necessary to end Law-suites, that writings alone
with enlightened reason will do the business: and especially that above all
Laws and Sciences, the Holy Scriptures that are in some places infinitely
obscure, and in plain places compiled in a popular style, far from that studied
exactness of Laws and Sciences, are most proper to have their sense agreed in.
This must be your task, and to make it good, it will be expected that You
should do one miracle more, which is, to produce but one Example during sixteen
hundred years and upwards, taking in the Apostles times, if You please, to show
that differences in Religion have been prevented or composed, and separations
of divided Churches reunited by disputing out of Scriptures alone, without
submission to a common Tribunal. On the contrary side we Catholics will be
obliged to show you that all Heresies hitherto appearing have been so far
destroyed by General Councils, that the Church has been preserved in Unity, and
we are confident will be so for ever, notwithstanding even so formidable an
Adversaries opposition, as you are.

Anathema's have been denounced against all Heretics and Schismatics, and
they separated from the Mystical Body of Christ, to which alone Salvation is
promised.

that the Church is infallible: Unless we would say, that our Lord has
commanded us to hear such a Church and Guide as might lead us to Hell. To
prevent all suspicion of which he has expressly promised to lead (not the
Apostles only, as you fancy, but) his Church into all Truth, with whom he said
he would be present to the end of the world, thousands of years after the
Apostles were dead.

16. These you may suppose, Mr. Bag. to be the true grounds of the Churches
Infallibility. It is Infallible because it is One, but, it is such an One from
which as Separation is damnable. So that if you, a Presbyterian, or
Independent, etc. have a mind to assault these grounds; then 1. You must first
destroy that Article of our Creed, I believe one Catholic Church. 2. Next you
must prove out of express Scripture not only that Scripture is our only Rule,
but that we have no other Guide to find out the sense of it but only our
private reason or spirit: and what these joined together conclude upon, will
infallibly serve our turn, whether it be true or false. 3. That all the Ancient
Church and all Protestants too are mistaken when they say that Schism, (to you
the most innocent thing in the World) is a Sin, a great exterminating sin, for
which there cannot possibly be a just cause, or sufficient excuse. 4. Lastly,
you must have the confidence befitting a Presbyterian to say, that all
Christians before you have been poor spirited sheepish, deceived people, that
knew not what the Liberty of a Subject was: and that all General Councils that
presumed to denounce Anathema's against the private spirit or enlightened
reason, have been most abhorred conspiracies of Tyrants over Men's souls.

17. Whereas if you were an English Protestant truly so called, (but the very
supposition is unsufferable, and therefore must be changed, therefore I say)
whereas a true English Protestant would protest his readiness to submit both
his tongue and soul to a lawful General Council, and consequently would have no
quarrel against the Infallibility of the Universal Church: He would admit
Tradition to be the best Interpreter of Scripture: Only his Controversiehumour
would spend it self against the Roman Churches pretention to the Title of
Catholic, and would maintain that the English State and Clergy had authority
enough to reform themselves without consulting the Roman, or any other
Churches: Indeed if the Eastern Church had still been in Union with the Roman
the case then would be altered. The English Church on such a supposition would
have had a scruple to oppose both.

18. Therefore since it is not in our power to oblige the Turk to permit the
Eastern Bishops to meet in a General Council with the West: for English
Protestants sake (not yours, good Mr. Bagshaw) I will take upon me a little
more then your Book can require from me, and that is to propose in the mean
time a convenient mean and expedient toward the removing this scruple: and
that is as follows.

19. Since we cannot have speaking Judges that will please them, they may, I
suppose, do well to help themselves with Books: and for that purpose pitch upon
some well known time in which the Eastern and Western Churches were united, and
out of the Books and Monuments of that Age impartially collect the Doctrines
then taught, and the Churchgovernment then in use through the whole Church: For
thereby it will evidently appear whether of the Churches, Eastern or Western
that now differ in both, have deserted that which was anciently in both.

20. Now I conceive a more proper time for this purpose cannot be imagined then
the Age of the Church in St. Gregory the great's time when England was
converted from Paganism by St. Augustine the Monk sent by him. For it is
evident that the whole Church was then in perfect Union: the same Doctrines
were taught, and the same Government and Common laws in use all the Christian
World over. Besides, there are extant more, better and clearer Monuments both
of the Doctrines and Discipline of that Age then in any other: and especially
in St. Gregory's Epistles sent into all quarters of the World, and in other of
his works translated into the Greek tongue, and freely embraced, yea admired by
the Greek Church, we may find what Authority so learned and Holy a Pope
exercised over other Churches according to the then received Ecclesiastical
Canons. Moreover besides S. Gregory's Works, our own Country both by wtitings
of learned men, Councils of Bishops, and visible Marks in the foundation of
Churches and Monasteries, will most abundantly furnish us.

21. Now when we have found what in that age was the Belief and practice of the
whole Church uniformly: Then we are to confront thereto the Doctrines and
Discipline of the present Eastern and Western Churches: Being assured that both
of them have not deserted the Ancient Belief and practice: because if it were
so, there would not now be extant any Orthodox Church at all: and consequently
our Saviors promise of leading his Church into all Truth would have failed.

21. Now when it shall appear unto us whether of these two great Churches has
preserved the Ancient faith and Discipline, we shall necessarily be obliged to
a Communion with that Church: because a separation from it will be a manifest
Apostasy and Schism from the most certainly one, true, Catholic Church, and
consequently from Christ himself.

22. Now that the present Roman Church does at this day profess the very same
Doctrines, and is governed by the same Laws, that were in force in St.
Gregory's days, will as seems to us evidently appear both from his Writings,
the Ecelesiastical Writers since, and the Ancient English Councils: as likewise
by the acknowledgment of several learned Protestants. To this purpose Doctor
Humphreys Humphr. Jesuitis in par. 2. rat. 5. p. 5. and 627.
writes thus, In Ecclesiam vero quid invexerunt Gregorius and Augustinus? Onus
ceraemoniarum, etc. that is. But now what have Gregory and Austin brought into
the Church? A burden of Ceremonies, etc. the Archiepiscopal Pall to be used at
Solemn Mass, Purgatory, etc. the Oblation of the Holy Host and prayers for the
Dead, etc. Relics, etc. Transubstantiation, etc. new Consecrations of
Churches, etc. To these particulars Carrion a Chronologist Carrion. Chron. l. 4.
p. 567.
adds the public Rite of Invocation of Saints, a false persuasion concerning a
Monastical profession, works devised without any precept of God, satisfactions,
vows, etc. And whereas (says he) Gregory himself did tragically declaim, and
profess his abhorring the Title of Universal Bishop, yet in reality he declared
that himself did vehemently desire the thing signified by that Title, since he
took upon him a commanding power over other Churches. To these may be added the
Centuriators of Magdeburg, Bale, etc. who mention these and other particular
Doctrines, as Novelties introduced by St. Gregory.

23. Hence if our Adversaries speak truth it will evidently follow, that since
there are now differences between the Eastern and Western Churches, all the
alterations and innovations have been made by the Greek Church only.

24. Do you not now see, Mr, Bagshaw, what Religion that is, the professors
whereof you, as far as your vote extends, expose to the Butchery? whence is
apparent, that if you had been a leader of a party able to execute your cruel
intentions in S. Gregory's days, you would like a very Antichrist, have laid
wast the whole Church of Christ, and murdered all that were called by his name.
There wants only this to crown your zeal, that you should cry out, Their blood
be upon us and upon our children. Thus would you have treated S. Augustine and
his fellow Monks, you I say, that the less Charity you have, esteem your selves
the more perfect Christians and Saints, you would have condemned to Gallowses,
quartering of members, and burning of bowels those innocent persons that
exposed themselves to all incommodities for the salvation of our Country: when
as our Pagan Ancestors, though Slaves of Devils, yet treated them with all
humanity. Take heed they do not rise in judgment against you: I am sure in that
great Judgment you shall not rise to condemn them for this sin.

1. THus Sir, I have performed as much as I promised in the beginning: and
truly I promised more then your Book deserved: In which I found so very small a
proportion of Reason employed, that I may perhaps incur censure for mispending
time about a Discourse that would not endanger the misleading of any. I must
therefore plainly tell the Reader that it was only your passion, Your cruelly
malicious suggestions that I intended to oppose: That is your proper Engine to
do mischief with, to prevent which, a Christian compassion to thousands of
innocent, peaceable souls whose destruction your passion designs, does require
all honest men's endeavors and care. You acknowledge enlightened reason for your
only Principle: but I find that which You call by such a name to be nothing
else but a restless fancy, swelling with self opinion, and inflamed with almost
all sorts of inordinate passions, sharpened against all moderate persons, both
Protestants and Catholics, that is, against all that have any sense of Duty to
the King, or love of peace among Christians.

2. Now as among Protestants You thought fit to single out only two, Doctor
Gunning and Mr. Thorndike, through whose sides You would wound all that are not
as furious against peace as your self: So among Catholics likewise there are
two, my Lord the Earl of Earl of Bristow. Fiat Lux
Bristow, and the Author of Fiat Lux, against whom you have thrust forth a
forked sting armed with poison enough, but wanting strength to make that poison
enter. I hope his Lordship will pardon a stranger, yet an admirer of his most
eminent abilities and virtues, for taking notice without order from him, of
your malicious reflections upon him, which might be prejudicial to his Honor,
were it not that it comes from a person that I am assured he will never dignify
with answering.

3. You reckon his Lordship in the Catalogue of those who have showed the
vanity and uselessness of Allegations Preface.
of Authorities, of Fathers, and Councils, etc. And because (say you) it is
possible that the example of that Honorable Person may be urged against me,
since his present practice does contradict his former principles, I will only
add this, that since his book is not yet answered by himself, I hope he thinks
it unanswerable, and will not long continue in communion with that Church,
whose foundations he has so well overthrown. An Admirable passage this is, fit
for no pen but Mr. Bagshaws.

4. That his Lordship has not yet published an Answer to a Writing of his own,
sufficiently confuted by his practice, I should rather think you might have
imputed to such as your self. These are not times for any of his Lordships
present persuasion in matters of Religion to multiply unnecessary controversies
of that Nature. And however, your self and your party afford such as his
Lordship is business enough to exercise all their abilities prudence and skill,
in opposing your secret workings and open calumnies, by demonstrating that a
change in his persuasion about points of faith does make no change at all in
his Fidelity. And thus much his Lordship (in the name of all Catholics) to
your great grief has performed with that sincerity, candor and energy, that I
am confident there is not a Protestant that shall read your infamous aspersions
cast upon Catholic Religion, touching the matter of Loyalty, but will look
upon them as the last effects of the desperate rage of one that takes pleasure
in mere calumniating, without any expectation to be believed.

5. And truly, Sir, if you had taken to task the making the World believe that
in your Sect Christian Charity is esteemed a mortal sin, you could not have
better effected your design then by saying, as you have done, I hope his
Lordship thinks his Book unanswerable, etc. For shame change this phrase, I
hope, etc. It would have been an impudence not to be pardoned had you only said
I fear, or I suspect this: But sure there is not any Christian, except Mr.
Bagshaw whose Religion would allow him to say, I hope his Lordship thinks his
Book unanswerable: that is in effect, I hope in God that his Lordship is both
an Atheistical Hypocrite, professing a Religion contrary to his conscience, and
withal that his Hypocrisy, against the nature of that sin, is sencelesly void
of all worldly pretentions, since he counterfeits a Religion that he knows is
ruinous to his fortunes. Is this your Theological virtue of Hope? Truly it
becomes you well: Your Faith, Hope and Charity I see are all of a piece.

6. It may be you knew some Great Men that for some ends you could permit to
strain their consciences so far as to profess a Religion that themselves are
able to confute. But sure they will be no losers by it: whatever becomes of
there souls, care shall be taken that their worldly Estate shall thrive by it:
They will declare for a Sect where money abounds, and where power and Offices
may be shared: That is, of all Religions in England they will take heed of the
Catholic.

7. Indeed if you understood what Catholic Religion is, you would never say so
much, as I suspect, etc. and if you knew what Christian Religion is you would
never have said I hope such an abominable, so unreasonable a thing. In your
Sect I conceive such an Hypocrisy may be practiced at a cheaper rate. But in
Catholic Religion no Man can commit that sin alone: it must necessarily be
attended with most horrible sacrilege and a solemn profanation of two
Sacraments, Penance and the Holy Eucharist. Therefore I hope that you have
been bold to belly your self when you said, I hope his Lordship thinks his Book
unanswerable. I have a better opinion of you, then you desire I should.

8. As for the Author of Fiat Lux complained Fiat Lux Epist. De^^^^^
of by you to your Honorable Patron in the Epistle Dedicatory, where you lay
to his charge Blasphemies that you (good man) tremble to mention: If you had
sincerely related those passages, and were they considered not as standing
alone, but with the dependence on what is delivered before, they will be so far
from deserving to be called Blasphemies, that no sober charitable Reader will
deny them to be simple unstrain'd Truths. And if you think good to reply to
these papers I here undertake to justify those passages in the proper true
sense that the Author apparently meant them. Which that it is no hard matter to
do I will show you presently: His first passage related by you is this: In my
judgment (says he) Christ our Lord has no less shown his Divinity and power
in the Pope, then in himself. And all things considered, I may truly say, that
Christ in the Pope and Church is more miraculous, then in his own person. My
reason to demonstrate the truth of this (which is the Authors too (is this,
because the preservation of the Church in Unity and Truth under the Government
of supreme Pastors, without interruption for sixteen hundred years and more
amongst so many trials and oppositions, is a greater effect of a Divine power
in Christ, then he showed in prolonging his own personal life for about thirty
three years.

9. And as to the second passage, viz. That the first great Fundamental of
Christian Religion, which is the truth and Divinity of Christ, had it not been
for the Pope, had failed long ago in the World. So that I may truly say, that
Christ is the Popes God: For if the Pope had not been, or had not been so
vigilant a Pastor as he is, Christ had not been taken now for any such person
as he is believed this day. Consult your books, and the whole Series of
Ecclesiastical Story will inform you that the Pope by means of Councels of the
Western Church assembled by his Authority was he alone that instrumentally
destroyed Arianisme and other Heresies denying the Divinity of Christ, which
for some ages had in a manner poisoned all the East.

10. And lastly without much boasting I may with him conclude. This I may
boldly say, and am assured of, that if the Pope be not an unerring Guide in
affairs of Religion, that way I mean that I have shown him in all ages to have
exercised his Guidance [by General Councils,] all is lost. For this is no other
then what with all Catholics I have asserted and will positively justify,
that the authority of the Church in her supreme Tribunals is the only assured
means of preserving the Church in Unity, as being an Authority from which no
Appeals must be admitted, that is, being Infallible. These therefore, you see,
are no such Blasphemies as to put you into a fit of trembling.

11. I do now expect, Sir, unless God inspire more charity into your heart,
that you will make loud complaints of the presumption of your Roman Catholic
adversary, for daring to defend his Religion against your evident mistakes, and
the cause of all his profession from the traiterous imputation of a Dependence
on a foreign authority, most unjustly by you laid to their charge: like the
ancient Gladiatour, you will accuse us for avoiding your blows and thrusts, and
because we do not recipere totum gladium. But this Confidence is the effect of
our Innocence only, which as the Scripture says, Gives the boldness of a lion.
Nay, it is for your sake, if you please; however it is for our Countries sake,
that we beg no more innocent blood may be laid to its charge. But if it must
still be spilt, we had rather you should be our Executioners, than any other.
We give Almighty God, and the Parliament most humble thanks, that we have been
permitted to wipe off the scandal of Infidelity from our Religion: This we
triumph in. Hereafter if we suffer, we call God to witness, and the whole
Kingdom (I mean English Protestants) that it will be purely our Conscience, our
Religion, our love of Peace and Unity that we suffer for; for all manner of
security we have, and ever will give of being faithful, quiet, good Subjects:
all Oaths expressing only our obligation to Fidelity, or acknowledgment of the
Kings temporal Supreamacy we will take. Does it not become then such Sufferers
to be confident? Does it not become such lovers of their Country to wish that
no more guilt may lie upon it? True it is, we look upon your party as our
Murderers, you give us up into their hands, you kill us with their swords. They
are inclined to mercy, being satisfied of our Innocence: but you threaten to
set the Kingdom on fire, with your crying out Popery, if they spare us. We do
not expect from his Majesty, that for our sakes (though his most loyal
Subjects) he should take upon himself the envy that you would raise against
him. We beseech him he would not: indeed he ought not to do it, considering the
mischief that may follow, is public, and threatening the whole Kingdom. But the
generality of Protestants, me thinks, have little reason to fear your clamours,
when they extend mercy to innocent persons. And therefore those that by their
Offices have an influence upon our Laws, and are able to abate the sharpness
of them, yea have thought fit to take it into consideration, if they, either
out of compliance, or fear of You, forbear to do what Civil Justice, and much
more, Christian Charity, requires, they must not expect that God will hold them
innocent: It will be a great mercy if he punishes them in this world, either
in their estates persons or families.

12. You know the Gospel Story: I would to God You would make better use of it:
The Jewish Priests and Pharisees accused our Savior of seditious doctrine: and
for that delivered him into the hands of the Romans. What did they lay to his
charge? Art thou a King? said Pilate, that was his charge: He assumes (said
they) a power contrary to Caesar's. Our Savior acknowledges that he was a King:
that he challenged a Supremacy of power: and that he came to constitute a new
Kingdom upon earth: but it was a Kingdom not of this world: it was a power
purely spiritual, so far from being prejudicial to Caesar, that one of the
fundamental Laws of this spiritual Kingdom was, That whatsoever belonged to
Caesar should be given to him: not one dram of Civil authority should be taken
from him. The Romans were satisfied with his answer: Pilate protested him
innocent. But all little purpose, for the Pharisees make clamours, they stir
the people to sedition; they threaten Pilate: and the Text says, the clamours
of the Pharisees and people so wholly prevailed, that our Savior was delivered
up unto their will, to do unto him even what they pleased. All that Pilate
durst to do was to wash his hands, and proclaim the violence used upon him: but
however he judged him to death, and the Romans crucified him. Now not any man
will acquit Pilate, though a greater damnation be due to the Pharisees. Pilates
crime was heinous, but it was humane, he would fain have done justice, but he
feared a sedition, he had not the courage to suffer for Justice. But the
Pharisees crime was Diabolical, and as they behaved themselves by crying out,
His blood be on us and our Children, it became unpardonable: both the temporal
and eternal destruction of the whole nation was the reward of it. But now
consider who these Priests and Pharisees were that accused our Savior of
seditious Doctrine against Caesar. They were the only Enemies that Caesar had
in the whole Nation: Josephus will tell us that the principles of their Sect
were treason and Rebellion: They only of all the Jews refused an Oath of
Allegiance. If our Savior would have incited his followers to cast off Caesar's
yoke, they would have joined with him, and have made him either their King or
Protector. They had attempted several insurrections against Caesar, and within
a few years after put the whole State into an open bloody Rebellion, which
ended in their utter destruction. Yet such power had these men's malicious
suggestions as to make our Savior be condemned as a Traitor: His Disciples
therefore must not think to be bettter used then their Master, I mean by
Pharisees.

13. I suppose Mr. Bagshaw, here is enough said to your Stating of that great
Question of Infallibility, as you have stated it: And more then You will think
enough, to Your cruelty against Roman Catholics. If you have any suspicion
that we have not expressed our minds clearly and satisfactorily enough; Upon
any exceptions You will please to make, more shall be said. And as touching
what has been here delivered about disowning a foreign power prejudicial to
the State, do not read it as the assertion of one single Roman Catholic: But
be assured that if ever these papers be offered to Your eyes to be read, You
will read that which has been approved, and will be justified by many Worthy
Persons of the same Religion, persons of Learning, Virtue and Authority, who
therefore can know, and will be answerable for the conformable judgments of far
greater numbers that depend on their Direction respectively.

14. My desire now is, that you would write no more against any Catholic
Truth, or Christian peace. But if You cannot for Your life hold, then I would,
as a friend, advise you to get before hand a right notion and understanding of
the subject you would write upon: and however, that You would forbear laying
false crimes to the charge of Your brethren: The condition of Roman Catholics
is sad enough: And truly it is most unhandsome for those that are in a State of
Uniformity with them, to add to their sufferings. To conclude, if you think me
worthy to be your Adversary in a Pen-quarrell, let us not dispute about things
in which You have no skill, or that will not be profitable, but rather wound
blessed Christian Charity. And if you will permit me to propose a subject in
which you and your party are believed to have much interest, and which if well
debated, would bring much good to thousands of souls in these Kingdoms, my
desire is it may be this Problem or Question (which I told you has been taken
into consideration in France, viz.) Whether Christian Subjects may by their
Religion be allowed to defend by Arms against their Sovereign and lawful
Authority their Opinions and Doctrines, in case these be persecuted by them.
For my own part I make choice of the Negative. And now I resign you to the
mercy of Mr. L'Estrange.

FINIS.

