THE UNION OF CHRIST AND THE CHURCH; In a Shadow. By R. C.

LONDON, Printed for RICHARD BISHOP. 1642.

The Union OF CHRIST AND THE CHVRCH Shadowed.
IT is ordinary in matters both of Practice and Opinion, for men when they turn
from one extreme, to run too far upon the other, by an (...), as Saint Basil
calls it. And I wish some Divines had not been surprised a little with this
deceit, as in some other things, so in the Theological consideration of the
nature of MARRIAGE: and whilst they have been carried by an heat of opposition
against that fond Tenet of the Papists, of seven Sacraments conferring Grace ex
opere operato, (whereof we have deservedly rejected all but two) they had not
in the mean time neglected, and passed over without any observation, that
Mystical Notion which is contained in it.

Which lest I should seem rashly and ungroundedly to affirm, I will first lay
down, as the Foundation of my Discourse, a Paragraph of St. Paul's Epistle to
the Ephesians, in the fifth Chapter, from the 22 verse to the 33.

22 Wives, submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.

23 For the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the
Church: and he is the Savior of the body.

24 Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to
their own husbands in every thing.

25 Husbands love your wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave
himself for it.

26 That he might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of water by the
word.

27 That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinckle or any such thing: but that it should be holy and without blemish.

28 So ought men to love their wives, as their own bodies; he that loves his
wife loves himself.

29 For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it,
even as the Lord the Church.

30 For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.

31 For this cause shall a man leave his Father and Mother, and cleave to his
wife, and they two shall be one flesh.

32 This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church.

It is very clear to any one that is of an impartial judgment, and does not
(...), as the Greeks speak, Serve some hypothesis already taken up, That the
Apostle in these words does not only suppose a bare Similitude between the
union of Man and Wife by Marriage, and the mystical union of Christ and the
Church, and thence compare them together, as there is a similitude between the
Kingdom of Heaven and a Grain of Mustard seed: But that he makes one to be a
Real Type of the other, and the other an Archetypall Copy, according to which,
that was limmed and drawn out. As the Platonists use to say, concerning
spiritual and material things, (...), That material things are but Ectypall
Resemblances and Imitations of spiritual things, which were the First,
Primitive, and Archetypall Beings. And as a deep contemplator of Truth, shall
find nothing more obvious then that of Reuchline, Deum solere uno sigillo
varias materias signare, That God often prints the same Seal upon several
matters: Which diverse Signatures from one and the same Seal of God, our late
noble Vicount of St. Albans calls, Parallela Signacula, and Symbolizantes
Schematismos, having found out diverse instances of them in Nature, which he
concluded, were not Merae similitudines (as the Vulgar perhaps might imagine)
But una eademque Naturae vestigia, diversis materiis and subject is impressa.
Neither were the ancient Hebrews unaquainted with this Notion, which seems
indeed to have been the true foundation of all their CABALA, as I shall show
hereafter: For I find it happily expressed by one of those Doctors in this
manner, (...) i.e. All the Three worlds were printed with the same Print, and
sealed with the same Seal, and that which is sealed and receives the
Sigillation here below, is like to the Shape and Form of those things above,
which did seal and stamp the Signature upon them: By these three (...)
worlds they mean three several and graduall Emanations of Creatures from God
in the World, one below another, upon all which, they say, God set his Seal of
(...) Mundus emanationis, sive Mundus Archetypus.
SEPHIROTH so hard, that he printed quite through the bottom of them.

In like manner I conceive God having framed that excellent Plot of the Gospel,
and therein contrived the Mystical union between Christ and the Church,
delighted to draw some Shadowings and Adumbrations of it here below, and set
the Seal of that Truth upon these Material things, that so it might print the
same stamp and Idaea, though upon baser matter; and thence arose the
institution of Man and Wife here below: although indeed Christ and the Church
be Sponsus and Sponsa Archetypi, and this Man and Wife which we speak of are
but Sponsus and Sponsa Ectypi.

But for our better and more orderly proceeding, I shall observe three things
especially, which I shall insist upon, from these words alleged.

First, that The Union of Man and Wife is a Type of the Union between Christ
and the Church, which is the Architype.

Secondly, that the making of Eve at first out of Adam, and then the uniting of
both again by marriage into one, in Paradise, was all Typical of Christ the
Second Adam, and his Wife the Church.

Thirdly, How and in what respects the Marriage of Man and Wife does Typically
signify the Union between Christ and the Church.

For the First, That the union between Man and Wife is a Type, whereof Christ
and the Church is the Archetype. This I prove from the whole scope of this
place, where the Apostle falling upon Oeconomicall duties, and first those
between Man and Wife, he derives them wholly, and brings the reasons of them,
from the Relation between the Church and Christ, supposing that to be the Copy
and Archetype, to which the Relation of Man and Wife is to be conformed.

First he begins with the duty of the Woman verse. 22. Wives submit your selves
to your Husbands, As UNTO THE LORD, (...) Sicut Domino nostro, says the
Syriack, i.e. The Lord Christ. For the true meaning is, As beholding a Type of
Christ in your Husbands, submit your selves to them; and this a Popish
Interpreter well observed, In viris vestris considerantes Christum Dominum, qui
est caput and sponsus Ecclesiae. So the following Verses expound it; For the
husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the Church: THEREFORE
as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be subject to their
husbands in all things. To fancy nothing here, but a bare Similitude between
man and wife, Christ and the Church, were to make S. Paul's discourse to be very
dilute.

Then he comes to the duty of the Husband, verse. 25. which he draws likewise
from the manner of Christ's behavior to the Church. Husbands love your wives,
as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, and so onward to the 28.
verse; where he shows, that as the Wife was to honor the Husband as her Head,
because Christ was the head of the Church, so the Husband was to love the Wife
as his body, because the Church is the body of Christ, verse. 28, 29, 30, 31.

And then in the close of all he gives an account why he had used this Parallel
all along. For this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother and cleave to his
wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great Mystery, I speak of
Christ and the Church; that is, because The Union between Christ and the
Church, thus Adumbrated and Shadowed out in the Union of Man and Wife is a
great Mystery. For this sense the very connection it self does sufficiently
imply.

I will now come to show how well this doctrine was understood among the
ancient Jews, especially by the MASTERS of the CABALA; which is a kind of
secret and mystical Divinity remaining in part yet amongst them, that is
almost wholly built (if I mistake not) upon this one foundation, (...) i.e.
That every thing which is below, has some ROOT above. Wherefore they call
these inferior things, (...) Branches, and the Sephiroth above, (...) Roots.
Now they tell us that the Union between Man and Wife here below, is but (...) a
Branch of the mystical Union between Tipheret and Malcuth above, which is the
(...) or Root of it. And these Tipheret and Malcuth, are two of those ten
Sephiroth, or Emanations of For the Etym^n of the word Sephiroth is derived
from (...) Sa^phirus, by the Author of Shaa^e Ora^^^ Po^tae (...).
Light above, in the Archetypall world, which are the same Originally, that
Sponsus and Sponsa are Derivatively and Typically here below. Now that we may
see who these were, and that they meant nothing else by them, but that which we
call God or Christ, and the Church, although expressed in a little more
Metaphysicall manner, let us examine further what they say concerning them.
Archangelus de Burgo Novo, a man well skilled in this faculty, speaks thus of
them according to the mind of those profound Doctors. Secundum Cabalistas duae
Veneres sunt Tipheret and Malcuth, quae dicuntur duo amores, etsi sint unus
amor per reciprocationem, unde Solomon in Canticis Sponsum Tipheret, and
Sponsum Malcuth introducit ad invicem loquentes. Where we see that they expound
the Song of Solomon concerning these two, which every one knows is a Love-Song
between the Church and Christ. But to clear it further, we must observe that
this Malcuth, which is Sponsa, is otherwise called by them Cheneseth Israel,
and Beth Israel, that is, Congregatio Israelis, and Domus Israelis, (for so it
is usual with these Authors to express one and the same Sephirah by diverse
names, for fuller explication sake.) So the learned Author of that Discourse
whose Title is (...) or Influentia Roris, (...) i.e. Malcuth is that which is
otherwise called Cheneseth Israel, or Congregatio Israelis, i.e. The Church:
And Tipheret likewise, which is Sponsus, is expounded also by the same Author
by (...) Adam superior, in opposition to whom the first terrestrial Adam is
called (...) Adam inferior, and (...) Adam corporeus. As also in those
Cabalistick Axioms collected by Mirandula, he is called Magnus Adam, in these
words: Rectius dicitur quod Paradisus sit totum aedificium quam sit Decima, and
in medio ejus collocatus est Magnus Adam, qui est Tipheret. The meaning whereof
is, that the terrestrial Paradise was not only a Type of the tenth Sephirah,
but of the whole Decade of them, because Tipheret the celestial and
Archetypall Adam, is placed in the midst of them, just as the terrestrial Adam
was created in the midst of earthly Paradise. So that it is clear, this
Tipheret can be nothing else but Christ the true celestial Adam, whom the
Scripture sometimes calls the The Persees use to call Noah to this day Adam
Asseni, which is pure Hebrew (...), i.e. The Second Adam.
Second Adam. The Author of Shephah Tal, before commended, speaks thus
concerning the mystery of these two Sephiroth: (...) i.e. Opera bonorum omnium
and justorum, and spirituales eorum intentiones, and preces sanctae and purae
ascendunt ad Sephiram Malcuth, and Sephira Malcuth adornat se illis ut Sponsam,
and sic exhibet se coram Tipheret Viro suo, and excitat eum ad influendum in
eam deorsum. And again a little after, (...) Malcuth adornat se ut Sponsam,
bonis operibus justorum, and per eaexcitat Virum suum Tipheret ad influeudum in
eam, per Arcanum Facierum.

By all this mystically describing the Communion between the Church and Christ;
the Church adorning her self as a Spouse, by the holiness and integrity, and
good works of the Saints, that so she may please her Husband, and Christ
sending down the Influence of his Spirit again into the Church. There is an
excellent Speech also to this purpose, in that ancient and famous Cabalistick
Book made by R. Simeon Ben Iochai, whilst he lived for the space of 12. years
in a dark dungeon, for fear of the Roman Persecution in the times of Trajane,
and therefore called it Zohar, that is, Splendour; As if he had then seen most
Intellectual Light, when he saw least Sensible, (...) i.e. Dixit R. Judah,
quando multiplicantur merita and bona opera in Mundo, tune Cheneseth Israel
exhalat fragrantissimos odores, benedicta a Rege sancto, and facies ejus
coruscant. Upon which an Hebrew Scholiast thus glosseth, (...) i.e. Quando
multiplicantur Merita in mundo inferiore, quia justi semet excitant per opera
bona ad Vniendum and Maritandum Mundum inferiorem cum Mundo superiori, tunc
Malcuth quae dicitur Cheneseth Israel, emittit odores fragrantissimos, ad
Tipheret Virum suum. By which passages we may partly see the strain of
Cabalisticke Divinity, and what a resentment they had of this Notion. But Picus
Mirandula in his Cabalistick Propositions, collected by him from some ancient
Jewish Authors, puts us down one that speaks as fully to our purpose as we
could imagine. Vbicunque in Scriptura sit mentio amoris Maris and Faeminae, ibi
mystice nobis significatur conjunctio Tipheret and Cheneseth Israel (for so it
should be read, and not Chienseth as our printed Copies have it) vel Beth
Israel and Tipheret. That is, as the forenamed Archangelus (who has commented
on some of Picus his Cabalistick Axioms) well expounds it, Conjunctio Domus
Israelis and Christi, qui locatur in Tipheret, tanquam Pulchrum omne pulchrum
pulchrifaciens. For Tipheret, as is well known signifies pulchritude and
ornament. And so the learned Schickard in his Bechinath Happerushin, amongst
some other of Picus his Jewish Observations which he there commends, glanceth
upon this in this manner; Tipheret matrimonio jungitur cum Cheneseth Israel,
hoc est, ^hristus Ecclesiae inenarrabili amore desponsatur. And the next
Proposition which Picus there sets down, belongs also to this purpose, and
therefore might not be forgotten. Qui media nocte cum Tipheret copulabitur,
prospera erit illi omnis generatio; Which Archangelus thus interprets Tipheret
est Sponsus, and Sponsa est quaelibet anima huic contractui consentiens, and
consequenter tota Ecclesia and Collectio fidelium, and qui per orationem Deo in
medio noctis adhaeret, valae de Influxu Tipheret participabit.

It will not be much amiss upon this occasion by the way, to give a little
light to another axiom, which the same Author elsewhere sets down secundum
opinionem propriam, of the same kind, which I think there are but few that
understand. Rectius est ut Amen Tipheret dicat and Regnum, ut perviam numeri
ostenditur, quam quod dicat Regnum solum, ut quidam volunt. Where if we do but
observe that Tipheret and Regnum are those two Sephiroth, Tiphereth and
Malcuth, which we spoke of so much before; for Malcuth signifies Regnum, and
then in what number of the Ten Sephiroth these two are placed perhaps it will
be easy to divine his meaning. But that I may hasten to finish and shut up
this observation, I will only remember one place more out of Nachmanides,
Parash ab cha^^^ Sarah.
where he speaks of these two Sephiroth, but under two other Names, and in a
little different Notion. (...) i.e. There is a Propriety or Sephirah in God,
which is called Col or Vniversitas, because it is the Foundation of the
Universe; and another Sephirah which is called Bath, or Filia, that flows
from him, and by this does he guide and govern the World: and this is that
which is called in the Song of Songs, Callah, that is, Sponsa, and it is that
which our Wisemen have called in many places Cheneseth Israel. Here we see,
Tipheret is also called Col, or Vniversitas, which name may very well agree to
Christ also, in whom were conceived the Idaea's of the whole World, and by whom
the Worlds were made; and Malcuth, or Cheneseth Israel, is called not only
Callah Sponsa, but also Bath Filia, which may very well agree to the Church
likewise, which is not only the Spouse of Christ, but also his Daughter,
flowing out from him, as Eve that was made out of Adams side, and afterward
united to him, was his Wife, his Sister, and his Daughter: of which more anon.

Now from this opinion which the Jews had of Marriage, I believe that ancient
Tradition amongst them did first arise, Berashith ^^bba.
Quod non sit Conjugium Hominis nifi a De^ tantum, i.e. as we use to say, That
all Marriages are made in Heaven; expressing some special hand of Gods
concurrence in it, because it had a Typical signification of a Divine Mystery.
Quaesivit quidam ex R. Iose quidnam faciat Deus post absolutam creationem
mundi: Respondit, (...) Sedet and conjungit conjugia: And the same is to be
found both in the Jerusalem Targum, and that of Jonathan upon Deuteronomy. 32.4. As if
God did nothing since the Creation of the world was perfected, but join souls
together in Marriage, before they came down into their bodies, for so they use
to speak, (...) Omnes animae, descendunt e coelo conjugatae.

I have now done with the Jews, and what if I should speak a word of the
Heathens also, who did ever look upon Marriage as a Sacred thing. Coniugium rem
esse vere sacram, id est, non humanitus sed divinitus constitutam, magno
consensu Gentes crediderunt, says a learned Author.

And it is very pertinent to this purpose, what a late Author reports of two
Ancient Sects of Religion in the Oriental Parts, the one of the Banians,
Natives of India, which seem to have been the Remainders of the ancient
Brachmannes, whose Name their Teachers and Doctors yet retain. The other of the
Persees, Persians by Nation, which seem to have descended from the Famous
Magi, the Father whereof was Zoroaster, whom they still honor (as I take it)
under the name of Zertoost. Of the first the Author relates, Page 61.
That they marry about the seventh year of their age, because they account
Marriage one of the most blessed actions of Man's Life, without which to dye
were a great unhappiness. And of the other, Page 47 43.
That when any one amongst them dies before Marriage, they have a Custom to
procure some Man's Son or Daughter to be matched to the Party deceased,
attributing this to the state of Marriage, to be a means to bring people to
happiness eternal in another World.

I have often thought the Egyptians had some relics of an old Tradition
concerning this very notion which we have spoken of, lest among them, from that
which Plutarch mentions of them in the life of Numa, upon the occasion of that
familiar converse which he pretended to have with the Goddess Egeria. (...).
Which I need not English but it is likely that Plutarch might mar it a little
in the relation; otherwise if this be not the meaning it may seem to argue
some Prophetical Prenotion which they had of Christ's Conception by the Holy
Ghost in the Virgin Mary.

We learn from all this which has been said, the true reason why the
Scripture so often uses to express the Relation of Christ and the Church
under the Notion of Man and Wife, or Sponsus and Sponsa, both in the Old and
New Testament. In the 45. Psalm and the Song of Solomon throughout. And John
the Baptist uses the Words (...) and (...) as if they were in a manner
synonymous. John 3.28, 29. I am not the Christ, but I am sent before him, he
that has the Bride is the Bridegroom, this Notion being then very familiar
amongst them. In the 22. of Matthew the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a
King making a Marriage for his Son. The Apocalypse speaks much of the Marriage
of the Lamb, and there be diverse Other places to the same purpose. Wherefore
Idolatry and false Worship also in the Church of God, is expressed under the
Notion of Spiritual Fornication; and no one Scheme of Speech or manner of
expression is so frequently and constantly made use of throughout the whole
Scripture as this is. In all which places and the like, we must not conceive a
Metaphore, but a Mystery.

And perhaps Christ himself intimated this Mystery in his manner of Life and
converse here upon earth. For some * Divines have wittily conceived, Lud^^
Vives de Ve^it.
that amongst many other good reasons which may be given, why Christ should
live an Unmarried Life, this might be one also, to show that he was Sponsus
Ecclesiae, The Spouse of the Church.

And I cannot here forget how elegantly this Notion was expressed by an Old
Syriack Philosopher in an Enigmaticall Poem De Sapientia Divina, set out by
Sionita, in this manner.

(...)
Occurrit mihi in mundo Puella
Aspectu bella,
Et Oculis splendida,
Et Vultu pulchra.
(...)
Virgo and Matter, Adolescentula,
Et Vetula, and familia
Admiranda.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
In eius facie depicta est Dies
quae omnia illuminat,
Et Nox obscura suspensa est
Crinibus eius.
In medio palpebrarum eius,
Occultantur Sol and Luna and
Aer;
Etiam Elementa coram ea
Exultant, motu Circulari.
Thus far he seems to describe the Church, and afterward to bring in Christ
the Spouse, in this manner:

(...)
Vidi Iuvenem iucundum Diademate vinctum,
Eius Puellae quae me insanum reddit,
amore percitum.
Thus I have done with the first thing which I propounded, That the Union of
Man and wife is a Type, whereof the Union of Christ and the Church is the
Archetype. I come to the second.

That the Making of Eve at first out of Adam, and the Uniting of her again to
him, which was the first Original of Marriage, was Typical of Christ the
Second Adam, and his wife the Church. And this I prove from the 30. and 31.
verses, where the Apostle uses those very words which were spoken of Eve, in
Genesis, when she was made out of Adam, concerning the Church and Christ. For
we are members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; For this cause
shall a man leave his Father and Mother, and be joined to his Wife, and they
two shall be one Flesh. Where lest we should be mistaken, as if these words of
the latter verse were spoken only of Man and Wife, and did not allude to
Christ and the Church, as the Words going before did, to which notwithstanding
they were immediately subjoyned by Moses in Genesis: he adds, This is a great
Mystery, but I speak (all this while) of Christ and the Church.

It Is true, the Apostle does not here go about to prove that there was any such
Mystical meaning in that passage of Moses his story; neither does he bring it
out as if it were a new thing to those converted Jews to whom he wrote. But as
that which was well enough understood amongst them, and therefore certainly
they had some Cabala, or received Tradition concerning such an interpretation
of it. Which that ingenuous Author Petrus Cunaeus well observed, De Rep. Heb.
Lib. 3. Cap. 8. where having shown that diverse places of the Old Testament are
expounded in the New, according to some Cabala, which they had concerning them,
he reckons up this amongst the rest: Etiam in illis verbis quae extant in
Capite secundo Geneseos agnoscimus Cabalam, Quod enim ibi dicitur, RELINQUET
HOMO PATREM MATREMQUE, ET ADHAEREBIT UXORI; ex illo ignotum mortalibus
Sacramentum revelat Apostolus in Capite quinto Epistolae ad Ephesios. Mystertum
hoc magnum est, loquor autem de Christo and de Ecclesia.

Now though it be not necessary, that any Footsteps of this Cabala should be
found in those Jewish writings which now we have, (for Cunaeus does not go any
further to show us what it was) yet we will endeavor to make our best search
and enquiry after it.

Moses Maymonides in his Moreh Nevochim lib. 2. cap. 30. speaking concerning
the Story of Genesis and the first Creation, after he had declared some more
obvious things concerning it, he comes to tell his Reader some Mysteries, but
so as that he would wave the interpretation of them, lest he should be counted
a betrayer of the Secrets of his Nation. (...) Quae tibi ex verbis Sapientum
nostrorum propositurus sum, sunt perfectissima and ordinatissima, ideo non diu
immorabor in expositione illorum, neque sensum ipsorum explicabo, ne arcanorum
fiam revelator. The first of those Mysteries is this: (...) (...) Which
Buxtorfius thought good to Latin thus, though I think he do not exactly
express the Authors sense. Adam and Eva creati fuerunt sicut Vnus, and tergis
vel dorso conjuncti, postea vero a Deo divisi fuerunt, qui dimidiam illam
partem accepit, and fuit Eva, and adducta fuit ad ipsum. Animadverte quomodo
explicetur quod fuerint certo respectu Duo, and certo respectu Vnum, sicut
dicitur, Os ex ossibus meis, and Caro ex Carne mea; quod fuerint certo respectu
Duo, id confirmatur ex eo quod dicitur Nomen Vnum AMBOBUS convenire, Vocahitur
Ishah Vira, quia ex Ish Viro desumpta est: quod fuerint UNUM id confirmatur eo
quod dicitur, Et adhaerebit VXORI suae, and erunt in Carnem unam. But lest we
should take all this merely in a literal sense, he concludes it in this
manner: (...) i.e. Quanta vero est ignorantia illius qui non intelligit haec
secundum aliquem Sensum occultum intelligenda esse? This same Tradition,
whatsoever it mean, I find diverse others of their own Authors glancing at. R.
Simeon Ben Iochai in the Book Zohar before commended (...) Adam and Eva
creabantur latere ad latus, quaenam est ratio quod non creabantur facie ad
faciem? R. Solomon and Aben-Ezra upon the second of Genesis, and Elias Levita
in Tishbi upon the word (...) express it briefly thus, out of Midrash Aggadah.
(...) i.e. The first Adam was created with two faces, and afterward God divided
him into Man and Woman. The same is likewise mentioned in Breshith Rabba, and
the Babylonish Talmud, in the Book Berachoth, (...) Duas facies creavit Deus
in Adamo primo, sicut dicitur, Ante and retro formasts me. And Philo the Jew
without question alludeth to it, in his Book (...), speaking concerning the
Making of the Woman in these words. (...) i.e. Quando vero facta est mulier,
videns homo cognatam speciem and imaginem, delectabatur spectaculo,
superveniens autem amor tanquam VNIUS ANIMALIS DUO SEGMENTA AB INVICEM
DISTANTIA colligens, in unum iterum compegit.

Here then we have already found out some Jewish Cabala, or Tradition,
concerning that piece of Story in Genesis, which is so mystically expounded by
Saint Paul, although we do not yet know the meaning of it; only Maymonides
has taught us that it must be understood in some OCCULT SENSE.

But before we come to that, that we may show how ancient this piece of
Cabalisme was, and that it was long before Saint Paul's time, by whom this
Epistle to the Ephesians was written, we will produce the very self same
thing out of Plato, as he had received it some way by Tradition in the
Oriental Parts, which will deserve no little admiration. He therefore in that
excellent Symposiack dialogue concerning the nature of Love, brings in
Aristophanes discoursing in this manner: (...), i.e. Non erat antiqua hominum
natura qualis nunc est sed long diversa, ANDROGYNUM tunc enim erat and specie
and nomine, ex Maris and Foeminae Sexu commixium. (Compare this with that of
Maymonides before; Adam and Eva creati fuerunt sicut unus, (and go on) (...)
i.e. Erat porro rota hominis species rotunda, dorsum and latera circum habens,
manus quatuor, totidemque crura, facies item duas teriti cervice connexas. Here
(...) are the very same words which we quoted from the Talmud (...) (for in
that declining age of the Hebrew and Chalday Tongues, about the time of the
destruction of the Second Temple, many Greek and Latin and other barbarous
words, were mingled with them) and there is withal added a larger explication
of it. But then when he comes to speak of the dividing of this Androgynon into
two, whereof one should be Male and the other Female, he puts in something for
the occasion of it, which we have not found mentioned to this purpose in Jewish
Authors, although he received it also by Tradition (though not immediately)
from the Jews, (...) i.e. Animos superbos habuerunt, Diis bellum infer
conati, and in coelum ascendere, quemadmodum de Ephialto and Oto narrat
Homerus, ut violentas manus in Does inferrent. Whereupon the Gods consulting
what to do, Jupiter at last found out this plot, (...) (says he) (...),
Vnumquemque in duas parts dissecabo. Whereupon it follows, (...), i.e. Haec
fatus, bifariam partitus est singulos, instar eorum qui ova dividunt ut sale
condiant. (...). They are incomparable words, expressing in the Type exactly
according to the Scripture-Notion the Nature of Marriage, but yet so, as
looking also beyond that, they aim at some further Mystery. viz. Hinc nimirum
ex illo tempore mutuus hominibus innatus est amor PRISCAE NATURAE CONCILIATOR,
annitens VNUM EX DUOBUS efficere, (what could be more like that of the
Scripture, They two shall he one Flesh) hominumque naturae mederi; est igitur
unusquisque nostrum hominis Collatio and quasi Dimidium, veluti dissecatus, ut
illi Pisciculi qui Psettae vocantur scissi ex Vno efficiuntur Duo.

I cannot consent with Lib. 12. Praepar. Evang.
Eusebius, that Plato had seen Moses his words, and there had taken out this
whole Story, as well as diverse other things, for * besides many weighty Reasons
which I have to think he never saw any of those Sacred Volumes, Vide Engubinum
in Timaeum Platonis.
this does not agree with Moses his relation of it, but is the very same with
that Jewish Cabala before recited, which he had therefore certainly received by
Tradition, when he was in Egypt, or some other of those Oriental Parts
bordering upon the Jews. Only as Leo Hebraeus (a disguised Author, whose true
name I think was Judah Abravanel) well observes, having there heard of these two
distinct things, The making of Eve out of Adam, by Cutting of him in two; and
then of the Fall of our first Parents, which was by their Pride, desiring to be
as God: He thought these two did belong to one another, and therefore joined
them both together, making their Pride to be the reason why they were so
divided into two, as a Punishment inflicted on them: whereas in Mose's Story,
the Fall of Man came after the making of Eve out of Adam. And certain it is
that Plato in all this, did think there was contained some Mystical meaning
concerning the Nature of Divine Love, either as Ficinus or Leo Hebraeus
allegorize it, or else perhaps more simply thus, That Man in his first Estate
being united unto God, and one with him, afterward Sinning was divorced from
him, and sunk down quite into the Body, but so as that by Divine Love he might
still recover himself, and so by degrees work up himself again unto God, and
be made perfectly one with him, as by a Carnal and outward Affection, Man and
Wife here below are united together.

But if we would have a true and genuine Interpretation of this Jewish
Tradition, we must have recourse to the Jewish Authors themselves, and
especially the Masters of the Cabala; and they will tell us, that here also
Adam and Eve are mystically signified Tipheret and Malcuth, of which we have
spoken sufficiently before, that were at first both one Sephirah, as it were
Male and Female together, but afterward were parted asunder into two (...) from
being so conjoined; but then were united together again as Man and Wife,
(...). This is fully handled and explained with many Cabalistick Mysteries, by
the sore-cited Author of Shephah Tal, in a Discourfe on purpose, the Title
whereof is (...) Arcanum duarum facierum. I will only transcribe some few
remarkable passages out of it. (...) i.e. Anima Adami qui erat masculus
emanavit ex Tipheret, and anima Evae quae erat Foemina emanavit ex Malcuth;
Duas facies habuerunt post creationem, hoc est, post creationem eorum in mundo
hoc corporeo and materiali habuerunt duas facies in corpore uno: Et sicut Adam
and Eva materiales habuerunt duas facies in corpore uno, sic etiam Fontes unde
emanarunt Tipheret and Malcuth, sc. Fons Amimae Adami qui erat Tipheret, and
Fons animae Evae qui erat Malcut, quando erant hae duae Sephirot Tipheret and
Malcuth in secreto Binah, erant tunc corpus nnum Sephirah una, consummata ex
duabus faciebus, quae erant secretum maris and Foeminae. Et Zohar loquitur
quidem ( viz. in that Tradition before related out of him) de inferioribus and
de animis Adami and Evae, sed intelligendus est de Superioribus, scilicet de
Fontibus unde emanarunt. And again, (...) etc. Notum est, quod istae Sephiroth
Tipheret, and Malcuth, Secretum maris and Foeminae, administrant mundum, nec
necesse est ut revelentur distinct, nisi post creationem hominis: erant vero
antea in Essentia sua occulta conjunctim existentes. The meaning is, that as
soon as Man was created, the Church did then flow out of Christ, and became
distinct from him (whereas before it lay hid in him) yet so, as that Christ and
it, that is, Tipheret and Malcuth, were united together again, as Sponsus and
Sponsa, whereof the Union of Adam and Eve by marriage was some Type and Shadow.

So then we may easily unriddle this Cabala, whereof the true meaning seems to
be nothing else but this, that the Church did as it were lie hid in Christ from
all Eternity, and was Seminally contained in him; who therefore might be said
all that while to have (...), that is, (...), or else in Plato's language to be
(...), i.e. (to speak with reverence) Male and Female together. As the
Heathens, I know not how, in some Arcane sense, were wont to describe their
Gods. For so Orpheus, the Father of Ethnicall Theology, speaks of Jupiter,

(...).

Which Apuleius in his Book De Mundo thus interprets, Jupiter and Mas est, est
que idem Nympha perennis.

And of Minerva,

(...).

And there is an Old Monument at Rome to this day, with this Inscription upon,
it, SIVE DEO SIVE DE AE C. TER. DEXTER EX VOTO POSVIT.

Servius upon that Verse of Virgil in his second AEnead,

Descendo and ducente Deo --

where the Poet calls Venus Deum, in the Masculine Gender, notes, Loquitur
secundum eos, qui dicunt utriusque Sexus participationem habere Numina. And
this, other learned men since, have often taken notice of; as Petrus Crinitus
in his Book De honesta Disciplina; and Casperius Gevartius in the Third Book
of his Electa, in the explication of that famous Enigme of

Elia Lelia Crispis,
Nec Vir, nec Mulier, nec Androgyna.
Which Fortunius Licetus has more fully since explained, in a Volume of
purpose upon that Argument. And lastly, Master Seldom, in the Prolegomena of
his Book DE DIS SYRIS, whose words I will here set down: Vide and eundem
ibidem de Astarte.
Credidit Vulgus Deum hoc, illud Deam Numen, Edocti tamen a sacrorum
antistitibus solenni invocatione, SIVE TU DEUS ES SIVE DEA, unumquodque
compellabant, test Agellio, Arnobio, aliis: Viriusque scilicet Naturae and
Masculinae and Foemininae vis ineffabilis, quam veteres in Deo Vnico Opt. M.
agnoscebant, (...) eum vocantes, mystice innuebatur. And a little after,
Rectissime ad eam mentem Nichomachus Gerasenus in (...) libris, coeteroqui
satis ineptis, Vnitatem (...) asserit. And indeed Hermes Trismegist, or
whosoever were the Author of Poemander, who, I think with Casaubon, was rather
a Christian Divine than a Philosopher, calls God or Christ the true logos and
Word of God, (...); as if seems, in respect of the Creation of the whole
world, which was made out of that Ideall Fecundity which was in him: which
might be better applied to him, in respect of the Church, and that by the
Apostles warrant, who has led us thus far into this Notion, affirming that
Believers are Members of Christ's Body, of his Bone and of his Flesh, and
therefore made out of him; which must not be understood as if it were by the
derivation of any material substance, for so Christ in respect of his body is
rather Bone of our Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh; but by the Effluxe and
Communication of his Spirit. For the Church is nothing else but Christus
explicatus, Christ dilated and explicated, and therefore is sometimes called in
the Scripture by the name of Christ: Ecclesia est Christus, (says Tertullian)
ergo cum te ad fratrum genua protendis, Christum contrectas, Christum exoras,
and illi cum super te lachrymas agunt, Christus patitur, Christus Patrem
deprecatur, in his Book De Poenitentia.

But further to confirm this, that the Jews had such a Tradition concerning
this Mystical Interpretation of that Story of Adam and Eve in Genesis, I will
produce another Testimony of some ancient Jewish Author, recorded by Munster in
his Commentary upon that Book; that the making of Eve at first out of Adams
side, was (...) Ad significandam sive notandam conjugem ADAMI SUPERIORIS qui
est benedictus. Which is the same that was intimated in the former Cabala,
according to the manner of the Oriental Nations, that were wont to couch their
greatest Mysteries and pieces of Wisdom, which they conveyed by Tradition to
one another, in the Covert of some Fables. And thence Pythagoras and Plato
afterward brought that manner of Philosophizing into Europe.

But last of all, for the fuller conviction of this Proposition which we have
laid down, that The Making of Eve out of Adam, did type out something
answerable in Christ and the Church, it will not be amiss, to consider what an
elegant Parallel there is to that Type in the Antitype. For just as Eve was
made out of Adams side when he was asleep in Paradise, so when Christ was
sleeping the sleep of death upon the Cross, was his side likewise opened, and
out of it flowed forth Water and Blood, one for the justification, the other
for the Sanctification of the Church; or else, as Saint Austine and others of
the Fathers will have it, the Types of the two Sacraments, Baptism and the
Lords Supper. Whence is that of Saint Jerome, in his Epistle Ad Pammachium, Eva
in typo Ecclesiae de Costa viri aedificata est: And of Saint Austin, in his
second Book De Symb. Dormiat moriendo, aperiatur ejus latus and Ecclesia
prodeat Virgo, ut quomodo Eva facta est ex latere Adae dormientis, ita Ecclesia
facta sit ex latere Christi morientis, and in cruce pendentis; and others of
the Fathers so often alluded to this Notion, that the Schoolmen at last had
got this pretty observation, Ecclesia facta est de latere Christi dormientis in
cruce.

Neither may it seem strange that we make Adam before the Fall to be thus a
Type of Christ, for if it were not too long here to discuss, it might be
easily proved that there were Types in Paradise. Neither can I believe that the
Tree of Life had in it a Natural Power to preserve from death, as Goropius
Becanus perhaps might dream, but that it was a Typical and Sacramental
thing, the mystery whereof seems to be unfolded Rev. 22.2. where we have a
description of another Paradise, of which also, to my apprehension, the first
Paradise it self was a Type. For though I dare not confidently aver that
which the Noble Picus took upon him to defend, Si non peccasset Adam Deus
fuisset incarnatus sed non crucifixus; Although the ancient Jews seem to have
been of that opinion, when among five things, which they say were created
before the World, they make Messiah the Son of David to be one, meaning
thereby, as a learned Scholiast of their own expounds it, R D Kimchi in
C^mment. ad (...)
that he was absolutely and primarily intended in the Creation of the World.
And Tertullian also, if I understand him aright, in his Book De Resurrectione
carnis, Quodcunque enim limus exprimebatur, Christus cogitabatur homo futurus
-- Et limus ille jam tunc imaginem induens Christi in carne, non tantum Dei
opus erat, sed and pignus. Yet however there might well be Types of Christ in
Paradise, because God ever intended Christ in the World, upon the supposition
of man's Fall, which he at least foreknew. Sure I am the Apostle tells us
plainly, that the first Adam was (...), Romans 5.14. A figure or Type of him
that was to come. And so R. Menachem of Rikanat according to the mind of the
ancient Jewish Doctors, upon Genesis 5.1. (...) (...) i.e. The Form of the
Inferior Adam, mystically signified the Form of the Superior Adam. And as Adam
was then a Type of Christ, so might Eve also be of the Church; neither was she
so called without a Mystery, for the Church indeed is the True Chavvah, the
Mother of all living, of all those which live the Life of Grace here, and of
glory hereafter.

I come to the Third and last thing, From these Words, to show How and in What
Respects this Union of Man and Wife by Marriage, does typically signify the
Mystical Union of Christ and the Church. Which is not barely by the Natural
Conjunction of them, for there must be some Positive and Instituted
Circumstrnces to make a thing properly to be a Type. And they are chiefly those
two which are contained in those words in which the Primitive institution of
Marriage is expressed. For this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother and
be joined to his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh; where are two things of
Divine Institution concerning Marriage employed. First, that every man should
have but one Wife, and that is to Type out the Union betwixt Christ and his One
Only Church, expressed in those Words, They Two shall be one Flesh, against
Promiscuous conjunction and Polygamy. Secondly, That a Man may not put away his
Wife for any cause (except that of Fornication) when it is said, They shall be
One Flesh, to type out the inseparable and indissoluble Union between the
Church and Christ, against Divorce. For that these two, Polygamy and Divorce,
are in themselves absolutely against the Law of Nature, I think will hardly
ever be proved. And therefore our Savior, Matthew. 19. goes about to show them
both to be unlawful, not from the Law of Nature, but from that Primitive,
Positive Institution which we have before specified, in these Words. Have you
not read that he which made them at first, made them Male and Female, and said,
For this cause shall a Man leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife, and
they Twain shall be one Flesh; Wherefore they are no more twain but one Flesh:
What therefore God has joined together let no man put asunder. They said unto
him, Why did Moses then command to give a Writing of Divorcement, and to put
her away? He says unto them, Moses because of the hardness of their hearts
suffered them to put away their Wives, but from the beginning it was not so.
Where although it be said, that it was for the hardness of their hearts that
they were allowed to put away their Wives with a Bill of Divorce, which may be
affirmed likewise of the other, the permission of Polygamy amongst them; Yet I
cannot believe that God would have suffered these two, Polygamy and Divorce to
have continued so long in his own Church, and that with such seeming
approbation, if they had been directly contrary to the Law of Nature, which he
does not, some say, cannot dispense with. But it is in his own power to
dispense with his own Positive Institutions for a time, more or less, as he
pleases.

Now if it should be objected, that in the Hebrew Text Genesis 2.24. there is
nothing that may seem to prejudice Polygamy, because the Word Two, upon which
the chief stresse of that Notion lies, is not there to be found, it being read
thus, (...) And they shall be one Flesh. I answer, That though perhaps that
Word may be Understood and borrowed from the Context, yet I strongly believe
that it was read also in the ancient Copies of the Hebrew Bible. Not only
because the place might else be easily eluded; and we see that the Jewish
Doctors notwithstanding do all generally hold to this day that Polygamy is
lawful, as Master Seldom has largely showed, in that incomparable work De
Iure Naturali and Gentium: but also because this is sour several times quoted
in the New Testament, in this manner, (...), They two shall be one Flesh, and
sometimes, so as that the chiefest stresse lies upon that word. And because
diverse ancient Translations read it in the same manner: beside the LXX. whence
perhaps it is quoted in the New Testament, the Chaldee Paraphrase of Jonathan
Ben Vziel, (...), Et erunt ambo in Carnem unam: and a Manuscript Syriacke
Metaphrase produced by Morinus, (...) Et erunt ambo Caro una. But lastly, that
which is most of all considerable, although these Hebrew copies which now we
have, received from the Jews, read it otherwise, yet that incomparable
Antiquity of the Samaritane Pentateuch, lately brought to light, which seems
to be truer in many places than our Copies are, has it thus, in Hebrew
Language, and the true Old Hebrew (now called the Samaritane) Letter; (...)
(...), Et fiet ex duobus illis in carnem unam.

Now that both these Circumstances of Lawful Marriage, were instituted to Type
out something in the Union between Christ and the Church; was very well
understood by Saint Austin, who observes first against Polygamy, in his Book De
Bono Conjugali, thus; Nuptias Christianorum cum una tantum Vxore, Sacramentum
esse Vnitatis Ecclesiae Christo subjectae: And against Divorce in his Book De
Nuptiis and Concupiscentia; Quoniam sane non tantum foecunditas, cujus fructus
in prole est, nec tantum pudicitia, cujus vinculum est fides, verumetiam
quoddam Sacramentum Nuptiarum commendatur fidelibus conjugatis; unde dicit
Apostolus, Viri diligite uxores vestras sicut Christus dilexit Ecclesiam. Huius
proculdubio Sacramenti res est, ut mas and foemina connubio copulati, quamdiu
vivunt inseparabiliter perseverent, nec liceat excepta causa fornicationis a
coniuge coniugem dirimi. Hoc enim custoditur in Christo and Ecclesia, ut vivens
cum vivente in aeternum nullo DIVORTIO separetur. And it is very observable,
that this was the only Argument of Moment which Tertullian had, that prevailed
with him to hold all Second Marriages unlawful, Because Christ is but once
married to his Church: So he in his Book De Exhortatione Castitatis, Cum
Apostolus in Ecclesiam and Christum interpretatur, Erunt duo in unam carnem:
secundum spirituales nuptias Ecclesiae and Christi, (unus enim Christus, and
una eius Ecclesia) agnoscere debemus duplicatam and exaggeratam esse nobis
unius Matrimonii Legem, tam secundum generis fundamentum, quam secundum Christi
Sacramentum. De uno Matrimonio censemur utrobique, and carnaliter in Adam, and
spiritaliter in Christo; and often elsewhere. Although this opinion be directly
contrary to the Apostles Rule somewhere given; and if Tertullians Rigor had
not misled him, he might easily have seen here a sufficient ground of
difference between these two, in that Christ and the Church always live
together.

The Reason, why this Type is not yet abolished, but still to continue; is
because the Antitype thereof, which is the marriage of the Lamb ( Rev. 21.) is
not yet consummated.

FINIS.

