TABLES OF THE UNIVERSAL CHARACTER So contrived, that the practice of them
exceed's all former ways of short hand writing, and are applicable to all
languages.
THE TABLE OF PARTICLES,
Before the character after above under 1. Ego tu ille me te illum praet.
praes. futurum passivum and non 2. Nos vos illi nos vos illos plurale genitiv.
dativ. ideo quia quasi 3. Hoc illud aliud hoc illud aliud possum debeo oportet
nam nisi ne 4. Uterque reliqui solus utrumque reliquos solum imperat. utinam
licet quod si quamvis 5. Unusquisque alius neuter unumquemque alium neutrum hic
illic alibi sed tamen cum 6. Omnes aliquis nullus omnes aliquem nullum ubique
alicubi nusquam sic ut sicut 7. Omnia aliquid nihil omnia aliquid nihil sursum
direct deorsum primo deinde denique 8. Quis qualis talis been mediocriter male
antrorsum a latere retrorsum partim dimidium potius 9. Ubi unde quo fere
praecipue perfect supra praeter infra omnino quodammodo praeterea 10. Quid
quare qua certe possibile impossible extra intra undequaque usque vix proxime
11. Quando quamdiu quousque facile difficile frustra simul juxta procul tam
quam secundum 12. Quantum quomodo quam forte probabile falsum contra inter
circum aut neque donec 13. Quot quotus quoties contingens conveniens necesse
citra apud ultra hucusque adhuc quoque 14. Tot toties tantum nunc tunc tandem
per de pro heri hodie cras 15. Solum satis nimis iterum brevi diu in cum sine
raro saepe semper 16. Cito opportune tarde coram public privatim super ab ex
magnum parum multum 17. Statim aliquando nunquam aliter particulariter
Universaliter ante penes post valde magis maxim Derivatives 18. Facere, actio,
Infinitivus, actor substantiv. activ. sub. pass. adjectiv. neutrum. adject.
act. adj. pass. abstractum, adverbium, potentia* 19. Officiu^, Incipio, genus
faemininum, Instrumentum, tempus, locus agendi membrum, vestis, fructus ars,
vox animalis, morbus,

The TABLE of Radical verbs and adjectives CONTRARIES 1. Ego 1. Ego 6. When I
sit down upon a hie place, I Am sick with light and heat Rise up, low,
displace, whole, dark, cold, 12. For the many thick moistures, do open wide
my Empty pores F. few, thin, dry, shut, narrow, full, 18. But when I sit upon
a strong borrowed Horse, I ride and run most swiftly B. stand, weak, lend, go
on foot, walk, slow, 24. Therefore if I can purchase this courtesy with
civilitie, I care not the hirers barbaritie T. possess, froward, rude,
neglect, eloquent, 30. Because I Am persuaded they are wild villains, scornfully
deceiving modest men B. dissuade, tame, serious, lascivious, 36. Nevertheless
I allow their frequent wrongs, and will encourage them with obliging
exhortations N. dissallow, rare, discourage, disobliedge, rebuke 42. Moreover
I Will assist them to fight against robbers, when I have my long crooked sword. M.
resist, at peace, want, short, straight. 2. Tu 2. Tu 6. Worthy friend be
entreated, to extol religion and holiness Unworthie enemy, threaten, abase,
superstitious, profane, 12. F. true virtue being found gives a rich blessing
F. false, vicious, seek, receive, poor, curse, 18. B. your courage concealed
in a prison, provokes flyers to pursue you B. coward, tell, set at liberty,
pacify, follow, defend, 24. T. hold firm your victory, against the heavy
burdens of despair T. let go, instable, yield, light, disburden, hope, 30. B.
the great sufferings of misery, kills wicked servants B. small, do,
prosperous, quicken, godly, free, 36. N. you may constantly sell dear, and
continue still your idle questions N. unconstant, buy, cheap, leave of work,
answer 42. M. you may remarke how chaste virgins conceive, and afflict sleeping
men with nakedness. M. unchaste, bring forth, comfort, wake, cloathe. 3. Ille 3.
Ille 6. A wise teacher knows, what he affirms and understand's what he
remembers Fool, learn, doubt, deny, ignorant, forget, 12. F. he chooses
rather to speak prophesies, then to please angry lovers F. reject, dumb, come
to pass, offend, content, hate, 18. B. when he hears and sees clearly, they
have promised to honor and thank him B. deaf, blind, obscure, perform,
dishonor, unthankful, 24. T. he therefore absolves them from false
accusations, and praises their flourishing innocence T. condemn, excuse,
dispraise, wither, guilty, 30. B. hard beginnings of good, begett a lively
growth B. soft, end, ill, corrupt, die, decrease, 36. N. he commanded presently
to bind them, and lead them away and hang and burn them N. obey, absent, loose,
draw, drown, smoke, 42. M. he punished them so with hunger and thirst, that
they cried out eating is sweet. M. spare, full, drink, silent, fast, sour. 4.
Nos 4. Nos 6. We Will call this old mad man, and tickle him till he fart for
laughter Appear, young, sottish, prick, belch, weep, 12. F. the pleasant
mirth of itching, will make him scratch his white snowie beard F. unpleasant,
sad, sore, rub, black, hail, 18. B. sharp biting wounds, will bury his
lustful desires B. blunt, lick, cure, dig, covet, 24. T. we'll feed his
lean barren corpse, with fresh savoury dinners T. poison, fat, fertile, rotten,
unsavory, suppe, 30. B. filthy stinking roasts, move him fall a vomiting B.
clean, odoriferous, boil, rest, stand, spit, 36. N. we will penetrate him with
fearful thunder, and kindle unhappy flames in him N. dare, lighten, quench,
happy, sparkle, 42. M. we will prove he divorced his wife for dancing, and
enchanted her to refuse his kindness. M. improve, marry, play, conjure, grant,
unkind. 5. Vos 5. Vos 6. You vile breathless liars, consider your wicked
customs Precious, strangle, speak, true, rash, godly, unaccustome, 12. F. you
bow ^own with deep groanings, when you use your flattering salutations F. lift
up, ebb, sigh, abuse, valedico, 18. B. you contradict the comparisons of
honest men, and vilipend their skillful corrections B. consent, unhonest,
esteem, unskilful, fault, 24. T. your seed shall be perfectly excluded, and
your names blotted out from inheritance T. reap, imperfect, contain, nickname,
disinherit 30. B. you measure the creation by division, and hyde the world with
coverings B. weigh, annihilate, describe, show, square, discover, 36. N. the
very despised shadow of your comb, shall be accepted with sweating kisses N.
respect, shine, brush, reject, faint, embrace, 42. M. your wilfully ensnaring
witnesses, shall be shot through with a rough plough. M. unwilling, deliver,
attest, bend, plain, harrow. 6. Illi 6. Illi 6. Thriftie men paint their
buildings, only with greasy blew and red Prodigal, print, cast down, brown,
yellow, green, 12. F. by the equality of this order, they take away the
joynings where the rain poures in F. unequal, disorder, add, disjoyne, blow,
pour out, 18. B. yet the power of the frost is so nimble, that it impudently
breaks down their baking houses B. unpowrfull, melt, weary, bashful, cut,
brew, 24. T. they agree to spend cruelly, before the tempests tumble down
their place of worship T. win, mild, calm, slide, 30. B. they would vindicate
the fitness of baptism, from undiscreet and severe solitariness B. impure,
unfit, circumcise, discreet, meek, accompany, 36. N. they keep themselves
unjustly armed, to hurt sincere undertakings N. lose, just, disarme, dissemble
fail, 42. M. they force swimmers to admiration, by taking their beautiful
sails from them. M. fly, astonish, leave, deformed, row,

Radical Characters, by the rule of derivatives. I shall subjoyne the
particular rules only in so many words referring the explication of them and
examples to be done viva voce.

1. Persons and particles of Universallity and Particularity have places both
before and after the radical Character, for distinguishing them when they are
agents, and when they are patients.

2. Affixes of persons are rendered personally with verbs, and as possessives
with nouns.

3. The compound pronouns which (ipse) are expressed by twice writing the
affixe of the simple, whether person or possessive.

4. Those particles which end in (ever) in English, and (cunque) in Latin, are
also expressed by twice writing the simple affixe.

5. If two simple points of affixe come so to be written, that they express
two several particles they are to be set at a little more distance one from
another, then they are set in the second place of affixes, where they express
both but one single notion.

6. Adverbs of motion, from, or to a place, are expressed by the adverb of
rest, in place, and the particles (from) and (to).

7. In verbs expressing action or passion, there is no necessity of adding the
affixe of the present time: but let it be taken for rule, that those verbs
written without any affixe of time are understood to be of the present time.

8. Where nouns come to be coupled together without any other verb, but the
substantive verb (sum) for the more compendiousnesse, the verb (sum) may be
expressed by the affixes of time, unless it be in propositions of (est)
secundi adjacentis, or some other few places, in which the radical Character
of the verb (sum) may be made use of.

9 Those particles which signify adverbialiter with verbs, being affixed with
substantives they signify adjectively, such as been, male, praecipue,
Vniversaliter, etc.

10. The notion of (to go) or (to come) are expressed, the first by a
quadrangle, the other by a, triangle, the reasons I can not enlarge here.

11. For reading any thing that is written in this Character, it is required
first that the Table of Particles and Derivatives be perfectly understood, and
had by heart; then let it be considered, whether the radical Character be a
noune or verb, primitive or derivative, and if it be a verb, what time it is of,
if it have persons before, or after it, what the notions of the other particles
are affixed about it: which all being understood, the sense of the whole will
immediately appear: where it may be observed, that for the most part
conjunctions are allwaies first read, adverbs or Logical modi may be ^ead
either first or last, and yet the sense stand entire; the expression whereof is
all here required: but a little practice will show that there can scarce be
error in reading, unless there be error first in writing.

12. If two or three particles come to be expressed with one view, which
virtually and logically makes more the one proposition then the sentence is
either to be expressed logically by man writing the radical Character, and
every one of them it is proper affixes, otherwise if the Character before
contra^tions cause, but once written, then the particle first to be read is set
nearest the Character etc. e g l love you but not him, this is Logically
resolved I love you, but I love not him etc.

Prepositions governing persons after verbs are to be set over the verb in
their own place, and if there be two persons after the verb, to wit one
governed by it self, and another by the preposition, that which is gover^ed by
the preposition, is to be set at a little farther distance from the Character.

I am necess^tated in respect of the narrow compass of this sheet, whereunto I
have confined my self to pass over the Table of Derivatives, without
explication, as also many other useful observations.

Of the Table of Radical Characters.
THis Table is divided into the Table of Verbs and Adjectives, and the Table of
Substantives: for understanding of the art and use of both, let it be observed.

Every particular table contains forty two words, expressing so many several
distinct notions of things, (which this design only considers without respect
to synonymous words.)

For helping of the ^emory to retain these words, and render them readily by
the Character, there is a story made up to couple them together, either by way
of sense, or no sense, which sometimes is most helpful to the memory: This
story is divided in seven parts, to wit 1. a simple narration, 2. a continuance
of the story by the particle, (for) 3. (but,) 4. (therefore,) 5. (because,) and
because variety is very operative upon the memory, the two last particles which
are (nevertheless) and (moreover,) give a quite contradiction, to what has
been spoken in the former part of the story, and this method is constantly
observed thorowout the whole Tables. Again those seven parts of the story so
distinguished, are contained in seven lines, whereof every one contains six
words, and those again so composed among themselves, that three of them go
always together by way of sense; Those words expressed in the Italicke
Character, are but only expletive particles, for binding the words belonging to
the tables together, for helping the memory.

One of the great advantages of this art, is the expressing of all contraries
by one uniforme rule, without any charge upon the memory: the rule is, When the
Character of the one contrary is had in the Tables, the other contrary is
always expressed by that same Character, with a single point put within it:
those contraries which are to be expressed with a single point added to the
Character of it; contrary in the stories, are set e diametro opposite, to their
own contraries expressed in the story. Where it is to be observed, that I have
not taken contraries always from contrariety of nature, but from any ground
of contradistinction, which might help the memory, this being all I intend.

And it is to be observed, that the order of the several heads of the stories
are carried on by the order of the particles of affixes, before the Character,
that is the first story being made up in the first person: The second in the
second person: The third in the third etc. The advantage of this is, the
Charact^r answering uniformly, by a numericall progression to this method, of
th^^ ^^^^rall stories, he who has any notion of the story, so that he can
refer any word either to the story of ego tu ille etc. immediately he has
the Character it is to be written with. For it is again to be observed, That
one Character carries out the forty two words of every table, by forty two
several distinct points of numeration which are affixed upon it, whereof all
the characters I make use of, are equally capable: the way of doing whereof I
refer to actual explication, seeing the Character must be set down with my
own hadd.

Briefly then for the attaining the perfect use of these tables: first the
numericall way of the Character is to be learned, then the seven cardinal
points of numeration upon the Character, answerable to the seven parts of every
story: the seven distinguishing particles of the story are to be gotten by
heart as they answer to the cardinal points of numeratio^ upon the character;
which by any of common capacity can upon a simple explication of the way be
fully comprehended and taken. And this being once rightly understood carries
out the whole design; for the method of the tables amongst themselves, and the
method of the distinguishing particles of the particular Tables (which is that
same in all) being rightly understood and attained, there needs no more for
doing all this design is capeable of, but to get exactly by heart those
memorialls of the several tables, which are composed by way of fictitious and
foolish stories, which are apt to stick more upon the memory then that which
carries more sense and seriousnes with it. This being all then that is
requisite for practicing this art, to understand first the rules which are few,
plain, and easy, and then to get those few stories by heart; I am bold to
affirm, that any man Indifferenly judicious and diligent, should be able both
to write and read in this character in any subject so far as the Tables will
reach, in a week's time without the help of Tables set before him but simply,
with the help of the memory. This I know will seem a thing impossible to many,
but I hope experience shall confirm the truth of it.

It is to be observed, that all those words in the table of verbs and
adjectives which are expressed in the stories either as substantives or
adverbs, which is done only for the more convenience of making up the stories,
are to be taken radically for verbs, and adjectives, according as the nature of
the notion is: so in the table of substantives all those words expressed in an
Italick letter, are radically to be taken as substantives.

Then let it be observed that my main design being to carry forth the common
notions and conceptions of the mind, in the ordinary intercourse of mankind,
if my Tables be not so full and comprehensive as many may judge they should
be; I give for a farther explication those following considerations, to be
seriously weighed by the more judicious and learned 1. The nature of this
design as it is intended for a common help and remedy of the imperfection and
difficulty of the languages of all nations, (which is the chief and grand
impediment that stops the familiar intercourse, commerce and mutual
communications between the people of several nations:) requires only the
expression of those notions and things, which are that same in all nations; so
that the particular ceremonies, customs, and technick words of particular
nations and languages fall not properly within the compass of it, for if any
notions of things proper to any particular nation should be expressed in other
nations, they behooved to learn the nature of the thing, as well as the word or
Character expressing it 2. those common notions, necessary for making up
discourse in all ordinary intercourse, consisting chieffely of particles which
are ligaturae orationis, coupling and binding together the radical and
principal parts of speech, and varying the formality of it, and verbs and
adjectives by which are expressed the qualities of things, actions, and
passions of the mind, motions, transaction of affairs etc. I hope there shall
be scarce any simple notions of particles, and very few of verbs and adjectives
found to be omitted. 3. I acknowledge the chief defect of my Tables will be in
substantives: for I did strive only at the present to pitch upon those, which
were most obvious and occurrent in ordinary discourse, as transcendent words,
relations, members of the body etc 4. I dare promise, that by adding four or
five more Tables composed in stories, (which God willing shall shortly be done)
this design shall be able to reach farther in communication and discourse then
the most part of languages. 5. I desire it may be considered, that my intention
being to express things and not the words of any Language; I take of that
irrationality of all Languages of using many times multitudes of synonimous
words for expressing that same thing. 6. It is worthy of observation by the
learned, that beside that principal intended use of this design, of
facilitating the matter of language and communication, there are other choice
advantages to be reaped by it as chieffely, the practice of it teaches a man to
abstract from the particular phrases of languages, which many times logically
considered, are impertinencies and non sense, and to compose and express his
thoughts in a plain and rational method, and (as I had it from an eminently
learned person) it makes a man as it were dip his pen in his soul, before he
deliver his thoughts: for it is the complaint of many learned men, that
Rhetorical flourishes of words do often obscure best literature, and what
strife has been in the world merely about words, is a thing too we'll known.
7. If the synonimous words of languages signifying that same simple notion,
were collected and ranked together, (which for the use of weaker capacities is
necessary and shall be done hereafter:) The extent of these Tables will appear
to reach a great length in communication. 8. This design being chiefly
intended for common intercourse as is said before, it is not to be expected
that it shall contain the numberless multitude of the several species of
nature and words of art and techinck words of all trades, for this no language
is able to do, nor no one man able to understand, but those who would have
those reduced to an artificial way of expression, must make particular tables
for every art and trade, which they must do in all languages, notwithstanding
there shall be as many of the most common species of nature here expressed, as
any language is able to do without Periphrases.


