A DISCOURSE ABOUT CIVIL GOVERNMENT IN A NEW PLANTATION Whose DESIGN is
RELIGION.

Written many Years since, By that Reverend and Worthy Minister of the GOSPEL,
JOHN COTTON B.D.

And now Published by some UNDERTAKERS of a New Plantation, for General
Direction and Information.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by Samuel Green and Marmaduke Johnson. MDCLXIII.

A DISCOURSE ABOUT CIVIL GOVERNMENT IN A NEW PLANTATION: Where all, or the most
considerable part of free Planters profess their desire and purpose of
enjoying, and securing to themselves and their Posterity, the pure and
peaceable enjoyment of the Ordinances of Christ in Church Fellowship with his
People, and have liberty to cast themselves into that Mould or Form of a
Commonwealth, which shall appear to be best for them. Tending to prove the
Expediency and Necessity in that case of intrusting free Burgesses which are
members of Churches gathered amongst them according to Christ, with the power
of Choosing from among themselves Magistrates, and men to whom the Managing of
all Public Civil Affairs of Importance is to be committed. And to vindicate
the same from an Imputation of an Vnder-Power upon the Churches of Christ,
which has been cast upon it through a Mistake of the true state of the
Question.
Reverend Sir,
THe Sparrow being now gone, and one days respite from public Labors on the
Lord's Day falling to me in course, I have sought out your Writing, and have
reviewed it, and find (as I formerly expressed to your self) that the Question
is mis-stated by you; and that the Arguments which you produce to prove that
which is not denied, are (in reference to this Question) spent in vain, as
arrows are when they fall wide of the Marks they should bit, though they strike
in a White which the Archer is not called to shoot at.

The terms wherein you state the Question, are these: Whether the Right and
Power of Choosing Civil Magistrates belongs unto the Church of Christ?

To omit all critical Inquiries, in your thus stating the Question, I utterly
dislike two things.

1. That you speak of Civil Magistrates indefinitely, and without limitat on;
under which notion, all Magistrates in the world are included, Turks, and
Indians, and Idolaters, as well as Christians. Now no man, I think, holds or
imagines, that a Church of Christ has power and right to choose all Civil
Magistrates throughout the World: For,

1 In some Countries there is no Church of Christ, all the inhabitants being
Heathen men and Idolaters; and amongst those who are called Christians, the
number of the Churches of Christ will be found to be so small, and the Members
of them so f^w and mean, that it is impossible that the Right and Power of
choosing Civil Magistrates in all places, should belong to the Churches of
Christ.

2. Nor have the Churches countenance of State in all Countries, but are under
Restraint and Persecution in some; as the Jews in Egypt under Pharaoh, and in
the Captivity in Babylon, and the Christian Churches 300 years after Christ
persecuted by Roman Emperors: and in these days those Reformed Churches sub
cruce in Antwerp, and other Popish Countries.

3. In some Countries the Churches are indeed under the Protection of
Magistrates, as Foreigners, permitted quietly to sit down under their Wings:
but neither are the Members capable of Mag^stracy there; nor have they power of
Voting in the choice of Magistrates: Such was that Church of Strangers gathered
in London by Johannes Al^s^, with allowance of State under the Broad Seal of
England in Edw. 6. Such are the Dutch and French Churches in England, and other
Churches in the Netherlands at this day.

4. In some Countries sundry Nations are so mingled, that they have severally
an equal Right unto several parts of the Country, and therefore though they
live in the same general Country, yet they are governed by different Laws, and
have several Magistrates chosen by themselves severally, neither of them being
capable of Magistracy in the others parts, nor having Right and Power of
choosing Civil Magistrates there. Thus were the Israelites joined with the
Canaanites, that were left in Canaan unsubdued: and thus are the English
planted in these parts of America, where sundry Nations of Indians dwell near
them, and are Proprietaries of the places which they inhabit. Now be that
should affirm, that the Churches of Christ, as such, have Right and Power of
choosing Civ^l Magistrates in such places, seems to me more to need Physic
then Arguments, to recover him from his Error.

2. The second thing that I dislike in your stating the Question, is, in that
you make the Churches of Christ to be the subject of this Right and Power of
ch^osing Civil Magistrates. For 1. The Church so considered is a Spiritual
Political Body, consisting of diverse Members Male and Female, Bond and Free;
sundry of which are not capable of Magistracy, nor of Voting in the choice of
Magistrates, inasmuch as none have that Right and Power but free Burgesses,
among whom Women and Servants are not reckoned, though they may be, and are
Church Members. 2. The Members of the Churches of Christ are considerable under
a twofold respect answerable to the twofold man, which is in all the Members of
the Church whilst they are in this world, the inward and the outward man. 2.
Cor. 4.16.
Whereunto the only wise God has fitted and appointed two sorts of
Administrations, Ecclesiastical and Civil. Hence they are capable of a twofold
Relation, and of Action and Power suitable to them both; viz. Civil and
Spiritual, and accordingly must be exercised about both in their seasons,
without confounding those two different states, or destroying either of them,
whilst what they transact in civil Affairs, is done by virtue of their civil
Relation, their Church State only fitting them to do it according to God.

Now that the state of the Question may appear, I think it seasonable and
necessary to premise a few Distinctions, to prevent all mistakes, if it may be.

Ecclesiastical and Civil, which men commonly call the Church, and
Commonwealth. I incline rather to them who speaking of a Christian Communion,
make the Communion to be the Genu^, and the State E^clesiastical and Civil to
be the Species of it. For in a Ch^istian Communion there are these different
Administrations or Pol^ties or State, Ecclesi^stical and Civil: Ecclesiastical
Admi^st ations, are a Divine Order appointed to Believers for holy comm^nion of
holy things: Civil Administrations, are An Humane Order appointed by God to men
for Civil Fellowship of humane things. Thus Junius defines them; and makes 1.
Order the Genus of them both. 2. God the Efficient and Author of them both. 3.
Gods Glory the last End of them both. 4. Man the common Subject of both. And so
they agree very well in the General Nature, Efficient, End and Subject; yet
with difference in all. For,

1. Though both agree in this, that there is Order in their Administrations,
yet with this diffe^ence, that the Guides in the Church have not a Despotical,
but Oeconomical Power only, John 1.23. Matthew 3.11. 1 Cor. 3.5, 21. 2 Cor.
1.1.24. and 4.5. and 5.20. 1 Pet. 5.1. Matthew. 28.18.
being not Lords ove^ Ch^ists heritage, but stewards and ministers of Christ
and of the Church; the Dominion and Law-giving Power being reserved to Christ
alone, as ^he only Head of the Church. But in the other State he has given
Lordly Power, Authority and Dominion unto men Luke 22.25. John 17.10. 1 Pet.
2.13.
.

2. Though both agree in this, that Man is the common Subject of them b^th, yet
with this difference, Man by Nature being a Reasonable and Sociable Creature,
capable of Civil Order, is or may be the Subject of Civil Power and State: But
Man by Grace called out ^f the world to fellowship with Jesus Christ, and with
his People, is the only Subject of Church Power; yet so, as the Outward man of
Church Members is subject to the Civil Power in common with other men, whilst
their Inward man is the subject of Spiritual Order and Administrations.

3. Though they both agree in this, that God is the Efficient and Author of
them both, and that by Christ, yet not eadem ratione. For, God as the Creator
and Governor of the world, is the Author of Civil Order and Administrations:
But God as in Covenant with his People in Christ, is the Author of
Church-Administrations. So likewise Christ, as the Essential Word and Wisdom
of God creating and governing the World is the Efficient and Fountain of Civil
Order and Administrations Joh. 1.1, 3, 10 Col 1.17. Heb. 1.2, 3. Prove 8.15.
: But as Mediator of the New Covenant, and Head of the Church Ephesians. 1.22 and
5.23. and 4.8, 11.
, he establishes Ecclesiastical Order.

4. Though they both agree in this, that they have the same last End, viz. The
Glory of God, yet they differ in their next Ends; for the next End of Civil
Order and Administrations, is The Preservation of Humane Societies in outward
Honor, justice and Peace: But the next Ends of Church Order and
Administrations, are The Conversion, Edification, and Salvation of Souls,
Pardon of Sin, Power against Sin, Peace with God. etc.

5. Hence arises another Difference about the Objects of these different
States: for though both agree in this, that they have the common Welfa^^ for
their aim and scope; yet the things about which the Civil Power is primarily
conversant, are Bodies, (...), 1 Cor. 6.4. or (...), the things of this life,
as Goods, Lands, Honor, the Liberties and Peace of the outward man. The things
whereabout the Church Power is exercised, are (...), Heb. 5.1.
The things of God, as the Souls and Consciences of men, the Doctrine and
Worship of God, the Communion of the Saints. Hence also 1. They have different
Laws: 2. Different Officers: 3. Different Power, whereby to reduce men to
Order, according to their different Objects and Ends. Now that a just harmony
may be kept between these two different Orders and Administrations, two
Extremes must be avoided: 1. That they be not confounded, either by giving the
Spiritual Power, which is proper to the Church, into the hand of the Civil
Magistrate, as Erastus would have done in the matter of Excommunication. If any
Magistrate should presume to thrust himself by his Authority or otherwise, into
a Work which properly belongs to a Church Officer, let him remember what befell
Saul and Vzziah for so doing: or 2. By giving Civil Power to Church Officers,
who are called to attend only to Spiritual matters, and the things of God, and
therefore may not be distracted from them by Secular intanglements. I say,
Church Officers, not Church Members; for they (not being limited as the
Officers are by God) are capable of two different employments, suting with two
d^fferent Men in them, in different respects, as has been said: and as they
may lawfully be employed about things of this life; so they are of all men
fittest, being sanctified and dedicated to God to carry on all worldly and
civil business to Gods ends, as we shall declare in due time. But concerning
Church Officers. I am able with Gods help to prove, that the devolving of Civil
Power upon Pastors of Churches, (upon how specious pretenses soever it began)
gave that Rise to the Man of Sin, which at last set his feet on the necks of
the Princes of the Earth, yea, of the Emperors of the World. It was your
mistake, when you too confidently affirmed, That the limiting of the Right and
Power of choosing Civil Officers unto free Burgesses that are Members of
Churches, brought that Tyranny into the Romish Church, which all the Churches
of Christ complain of. It would well have become you to have better digested
your own thoughts, before such words had passed through your lips; for you will
never be able to produce any good Author that will confirm what you say. The
truth is quite contrary; for that I may instance in R^^e it self: Had Churches
been rightly managed, when the most considerable part in that City embraced the
Christian Faith, in the ceasing ^f the Ten Persecutions, that only such as had
been fit for the State, had been admitted into Church Fellowship, that they
alone had had power, out of themselves to have chosen Mag^strates, such
Magistrates would not have been chosen, as would have given their Power to the
Pope; nor would those Churches have suffered their Pastors to become Worldly
Princes and Rulers, as the Pope and his Cardinals are; nor would they have
given up the Power of the Church from the Church into the Officers hands, but
would have called upon them to fulfill their Ministry which they had r^ceived
of the Lord; and if need were, would by the power of Christ have compelled them
so to do: And then where had the Popes Supremacy been which is made up of the
Spoils of the Ecclesiastical and Civil State? but had by the course which now
we plead for, been prevented.

2. The second Extreme to be avoided, is, That these two different Orders and
States, Ecclesiastical and Civil, be not set in opposition as contraries that
one should destroy the other, but as coordinate States, in the same place
reaching forth help mutually each to other, for the welfare of both, according
to God: So that both Officers and Members of Churches be subject, in respect of
the outward man, to the Civil Power of those who bear Rule in the Civil State
according to God, and teach others so to do: And that the Civil Magistrates and
Officers, in regard of the inward man subject themselves Spiritually to the
power of Christ in Church-Ordinances, and by their Civil Power preserve the
same in outward Peace and Purity; and this will best be attained, when the
Pastor may say to the Magistrate, as Gregory Na^ianz^n wrote to the Magistrate
of N^zianzum, Scio te ovem mei gregis esse sacri gregis sacram^ve^: I know thou
art a sheep of my Flock a holy sheep of a holy Flock. Again, Cum Ch^isto
imperas, cum C^^isto etiam administras, ^b eo est tibi gladius, ho^d narium a
te pa^u^^^ qui dedit conservetur; that is, Thou rulest with Christ, and
admin^st^est to Christ; thou have the Sword from him: let this gift which thou
have received from him, be kept pure for him. And when the Civil Magistrate in
his Church State, answers Ambrose his description of a good Emperor: Ipse
Imperator bonus in^ra Ecclesiam, non supra Ecclesiam est: A good Magistrate is
within the Church, not above it. Lastly, when according to Junius his
description of the Power of the Christian Magistrate in Church Matters, he
accounts it his duty to embrace in Fellowship with the whole Church, ut verum
Christi and Ecclesiae membrum the Laws given by God in the Church, and the
means sanctified by him to nourish the inward man, and to protect and defend
the same: [Tanquam Magistratus a Deo Ordinatus] for, says he, As he is a
Christian, he is sancta ovis de sancto Christi grege, (i. e. A holy sheep of
Christ's holy flock. But as a Magistrate he is [Custos Ordinis vindexque
publici;] that is, A preserver of public order. Such were (besides the good
Kings of Judah) Constantine, Theodosius, etc. in some measure, though very
defective. So much shall serve to have been spoken concerning the first
Distinction.

Distinction to be premised for clearing the true state of the Question, is
[Inter Remp. constitutam and constituendam] Between a Commonwealth already
settled, and a Commonwealth yet to be settled, and wherein men are free to choose
what Form they shall judge best. For I conceive, when Paul exhorted the Romans
to be subject to the higher Powers, who at that time were Heathen men, and
Persecutors, he considered that Civil State as settled, and suited his Advice
accordingly. But if he had been to Direct them about laying the Foundation of a
Christian Commonwealth, he would not have advised them to choose such
Governors as were on^ of the Church, but would have seriously forewarned them
of the danger whereunto the Church would have been exposed thereby, and that
unavoidably. And that this may not be thought a slight and uncertain
conjecture, let us consider what advice he gave in like cases: Ye know, that
writing to persons already Married he exhorts the believing wife to live with
the unbelieving husband; 1 Cor. 7.13.
yet the same Apostle directs the same Church, in case they were free to make
their own choice, to avoid such matches: Be not unequally yoked (says he) with
Infidels; 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousnes? and what part has
the believer with the infidel? In like manner, 1 Pet. 2.18.
when Peter exhorted Christian Servants to be subject to their Masters with all
fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward, he did
accommodate his instruction to their present condition. But had he been to
direct them in another state being free, to choose what might be best for
themselves, he would have expressed himself otherwise, as may appear by this.
The same Spirit that inspired Peter thus to advise in this case, guided Paul
further in a different case: 1 Cor. 7.21.
Art thou called being a servant, (says he) care not for it^ but if thou may
be free, use it rather. And that if he had written to a company of Believers in
a New Plantation, where the Foundations of the Church and Civil State, and the
communion of both, was to be laid for many Generations to come, he would have
advised them to take the same course which we plead for, may appear by his
reproving the Church in Corinth, for carrying their differences before Heathen
Magistraies to be judged by them, though he press them to be subject to their
power: 1 Cor. 6.1.
Had the unbelieving Magistrates cited them to appear before their
Judgement-seats, he taught them both by Precept and by his Example to submit.
But when they were at liberty to compose civil Differences among themselves,
and yet they would voluntarily, and of their own accord, choose to bring their
cases before those that were without the Church, this he blames in them; and
that so far, as he demands why they do not rather suffer wrong then take
such a course? plainly intimating, that men that profess the fear of God if
they be free to make choice of their Civil Judges, (as in this New Plantation
we are) they should rather choose such as are Members of the Church for that
purpose, then others that are not in that estate. The same Rule holds by
proportion in all things of like nature: for Parium par est ratio.

Distinction to be premised for clearing the truth in this Point, is between
free Burgesses and free Inhabitants in a Civil State. Concerning whom there
must be had a different consideration. This difference of People living under
the same Civil Jurisdiction, is held and observed in all Countries, as well
Heathen as others, as may at large be proved, if it were needful, out of the
Histories of all Nations and Times; and the Experience of our Times, as well in
our own Native Country, as in other places, confirms it. In all which, many
are Inhabitants that are not Citizens, that are never likely to be numbered
among (...), or Rulers: Answerably it is in the case now in question. So that
when we urge, that Magistrates be chosen out of free Burgesses, and by them,
and that those free Burgesses be chosen out of such as are Members of these
Churches, we do not thereby go about to exclude those that are not in
Church Order, from any Civil Right or Liberty that is due unto them as
Inhabitants and Planters, as if none should have Lots in due proportion with
other men, nor the benefit of Justice under the Government where they live, but
only Church Members; (for this were indeed to have the Commonwealth swallowed
up of the Church) but seeing there ever will be difference between the World
and the Church in the same place, and that both men of the world are allowed of
God the use and enjoyment of the help of Civil Government, for their quiet and
comfortable subsistence in the world: and Church Members (though called out of
the world into fellowship with Christ, yet) living in the world, having many
worldly necessities and businesses in common with men of the world that live
among them, stand in need of the civil Power to right them against civil
injuries, and to protect them in their right, and outward orderly use of their
Spirituals, against those that are apt to be injurious to them in the one, or
in the other respect; which being without, are not under the Churches Power;
and yet living within the Verge of the same Civil Jurisdiction, are under the
Civil Power of the Magistrates. Hence it is, that we plead for this Order to be
set in Civil Affairs, that such a course may be taken as may best secure to our
selves and our posterities the faithful managing of Civil Government for the
common welfare of all, as well in the Church as without; which will then most
certainly be effected, when the public Trust and Power of these matters is
committed to such men as are most approved according to God; and these are
Church Members By Church Members in all this Discourse, is meant such as are in
full Communion.
, as shall afterward, God assisting, be proved.

Distinction to be premised for clearing the truth, and to prevent mistakes in
this Question, shall be between the Actions of Church Members. For some actions
are done by them all jointly as a Spiritual Body, in reference to Spiritual
ends; and some actions are done only by some of the Body, in reference to
Civil ends. Actions of the first sort, are said to be done by the Church of
Christ, as a Church of Christ; such are Admission of members, and
Excommunication of them according to Christ's order, and other actions of that
kind; but these fall not under our Question, which is wholly about the
transaction of Civil Affairs: so that your whole Dispute wants a good ground,
and your labor about it might well have been spared. Actions of the second
sort, are of a larger extent, and reach to businesses of a Civil Nature, such
as that Civil Judgment whereof Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 6. (...), in matters that
concern this life, as the Lives, Goods, (and which is dearer to them then both)
the Reputations of men, and their outward Liberty and Peace. Concerning which,
Members fitly chosen out of the Church, and made free Burgesses, are fitter to
judge and determine according to God, then other men, and that for weighty
Reasons; some whereof are rendered by Paul in that Chapter, whereunto others may
be added, when we shall argue that Point, the Lord helping us.

D^stinction to be premised for the clearing of the truth in this Point, is
between Places, where all, or the most considerable part of first and free
Planters, profess their desire and purpose of entering into Church Fellowship
according to Christ, and of enjoining in that State all the Ordinances in
purity and peace, and of securing the same unto their posterity, so far as
men are able; and those Places where all or the most considerable part of the
first and free Pl^nters are otherwise minded, and profess the contrary. Our
Question is of the first sort, not of the second. As for those of the second
sort, if the major, or more considerable part among them, will be like Heathen
men, without such Church Fellowship, as is according to Christ in all things, a
Heathen man, or mere civil worldly Politician, will be good enough to be their
Magistrate; or if they desire to set up Idolatry and Superstition, an
Idolatrous and superstitious Governor in the Civil State will best suit their
ends; and so they may be said to their just reproof and shame, Like Priest,
like People; and Like Prince, like People. Thus sometimes the Lord has spoken
against a licentius people concerning their prophets, He that will prophecy of
wine and strong drink, Micah 2.11.
he shall be the prophet to this people. He that sometimes gives such Guides
in the Church to a people in his indignation, does also sometimes give
Magistrates and Rulers to a people in the Civil State in his wrath, when men
are forsaken of him, and given up more to affect outward fancy and vanity, then
Gods Order: as when the people of Israel sought a King, without respect to the
right Tribe, from whence by Gods order they ought to expect one, He gave them a
King in his anger, Hosea 13.12.
and took him away in his wrath. In such case, what shall the people of God do
that live in such a place? surely if God give them liberty and ability, they
should attend to the voice of God, which has said in a like case to his
people, Arise and depart, this is not your rest; Micah 2.10.
and follow the steps of Christ's flock to any place, where he causes his flock
to feed, Cantic. 1.6, 7.
and lie down under a comfortable shadow at noon: As in Jeroboam's time, the
Levites left their suburbs, and came to Judah and Jerusalem, and after them of
all the Tribes of Israel, such as set their hearts to seek the Lord God of
Israel, and strengthened the Kingdom of Judah, where Gods Ordinances both
concerning Civil Government and Religious Worship were better observed. But if
Divine Providence does necessitate their stay and abode in such places, they
are to pray for those in Authority, 1 Timothy 2.^^.
that they may become such, as under whom they may live a quiet and peaceable
life, in all godliness and honesty; and to be subject to their Power, even in
those things wherein they may not obey their Commands, nor seek their help, 1
Cor. 6.1, 2. till God shall give them liberty from that Yoke, either by
removing them to those places where fitter Magistrates bear Rule in Civil
matters, or by giving them opportunity of Choosing more suitable ones from among
themselves.

So much shall serve to have been spoken to the Distinctions, which having thus
premised, we now proceed to declare the true state of the Question: which is as
follows.

The true state of the Question.
Q. Whether a new Plantation, where all or the most considerable part of free
Planters profess their purpose and desire of securing to themselves and to
their posterity, the pure and peaceable enjoyment of Christ's Ordinances;
Whether, I say, such Planters are bound in laying the Foundations of Church and
Civil State, to take order, that all the free Burgesses be such as are in
fellowship of the Church or Churches which are, or may be gathered according to
Christ; and that those free Burgesses have the only power of choosing from among
themselves Civil Magistrates, and men to be entrusted with transacting all
public Affairs of Importance, according to the rules and directions of
Scripture? I hold the Affirmative part of this Question upon this ground, that
this course will most conduce to the good of both States; and by consequence to
the common w^lfare of all, whereunto all men are bound principally to attend in
laying the Foundation of a Commonwealth, lest Posterity rue the first
Miscarriages, when it will be too late to redress them. They that are skilful
in Architecture observe, that the breaking or yielding of a stone in the
groundwork of a Building but the breadth of the back of a knife, will make a
cleft of more then half a foot in the Fabric aloft: So important (says mine
Author) are fundamental Errors. The Lord awaken us to look to it in time, and
send us his Light and Truth to lead us into the safest ways in these
beginnings.

The Question being thus stated, I now proceed with Gods help to prove the
Affirmative part: and thus I argue, to prove that the Form of Government which
is described in the true stating of the Question is the best, and by
consequence, that men that are free to choose (as in new Plantations they are)
ought to establish it in a Christian Commonwealth.

or to make the Lord God our Governor Deuteronomy. 33.29. Isai. 33.22. Judge. 8.23.
, is the best Form of Government in a Christian Commonwealth, and which men
that are free to choose (as in new Plantations they are) ought to est^b^^sh. The
Form of Government described in the true stating of the Question is Theocratie,
or that wherein we make the Lord God our Governor; Therefore that Form of
Government which is described in the true stating of the Question, is the best
Form of Government in a Christian Commonwealth, and which men that are free to
choose (as in new Plantations they ^r^) ought to establish. The Proposition is
clear of it self. The Assumption I prove thus:

That Form of Government where 1. The people that have the power of choosing
their Governors are in Covenant with God Exodus 19.5. De^t. 1 13, 14.
2. Wherein the men chosen by them are godly men, and f^tled with a spirit of
Government Exodus 18.21. Deuteronomy. 1.13.
: 3. In which the Laws they rule by are the Laws of God Numb. 11.24.25. Isa.
33.22.
: 4. Wherein Laws are executed, Inheritances allotted, and civil differences
are composed, according to Gods appointment Number 35.29. and 6.27. and 2.3. 1
Cor. 6.1, 2.
: 5. In which men of God are consulted with in all hard cases, and in matters
of Religion Deuteronomy. 17.8. to 11. and 19.16, 17. 2 Cor. 10.4. to 11
, is the Form which was received and established among the people of Israel
whilst the Lord God was their Governor, as the places of Scripture alleged
show; and is the very same with that which plead for, as will appear to him
that shall examine the true stating of the Question. The Conclusion follows
necessarily.

That form of Government which gives unto Christ his due pre-eminence, is the
best Form of Government in a Christian Commonwealth, and which men that are
free to choose (as in new Plantations they are) ought to establish. The Form of
Government described in the true stating of the Question, is that which gives
unto Christ his due pre-eminence. Therefore the Form of Government which is
described in the true stating of the Question, is the best Form of Government
in a Christian Commonwealth, and which men that are free to choose (as in new
Plantations they are) ought to establish.

The Proposition is proved out of two places of Scripture, Col. 1.15. to 19.
with Ephesians. 1.21, 22. From which Texts it does appear, that it is a prehemince
due to Christ, that all things, and all Governments in the world, should serve
to Christ's ends, for the welfare of the Church whereof he is the Head. For 1.
In relation to God, he has this by Right of Primogeniture, as he is the
firstborn, and so Heir of all things, higher then the Kings of the earth. 2.
In relation to the World it is said, All things were made by him, and for him,
and do consist in him, and therefore it is a pre-eminence due to him that they
all serve him. 3. In relation to the Church, it is said, He has made all
things subject under his feet, and has given him over all things to be Head of
the Church, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. And indeed that
he upholdeth the Creatures, and the Order that is in them, it is for his
Churches sake; when that is once complete, the world shall soon be at an end.
And if you read the stories of the great Monarchies that have been, and judge
of them by Scripture Light, you will find they stood or fell, according as God
purposed to make use of them about some service to be done about his Church. So
that the only considerable part for which the world stands at this day, is
the Church: and therefore it is a Pre-eminence due to Christ, that his Headship
over the Church should be exalted and acknowledged, and served by all. In which
respect also the Title of The firstborn is given to the Members of the Church,
and they are called The first fruits of his Creatures, to show both their
pre-eminence above others, and that they are fittest to serve to Gods ends.

The Assumption (That the Form of Government described in the tr^^ stating of
the Question, does give unto Christ his due pre-eminence) will easily be
granted by those that shall consider what Civil Magistrates and Rulers in the
Common wealth those are, who are fittest to serve to Christ's ends for the good
and welfare of his Church; which will be evident from two places of Scripture:
First, in Psa. 2.10, 11, 12. you have a description of those that are fitted to
order Civil Affairs in their Magistracy to Christ's ends; they are such as are
not only wise and learned in matters of Religion but also do reduce their
knowledge into practice: they Worship the Lord in fear* and not only so, but
Kiss the So^, which was a solemn and outward P^^fession of love 1 Pet. 5.14.
, and of Subjection Genesis 41.40. 1 Samuel 10.1.
, and of Religions Worship Hos. 13.2.
, and so fitly serves to express their joining themselves to the Church of
Christ. Secondly, in Isa. 49.23. it is promised to the Church, that Kings and
Queens shall be their nursing-fathers and nursing-mothers, and therefore it is
added, They shall worship with their faces to the earth, and lick up the dust
of thy feet; which is a proverbial expression of their voluntary humbling of
themselves to Christ in his Ordinances, (taken from the manner of the Persians,
in declaring their Subjection to their Emperor Val. Max. lib. 7. chap. 3.
, which the Apostle calls a voluntary submission to the Gospel 2 Cor. 9.13.
, which is the spirit of the Members of the Churches of Christ. And for this
Reason it is, that the Lord, when he molded a Communion among his own People,
wherein all Civil Administrations should serve to holy ends, be described the
men to whom that Trust should be committed, by certain Properties, which also
qualified them for fellowship in Church-Ordinances, as Men of ability and power
over their own affections Exodus 18.21 Deuteronomy. 1.13.
; secondly, fearing God, Truly Religious, Men of Courage, hating Covetousness,
men of Wisdom, men of understanding, and men known or approved of among the
people of God, and chosen by the Lord from among their Brethren, and not a
stranger, which is no Brother: the most of which concur to describe
Church Members in a Church rightly gathered and ordered, who are also in
respect of their union with Christ, and fellowship together, called Brethren
frequently in the New Testament, wherein the equity of that Rule is established
to us. Christ will have his due Pre-eminence, though the Civil Rulers oppose
him, and persecute the Churches, as in Rome: Therefore it is not necessary that
this course be taken in Civil Affairs to establish Christ's Pre-eminence. The
Question is of a Christian Commonwealth that should willingly subject
themselves to Christ, not of a Heathen State that shall perforce be subdued
unto Christ. It is concerning what Gods people being free should choose, not
what his enemies are compelled unto.

That Form of Government wherein the best provision is made for the good both
of the Church and of the Civil State, is the best Form of Government in a
Christian Communion, and which men that are free to choose (as in new
Plantations they are) ought to establish. The Form of Government described in
the true stating of the Question, is that wherein the best provision is made
for the good both of the Church and Civil State. Therefore the Form of
Government described in the true stating of the Q^^stion, is the best Form of
Government in a Christian Communion, and which men that are free to choose (as
in new Plantations they are) ought to establish. The Proposition (if need be)
may be confirmed from the end of all Civil Government and Administrations which
is the public and common Good, whether Natural, as in the preservation of Life
and Safety; or Moral, as Justice and Honesty in Humane Societies; or Civil, as
Peace, Liberty of Commerce; or Spiritual as to protect the Church in Spiritual,
though outward, Order and Administrations in peace and purity. And this last is
principally to be attended unto, and therefore such as are entrusted with this
care, are called The Ministers of God, to note the principal end whereunto they
serve, viz. The things wherein God is most directly and immediately honored,
which is in promoting man's Spiritual good, so far as they are enabled by
their Civil Power.

The Assumption (That the Form of Government in the Commonwealth which we
plead for, is that wherein the best provision is made for the good both of the
Church and of the Civil State) may appear by the blessing of God which usually
is upon the Communion, where the securing of the Spiritual good of men, in the
peace and purity of Gods Ordinances, is principally attended unto by all sorts
as may be proved by the state of thin^s in the Communion of Israel, whilst the
service of the Lord was with due care attended to all the days of Joshua,
Josh. 24.31.
and all the days of the Elders that over-lived J^shua, which had known all
the works of the Lord which he had done for Israel. Many more places of
Scripture might be alleged; but I will only note Psalm. 72. wherein all-sorts
of good are assured to the Commonwealth, wherein the fear of God, that is
Matters of Religion are so regarded, as the preservation thereof to after-ages
is duly provided for: which how can it be done, if the course described in the
true stating of the Question be neglected by those that are free to cast the
Commonwealth into what Mould they please?

Junius Eccles. lib. 3. chap. 5.
This Junius, a Learned and Godly man, and much exercised in State Affairs, as
appears by the Story of his Life, saw clearly; and therefore speaking of the
Consent and Harmony of the Church and Civil State, in the concurrence of their
several Administrations to the welfare of a Christian Commonwealth, he
expresses it by the conjunction of the Soul and Body in a Man; and concludes,
that Nothing will be of so much avail to the welfare of civil Administrations,
as will the best Administrations of the Church giving attendance to the holy
and just Communion of Saints, (ut ad parentem officiorum omnium) as to the
Parent of all Duties: and, that Nothing will so secure and strengthen
Church-Administrations, as that security (quam praebitura est justa pii
Magistratus atque fidelis (...)) which the just Administrations of a godly and
faithful Magistrate will afford. Now Pii and Fideles, Men that are godly and
faithful, are such as are described in our stating of the Question. And having
thus said, he breaks out into an affectionate Admiration of the Happiness of a
Communion so ordered: Ecquid obsecro futurum est, si optima Ecclesia, cum
Republica optima coal scat? O beatum populum, in quo uno ore, and uno animo,
utraque administratio, ad sanctam communionem cum civili Societate continendam,
and augendam conspiraverit! Non minuit illam haec administratio, sed altera
alteram stantem, confirmat, labantem, statumina^, collapsam erigit. Which I
thus English: What I pray may be expected in future times, ^f the best Church
and the best Commonwealth grow up together? Oh blessed people, among whom each
Administration shall conspire with one mouth, and one mind, to conjoyn and
advance the Communion of Saints with the Civil Society! One of these
Administrations will not detract from the other, but each will confirm the
other if it stand, and stay it if it be falling, and raise it up if it be fallen
down. And a little after he thus concludes, Magistratum cui credita est
civilis administratio non in Ecclesia solum, sed etiam ex Ecclesia esse
affirmamus; We affirm, that the Magistrate to whom the Civil Administration is
committed, is or ought to be not only in the Church, but also taken out of the
Church. Thus Junius thought, and taught, and published to the world. And indeed
what is more equal, then that he who by Office is to be a Minister of God,
should be chosen by and out of those who are by open Profession in the
Church Estate, the Servants of the Lord and have more helps to know his Mind,
and deep engagements to seek his Ends, and observe his Will, then other men?
But if any be otherwise minded, let them show some other course, wherein the
public good may be promoted according to God, with assurance of a blessing by
virtue of the Promises.

Cor 6. ver. 1, to 8. Whence I thus argue: That Form of Government wherein the
power of Civil Administrations is denied unto unbelievers, and committed to the
Saints, is the best Form of Government in a Christian Commonwealth, and which
men that are free to choose (as in new Plantations they are) ought to establ sh.
The Form of Government described in the true stating of the Question, is that
wherein the power of Civil Administrations is denied to unbelievers, and
committed to the Saints. Therefore the Form of Government described in the true
stating of the Question, is the best Form of Government in a Christian
Communion, and which men that are free to choose (as in new Plantations they
are) ought to establish. The Proposition is evident from the Scripture
alleged. For the thing which Paul blames in them, is not, that living under
unbelieving Magistrates, they submitted to their Civil Judicature when they
were cited to appear before their Judgement-seats; but this he reproves, that
when they were free to choose other Judges, (as in voluntary references they
were) they would out of choice be judged under the unjust, and not under
Saints. His Arguments against this are many and weighty. 1. From the danger of
thus exalting unbelievers, and abasing the Saints, in these words, Dare any of
you having a matter against another, be judged under the unjust, and not under
the Saints? 2. From the quality of unbelieving Judges, whom he calls unjust,
because they are destitute of the righteousness that is by Faith, and which is
the Fountain of all true Moral Justice; and because they were ill-affected to
Christians, and to the Church of Christ, and apt to vex them injuriously, if
they had any business before them; and because though some men out of Christ
may be found civilly honest, and morally just, as were also some Heathen men,
yet you can have no assurance of their justice, seeing this is the genius and
nature of all men out of Christ to be unrighteous. 3. From the property of
Church Members, whom he calls Saints, that is, men consecrated to God and to
his ends in all things; for so they are in their Church Estate, and by virtue
of their Covenant are bound so to be: when as others are (or at least are not
manifested to be otherwise according to Gods order) worldly-minded, or
self-seekers, minding their own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ. The
4th Argument is a majori, for he says, The Saints shall judge the world, and
blames their ignorance that question it: Know ye not that the Saints shall
judge the world? and thence infers, that they should much more have
judgment (...) in matters that concern this life, such are Humane Contracts,
men's Goods, and Lives, and outward Liberties. The 5t Argument is from the
Wisdom wherewith the Church of God is furnished for all Civil businesses: Is
there not a wise man among you? as if he should say, It cannot be that more
wisdom should be for transacting of businesses according to God in men that
are out of the Church, then in those that are in the Church? howsoever much
worldly wisdom is sometimes given to men of the world, yet not sufficient to
reach Gods ends, that is the Privilege of Saints, they only are wise as
Serpents, the other men may be as subtle as Foxes. Prove. 8.15.
And seeing it is by Christ that Kings reign, and Princes decree justice, how
can it be supposed that Christ, who is the Head of the Church, will furnish
others with a Spirit of Wisdom and Government in Civil Matters, and deny it to
the Church, Members of his own Body, whom he alone sanctifies to his ends?

The Assumption (That the Form of Government in the Commonwealth which we
plead for, is that wherein the power of civil Administrations is denied to
unbelievers, and committed to the Saints) is evident of it self. For whom does
the Apostle call Saints there, but Members of the Church? when he had said
before, they were sanctified in Christ Jesus, Saints by calling. 1 Cor. 1.2.
Hence it is that he speaks of men esteemed in the Church, v. 4. and of man
that can judge between Brethren, v. 5. which is a Title given to Church Members
ordinarily in the New Testament.

He speaks there of Church Members, in opposition to Infidels which
persecuted the truth, not in opposition to men that may f^ar God, and be
accounted Believers, though they be not in Church Fellowship.

added to the Church, and their being added to the Church, was made an evidence
of their conversion; what may we think of those men, who living in times and
places where the Ordinances of the Gospel may be enjoyed in purity, with peace
in Church Fellowship, do yet live without the Church? 2. Though there be sundry
degrees of distance from the Church, to be found among men that are out of
Church fellowship, as the Heathen are further off then moral Christians, yet
the same Spirit of unrighteousness and enmity against Christ, works and bears
rule in an unconverted Christian, as does in an unbaptized Heathen: He is
unsanctified as the other is, and so unsuitable to Gods ends in civil
Administrations; and therefore it will not be safe, nor according to the Rule,
that where a Church is gathered according to Christ, the Members should be
neglected, and such men entrusted with managing the Public Affairs, as are not
in fellowship with them.

That Form of Government wherein the power of choosing from among themselves,
men to be entrusted with managing all public Affairs of Importance, is
committed to them who are furnished with the best helps for securing to a
Christian State the faithful discharge of such a Trust, is the best Form of
Government in a Christian Commonwealth, and which men that are free to choose
(as in new Plantations they are) ought to establish. The Form of Government
described in the true stating of the Question is such. The efore the Form of
Government described in the true stating of the Question, is the best Form of
Government in a Christian Commonwealth, and which men that are free to choose
(as in new Plantations they are) ought to establish. The Proposition is
undeniable.

The Assumption (That the Form of Government which we plead for, is that
wherein the power of choosing men to be entrusted with managing of all public
Affairs of Importance, is committed to them who are furnished with the best
helps for securing to a Christian State the faithful discharge of such a Trust)
may be confirmed, by showing what these Helps are; viz. 1. That the Members of
the Church are Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1.2. John 15.19. Heb. 12.23. James
1.18. Isai. 11.1, 2. Luke 1.75. Psalm. 50.5. Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18.
i. e. men separated from the world, and the pollutions thereof, out of which
they are called, and dedicated to God, as the firstborn, and the first fruits
were; and they are qualified, by the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the
Lord, in some measure through fellowship with Christ, to serve God and men in
holiness and righteousness all the days of their lives. 2. That these Saints
by calling being in Church Order according to Christ's appointment, are in
Covenant with God, and one with another, whereby they are most strictly bound
to do faithfully, whatsoever they do to God or men. 3. That by virtue of this
Order, they are bound to mutual helpfulness, in Watching over one another,
Instructing, Admonishing, and Exhorting one another, to prevent sin, or to
recover such as are fallen, or to encourage one another, and strengthen them in
well-doing.

Thus are they bound in a threefold Cable unto all Faithfulness in all things
to God and Man. The like assurance cannot be had in any other way, if this
course be neglected.

The Danger of devolving this Power upon those that are not in Church Order.
From whence the Apostle would have men to be affrighted. 1 Cor. 6.1.
Dare any of you having business against another, be judged under the unjust,
and not under the Saints? The Danger therefore that is to be feared in
reference to the Chrrch, is, The disturbance of the Churches Peace, when Power
shall be put into their hands, who being of worldly spirits, hate the Saints
and their Communion; and being of the seed of the Serpent, John 15.18. Genesis
3.15. Zech. 3.1. Revel. 12.7.
are at enmity against the seed of the Woman; and being Satan's instruments, who
is the God of this World, are resisting and fighting against Christ his
Kingdom and Government in the Church. 2. Add hereunto, The Danger of
corrupting Church Order, either by compelling them to receive into fellowship
unsuitable ones, or by imposing upon them Ordinances of men and worldly
Rudiments; Col. 2.22, 23.
or by establishing Idolatrous Worship; or by strengthening Heretics in
subverting the common Faith, as those Arrian Emperors, and Idolatrous Kings
and States have done, of which we read so many instances.

Secondly, the Danger to be feared in reference to the Civil State, is, 1. The
raising of Factions to the disturbance of Public Peace, whilst some
Magistrates out of the Church, watch their seasons to strengthen themselves
against those that are in the Church, till they have wrought them out of Office
and Power in the Civil State: and in the mean time, what other can be expected
from such unequal mixture in State, Dan. 2.42, 43.
but that they should be as the toes of the fe^t of Nebuchadnezzar's image,
which were part of iron, and part of clay, they should be partly broken, and
partly strong, and not comfortably join one with another, as iron cannot be
mixed with clay. The second Danger to the Civil State, will be, A perverting of
Justice by Magistrates of worldly spirits, through Bribery, respect of persons,
unacquaintance with the Law of God, and injuriousness to the servants of God.
But I must break off, lest I grow too tedious. How easily might I add the
Consent of all Nations to this Truth in some proportion, who generally practice
accordingly? In our Native Country, none are entrusted with managing of
Public Affairs, but Members of the Church of England, (as they call them.) In
Holland, when the Arminian Party had many Burgomasters on their side, Grave
Maurice came into diverse of their Cities with Troops of Soldiers, by Order
from the States General, and put those Arminian Magistrates out of Office, and
caused them to choose only such as were of the Dutch Churches. And in Roterdam
(and I think it is so in other Towns) the Vrentscap (who are all of them of the
Dutch Church, and free Burgers) do out of their own company choose the
Burgomaster, and other Magistrates and Officers. In all Popish Countries and
Plantations, they observe it strictly, to entrust none with the managing of
Public Civil Affairs, but such as are Catholics (as they speak) and of the
Roman Church. Yea, in Turkey it self, they are careful that none but a man
devoted to Mahomet bear public Office. Yea, these very Indians that Worship
the Devil, will not be under the Government of any Sagamores, but such as join
with them in Observance of their Pawawes and Idolatries: That it seems to be a
Principle imprinted in the minds and hearts of all men in the equity of it,
That such a Form of Government as best serves to Establish their Religion,
should by the consent of all be Established in the Civil State.

Other things I might add, but I hope enough has been said for Defense and
Confirmation of what I have affirmed touching this matter. If you remain
unsatisfied, I shall desire that you will placidly, and lovingly, and
impartially weigh the Grounds of my judgment, and communicate yours, if any
remain against it, in writing. For though much writing be wearisome unto me,
yet I find it the safer way for me. Now the God of Peace and Truth lead us
into all ways of Peace and Truth, to the Praise of his Grace through the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. To whom be in all things
the Pre-eminence, and Glory, and Praise. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 8. line 17. for the State read that estate. Ibid. for that read
and. p. 11. l. 27. read and having.


