The true Copy of a LETTER sent from an Inhabitant of BRIDGEWATER In the
County of Somerset, which is now under the command of his Majesty's Forces,
unto a Quartermaster of a Troop of Horse belonging to the Western Brigade.

Wherein is set forth the certainty of the landing of 1000. Jrish Rebels at
Mynehead in the said County, and of diverse others landed at BRISTOL.

TOGETHER With the Governor of Bridgewater his Speech to restrain the
garrison Soldiers from going to Mynehead to suppress the Progress of the
Rebels.

London, printed for Richard Lownes, and are to be sold at his Shop near
Ludgate. 1643.

The true Copy of a LETTER sent from an Inhabitant of Bridgewater, in the
County of Somerset, which is now under the comm^nd of his M^jesties Force^,
unto a Quartermaster of a troop of Horse belonging to the Western Brigade.
Noble Quartermaster,
HAving so fit an opportunity, and such variety of news afforded me, I could
not pass you by unsaluted, with a full and true Narration of the Affairs in
these your native parts. Upon Tuesday last, Lieutenant Jones (who sometimes
belonged to the worthy Colonel Edward Popham) came to our Town, with Letters
from Oxford, directed to our Governor Master Edmund Wyndeham, the contents
whereof we know not, but do believe it was for the sending the Garrison
Soldiers toward Oxford; for the day after his coming to us, all the
Soldiers in the Town were drawn forth, being in number 300 Musketeers, and
they marched about two miles; but upon a sudden the Governor sent to command
the said Soldiers back again. The occasion was this: On Monday night last,
Noah Rendall came from Mynehead, and brought certain news that there were
landed in that place about a thousand Irish Rebels, which so amazed the poor
Soldiers, that they all with an unanimous voice cried, away to Min^^e^d, le^
us cut those Papish Dogs throats. This noy^e continued about two hours; when
at last Windham (that old principle Patriot of P^pists and Monopolist) came to
the Soldiers and used this learned Oration.

Gentlemen Soldiers, you have hitherto quitted you ^ravely, so that no
interior Soldiers deserve better of his sacred Ma^esly then your selves do,
for which I do not only render you many thanks, but do also promise you as
I am a Gentleman, to give you as much satisfaction as your hearts can desire.
But to give you true notice what those are which you call Rebels at Minehead,
know for certain, that they are no more Rebels then I, or your selves are: No,
they are our friends, our brethren, whose zeal for our Religion, Laws and
Kings Monarchy, have brought them hither, to suppress the insolences of those
true Rebels, the pretended Parliament, and the Roundheads; these are those
that come to ^oyne with you (and 8000 more are upon coming) to establish our
Sovereign in his glorious throne, and to make the almost extinct flames of the
Protestant Religion shine in his former luster. Therefore (brave Gentlemen)
take your rest this night, and I beseech you make no mutinies, for the time
will not be long ere the work will be ended, and then instead of being
commanded, you your selves shall be Commanders of the several estates which
the Roundheads have enjoyed.

No sooner had this Tertullus ended his insinuating Oration, but one of the
Soldiers swore with a great oath, saying, we have now brought our Hogs to a
fair Market; what be there not Protestants enough in England to fight for our
Religion, but the King must send for the Irish Papists? (I see I must not call
them Rebels) He never hold with Papists as long as I breath, and presently all
the Soldiers cried no Papists should join with them. So that there was a
terrible Mutiny till the Masters of the Town came and appeased them. Now these
Soldiers were very glad that they had an opportunity offered them the next day
to run away (which they had done if they had recovered two miles farther)
that so they might have passed the danger of Wyndehams sons Troops: Of which
plot Wyndeham being advertised, demanded them back again. You will not
believe how the coming over of the Rebels at Minehead and at Bristoll (for we
hear for certain that there are 2000 landed there) has wrought upon the
heart^ of Master Hill, Master B^^kin, Master Pits, and generally on all the
crew of M^lignants: They now being awakened, do reason among themselves,
whether their Governor be right; that is, whether he be a P^pist or no? And
whether this War be not a great d^ale worse then the Scots War, for that was
but to set up Episcopacy, this to establish Papacy. And the result of all their
reasoning is, that certainly the Parliament is in the right way, and they
desire God to pardon them, that they have yielded no better obedience to the
Ordinances of the Parliament. We have here a very great Market upon Thursdayes,
but I believe with some confidence, that there are 40 buyers to one seller, for
people are afraid to bring provision to market, in regard Captain Harvey (that
murtherous Rascal) and some of his creatures, issue forth and robs the poor
Country people of their moneys. We are squeezed like wax in our weekly
payments, still mounting; but I trust in God it will not be to establish the
purpose of the Kings Council. I pay weekly (besides a hundred pounds which I
was first fined at) 15. s. 6. d. besides, I biller at free quarter five Troops.
It is a lamentable thing to consider; but yet it is not only my case, but
hundreds more of my fellows and therefore I many times solace my self with the
words of the Poet, Solamen miseris socios babuisse delore; Although we pay such
Taxes, yet the foot Souldies are not paid above 14. d. a month, and some of
them nothing at all, so that here are quotidian fits of Mu^inies. The Governor
being assaulted on Saturd^y last, as he was walking on the Cornhill, by ten
sturdy fellows, who showed him their ragged clothes, and torn shoes, and
told him they must have better clothes, or else he should have never a Coat to
his back another (laying his hand on his sword) told the Governor plainly,
that he was a Papist, and that it was evident to all men that it was true, for
he had almost undone the Country by great Taxations, and had almost starved the
poor Soldiers, and that he kept all for the damned dogs the Irish Rebels.
Whereupon the distressed Governor was feign to run into Master Edward Sealyes
house, and there he commanded the Club-men of the Town to come and assist him;
unto whose command they showed a very brief and tedious obedience; so that if
Captain Wyndehams Troop had not then accidentally come to the Town, I am
confident they had pulled the house obout the Governors ears: But that Troop
stild the tumult, and then the Governor came forth and commanded the said ten
men to be clapped in the Bilboes. But as soon as the Troopers were dismounted,
their Comrades released them: And now these Mutineers, are to be imbarqued for
Bristoll; but I know whatever comes of them, they will never fight against the
Parliament.

Here you may see that place confirmed, The wisdom of this world is
foolishness with God. For the falesharted Achitophels about the King thought
they had given wise Counsel I to have the Rebels brought over to subdue his
M^jesties true Subjects, and subvert their Religion, Laws, and Liberties, but
I believe it will prove the foolishest Council (though bloody) that they have
yet given; for there is not a man in these parts, but have waxed cold in his
former malignancy, since the Bruto that the Rebels were landed in our County.
So that if there were but an Army on foot again in these parts, I am confident
it would increase like a show-ball, for there is nothing more talked of and
feared, than that those blood-thirsty Saint murdering Rogues will make this
County an Aceldama. But I hope the Lord of Hosts is yet with us, and that the
God of Jacob will so protect u^, that the end of these Rebels coming into
England shall be to save our English men a labor, to confound those Helhounds
here, that were so marchlesse in their own Country, for I assure you they
will want their Fennes and Quagmires to retreat unto here in England. I hear
his Majesty's Army does increase with such as run from your Army, which, if
true, I wish he may have no abler men than that valiant runaway Atheistical
turne-coat Jones, whom I before ment^oned, for you k^ow he is very able with a
wench in a Barly-close but m ghty apt to run at the sight of the enemy. Our
Organs toot it out to the purpose six times on a Lords day; for preaching we
have commonly as good as was usual in Wels Cathedral. I hope our sufferings
are almost at the highest, we hope of a western Army, but if we should speak
of any preparation or likelihood of it, we should presently be clapped into
prison. I have bin the more tedious, because I would set forth the truth at
large, and also believing it will not be troublesome to you to read it, in
regard (as I hear) you want employment, which I heartily wish you to your
content; and so I commit you to the protection of the Almighty, desiring him to
bless, protect and guide you.

Bridgewater October 27. 1643. Your assured loving friend and Schoolefellow
Hen. Davy.

This is Licenced and Entered according to Order.


