THE Man's the Master: A COMEDY.

WRITTEN BY Sir WILLIAM D'AVENANT, KNIGHT.

In the SAVOY.

Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Blew-Anchor, in the Lower-Walk of the
New-Exchange. 1669.

PROLOGUE.
1.
NO Country Lady ever yet did ask
Such shrewd advice before a Ball or Masque
(When curious dressing is the Courts great task)
2.
As now young Poets do, in this nice Age,
To gain the froward Lovers of the Stage;
Whose heat of humors nothing can assuage.
3.
The Muse, disdained, does as fond Women do;
Instead of being courted she courts you:
But Women are less valued when they woo.
4.
And as young Poets, like young Ladies, fear
A Concourse, great as this Assembly here,
Till they seek council how they should appear,
5.
So all old Poets, like old Ladies, may
Be more afraid to venture the survay
Of many apt to censure their decay.
6.
Both know they have been out of fashion long;
And, ever they come before a shining Throng,
Would dress themselves by Patterns of the Young.
7.
Well, our old Poet hopes this Comedy
Will somewhat in the fine new fashion be;
But, if all gay, 'twould not with Age agree.
8.
A little he was fain to moralize
That he might serve your Minds as well as Eyes:
The Proverb says, Be merry and be wise.
9.
This, Gentlemen, is all he bad me say
Of his important Trifle called a Play;
For which, he does confess, you dearly pay.
10.
But he did fear that he could hardly make
A Prologue so in fashion as might take,
For he does much of too much boldness lack.
11.
He never durst, nor ever thought it fit,
To censure those who Judges are of Wit.
Now you expect the Rhyme will end in Pit.
The Persons represented.
Don Ferdinand. Father to Isabella. Don John. Suitor to Isabella. Don Lewis.
His Rival. Sancho. Steward to Don Ferdinand. Jodelet. Servant to Don John.
Stephano. Servant to Don Lewis. Isabella. Daughter to Don Ferdinand. Lucilla.
Sister to Don John. Bettris. Isabella's Maid. Laura. Lucilla's Maid.
The Scene MADRID. And in one House.

THE Man's the Master.
ACT I.
Enter Lucilla, and Laura with a dark Lanthorn. Lu. YOu have served me but two
days, and are you weary already?


Lau. Pray add the nights to the days; for I have not slept since I came into
your service.


Lu. Love has ordained us for these Journeys; and will, I hope, bring us at
last where we may rest quietly.


Lau. Yes, to the last Inn of all Travailers, where we shall meet Worms instead
of Fleas; Lovers never rest quietly till they lodge at the sign of the Grave.


Lu. P^ithee be patient Laura.


Lau. If I had been waiting woman to Will of the Wisp, I could not have
wandered with so much uncertainty as when I follow a Mistress led about by Love.


Lu. But, Laura, I follow you now.


Lau. You may with ease enough when I Am so tired that I can go no farther; this
is the pretty Foot belonging to a Leg; which (though I say it) was fit to lead a
Dance in Hymen's Hall.


Lu. And does it limp now, and grow weary of the errands of two days.


Lau. You have little reason to blame that Leg which has been so nimble in your
service; but the other will follow it no further. Me thinks it has got a
shackle instead of a Garter She limps a little.


Enter Sancho with a dark Lanthorn. Lu. Take heed, Laura; I see light.


Lau. Why, what would you see, darkness? are not your eyes made for the light?


Lu. It Is a Man; He seems to seek some body with a Lanthorn.


Lau. He seeks me here by appointment.


Lu. I Will retire to this Portico.


Lau. Do, whilst I accost him.


Lu. What is he?


Lau. It Is Sancho, Don Ferdinando's Steward; he was my sworn Brother over a
Possit, he is by the length of his Beard and the heat of his Constitution, a
very Goat.


Lu. For Heaven's sake lose no time.


Lau. You need not fear his loss of time; I use to call him my Brother-Brevity;
He is so thrifty of his speech, that his Tongue does seldom allow his thoughts
above two words to express them.


San. Laura!


Lau. Are not you my Brother Sancho?


San. I am.


Lau. Have you contrived a way to conceal my Lady in your Masters house?


San. Yes.


Lau. Can you admit her now?


San. No.


Lau. May it be to morrow?


San. It may.


Lau. I Will attend you in the morning.


San. Do.


Lau. Pray name the hour.


San. Nine.


Lau. My Mistress is very sensible of your care, and would know if I may have
leave to give you this Gold?


San. You may.


Lau. I hope you hate not me, nor the present.


San. Neither.


Lau. Are we both acceptable?


San. Both. -- He looks on the Gold.


Lau. It Is very Gold; and Signior Sancho you shall find me to be as true metal
as it.


San. I Will try. -- Offers to kiss her.


Lau. Not so soon, good Signior Sancho, Bring me to the Wedding night, and then
try if, like Gold, I can endure the touch.


San. Humph! --


Lau. Lovers may pretend to have true Metal, but Marriage is the Touchstone.


San. Of Fools. aside.


Lau. Hands off, good Signior Sancho. You want sleep, Good night, Pray let me
go. --


San. Pass. -- Exit Sancho.


Lau. Come, Madam, we may hasten home, Nine is the appointed hour when you
shall have admittance.


Lu. After I have sought opportunity, I am afraid to find it.


Lau. Madam, I do not yet understand your intrigues of Love. You are afraid to
find the opportunity you seek, and I, poor wretch, seek more opportunities than
I fear I shall find.


Lu. Lord help thee,! thou do want a great deal of sorrow to make thee a
little wise. Exeunt.


Enter Don John and Todelet. Tod. Sir, by your favor, you are either mad, or
the Devil is malicious to bring you to Madrid, at so unseasonable an hour,
after riding post, or rather flying, without meat or drink, as empty as wild
Hawks, and as uncertain of your Quarry.


D. John. I confess thou may be tired all over, all but thy Tongue, and that
can never be weary. The Street where we are now, is that which I have sought.


Tod. What will you do here, go see Don Ferdinand when it is past Midnight?


D. John. Yes, and this very night I Will visit Isabella.


Tod. It Is ill to have an empty stomach, but worse to have an empty head.


D. John. Todelet, I know you are hungry, but hunger makes you fitter for
watching, I Will not stir out of this street till I see my Mistress.


Tod. Remember it is past One, a season when Don Ferdinand's Gates are always
shut: we have ridden this morning from Burgos. I know no kind of Lovers but
Owls would have chosen the night for a journey.


D. John. To love nothing but sleep and eating is to be a Beast in the habit of
a Serving-man.


Tod. How I hate raillery?


D. John. And I eating and sleep, in comparison of this Picture of Isabella.


Tod. You are one of those who are filled with wildfire at sight of a cold
Picture; and if Master Painter, has luckily drawn a Snout of Ivory and a Mouth
of Coral, which perhaps does enclose an ill Tongue and worse Teeth, then he
makes you mad of a Mistress; Will a Picture reveal whether her crooked body be
armed with a Coat of Mail, or whether she be some Skeleton whose Beauties lie
at night upon her dressing-cloth? you will not be much pitied if men find you ill
provided of a Woman, since you will be gulled with one before you have seen her.


D. John. Thou art as froward at this time o'th night as a waked Child.


Tod. Would any Man keep patience about him when he must run in the dark from
Street to Street, and grope out his way like a blind Man without a Dog? or
stand so long under a Balcone (lifting himself upon one leg to stare higher
about him) till he shift his feet as often as a Stork?


D. John. Todelet!


Tod. Don John.!


Don John. My Picture was rarely drawn: and sure it could not choose but please
my Mistress.


Tod. I know the contrary.


D. John. What say thou?


Tod. I tell you it has rather displeased her.


D. John. How the Devil can thou know that!


Tod. Alas, I know it too well.


D. John. Hah! tell me how?


Tod. Good Sir, have patience! instead of your Picture she received mine.


D. John. Traitor, it is well thou do not use to speak truth, for else I
should search for thy life in the very bottom of thy Bowels.


Tod. You may, Sir, and begin as my Throat: But in piercing my body, I pray
spare my Doublet for I made it new at Burgos.


D. Joh. Pox of your Railery, Tell me what thou have done?


Tod. Sir, put your anger up first.


D. John. I never had so much cause to let it out, But speak, and let not Fear
fright Truth from thee.


Tod. Sir, when we left Flanders --


D. John. Well proceed.


Tod. You having your Brother ki^l'd, and a Sister carried away by stealth (not
knowing where, nor how, nor wherefore, nor by whom) you rode so fast that you
left all your judgment a great way behind you.


D. John. To what purpose, Villain, do thou open these two wounds? proceed
apace to thy Picture.


Tod. Sir, I go as fast as I can; but your anger interrupts me so, that I Am
fain sometimes to go back to recover my Tongue, though I have nothing within me
but what is much to the purpose.


D. John. Why do thou not render it in few words?


Tod. I cannot, Sir, for I always speak things in order, but for your Picture
which I had e'n forgot --


D. John. Was ever Man so tired with the tedious length of nothing?


Tod. We were but newly returned to Castille when Don Ferdinand de Rochas
proposed his Daughter to you in Marriage: her Picture was made a Present to
you, and the offer of Twenty thousand Crowns in portion, and then you
(t'inchant her with your own Picture as much as you were charmed by hers) made
haste to send her it: and so, as the Proverb says, put an old Cat to an old
Rat. It was a Lovers stratagem, and villanously subtle. But Heaven (not always
a Friend to Lovers) ordained a success in spite of expectation.


D. John. Art thou about the History of the World; and will thou not finish it
till the World ends?


Tod. Yes, Sir, but I must refresh my memory, for it is almost weary.


D. John. I would thy Tongue were so too.


Tod. You remember that your Painter (in thankfulness for the great reward you
gave him) would after he had drawn your Picture, take a little pains about mine.


D. John. I know that: but proceed.


Tod. Then you likewise know it cost me nothing, Well, that Flemming's a brave
man. None of your Jan Van Lievens, nor your Elshamers, nor your Brauwers, nor
your Joes Van Winghens ever drew like him. Then give him but a Rummer, over a
Pickell'd Herring, and he will drink so kindly, as if he had the Heart of a
Whale.


D. John. Will thou never conclude? have thou sold, burnt, eat, or drank my
Picture? Have I it yet, or was it sent to Isabella? speak and be quick!


Tod. If you have not patience to stay awhile rather than hear ill news, but
will needs ride Post to overtake the Devil, I will leave Flanders and go the
nearest way to the purpose.


D. John. Still will thou be tedious?


Tod. Nay, Sir, since you love unwelcome brevity, know when I was to send away
the last Packet, I would (being a little curious) compare the workmanship of my
Picture with yours. I set them opposite to one another, turning my Eyes often
from this to that, and being called for in haste by the Post-Boy, I put my
little Picture in the Packet instead of yours!


D. John. How? yours instead of mine?


Tod. Sir, your Picture had the happy laziness to stay here; but mine was
destined to ride Post with the Devil to your Mistress.


D. John. Can thou live, or I either, after I have heard this?


Tod. Good Sir, make use of patience as I did. Time, which wears out sorrows as
well as joys, has since the unhappy accident given me a few quiet nights, and I
have ceased to grieve for fear of being sick.


D. John. Dog! what will she say of thy horn-face, and of thy Badgers Nose?


Tod. Alas, Sir, she will not think you very handsome, I mean in my Picture;
but if we were both our own Painters we should not want Beauty.


Enter Stephano. D. John. Peace, there comes one who perhaps knows Don
Ferdinand's house, Go, ask him.


Tod. But Sir --


D. John. Well, speak low.


Tod. Perhaps he^l expect a reward if he tells us. In Madrid you must hold out
your Money if you do but ask what is a clock?


D. John. Unlucky Rogue, would he would cudgel thee.


Tod. He has not leisure to do it; he seems in haste.


Steph. Who goes there?


Tod. Not to displease you, Sir, where dwells Don Ferdinand?


Steph. This is his house.


Tod. Are we in the right already? for this bout my Master has reason, the
Father-in-law is found; and the Son-in-law-elect has nothing to do but to knock.


Steph. I begin to find my self a Fool for having showed them where my Master
is secretly entered, and whence I expect he will presently come forth; I must find
some expedient.


Tod. Does he dwell here?


Steph. Yes, but he is sick, and does not love noise, what are you?


Tod. We, Sir, are Night-walkers; or rather men of Norway, a Norhern-Countrey
where he is cursed, who does not sleep continually, for my part I never sleep;
and that is my Master, Sir, the greatest waker in the World.


Steph. Or rather the greatest Robber. He shall give me satisfaction for what
he lately took from me; I know him well enough, and you were with him.


Tod. You are very chollerick, and I think somewhat mad. If I were so too, you
would have little safety but in flying. Sir, as sober as I am, I can scarce
keep my hand from my hilt.


To D. John. Sir! Sir! advance a little, I begin to grow soft, and were it not
dark, I should appear somewhat pale too.


D. John to Steph. Approach Sir, come on toward me. I Will make you civil.


Steph. How! Don of the dark? are you so brisk? but I shall take the pains to
drive you a mile hence: for though you are Two (would I were rid of 'em) if you
dare follow me as fast as I Will lead the way, ye shall come to a better place for
fighting.


D. John. Say you so, Sir? I Will follow you, stay! I hear a noise. It seems to be
above us.


Tod. Pox on this chollerick Curr! if his barking had not frighted me, I had,
perhaps, without any danger, broke his very bones: but whence the Devil comes
that other Devil? Don Lewis descends from the Balcone.


D. Lewis. Stephano!


Tod. They are going.


D. John. Sure that is his Man whom he calls: he who gets way before us.


D. Lewis. Either I am much cousen'd, or I am watched. But the noise of a
quarrel will fright Isabella. In care of her I must neglect my honor. Let Us
steal away, since it must be so.


Exeunt D. Lewis, Stephano. D. John to Tod. Stay, or thou art dead. Stay but
one thrust.


Tod. My Master has metal, but I Am no Touchstone to try it on.


D. John. Give me thy name, or I Will take thy life.


Tod. I am Don Todelet of Segovia.


D. John. Three curses on thee, and a thousand on him that leapt from the
Balcone. What Is become of him.


Tod. He flew through the dark like Lightning, and I like a furious Fool,
followed him like Thunder, till the invisible Rogue threaded a Lane as narrow
as a Needles Eye. Well, I Am the Hercules whom you always expose against Two.
You are a little prompt, but, by your leave, Master; is it the Custom of
Madrid to escape thus out of a Windore?


D. John. Did thou perfectly discern him?


Tod. Yes.


D. John. I am amazed.


Tod. And I, if it were possible, am quite confounded.


D. John. I must not here take up a quarrel at the first bound.


Tod. Methinks your mind is a little troubled.


D. John. It is; and I have much cause, but let us consult upon it.


Tod. That Is well said; I never found my self so much inclined to reasoning,
and, if you please, let us consult soundly.


D. John. I was born at Burgos; left poor, but of a long race exempted even as
far as my self, from all disgraces.


Tod. Very well.


D. John. At my return from the War to Burgos, I found my self attacqu'd with
two different Evils. I had a Brother murdered and was robbed of a Sister; though
she was bred with all the cares of honor. And this makes me exceeding
chollerick.


Tod. That Is ill, very ill, exceeding ill.


D. John. D. Ferdinand chose me for a Husband to Isabella; and she has received
thy Picture instead of mine.


Tod. That Is not very ill.


D. John. We treated of this bus^ness in secret; and I took horse for Madrid,
where I now arrive late at night.


Tod. That Is a little ill.


D. John. Without seeking out a Lodging my love leads me directly hither.


Tod. That Is a little too soon.


D. John. I met before Don Ferdinands House a Serving-man who thrusts me, by
design, upon an Almain-quarrel.


Tod. That Is very true, but somewhat unwillingly, like a Coward as he is.


D. John. Perhaps 'twas for fear of scandal; for he did not approach us like a
Coward.


Tod. How did the unlucky Thief come then?


D. John. He came on like the Lover of Isabella.


Tod. That Is very ill.


D. John. It Is that which will wound my head more than his sword.


Tod. Let Us fall to reasoning again.


D. John. Ah! no more reasoning, when reason grows superfluous. But prithee
mark the counsel which Love suggests to me. My hope lies in thee. To morrow, my
dear Todelet, thou must pass for my Master, and I for the Man. Thy Picture is
to work Miracles. What ayl'st thou? do thou shake thy ears?


Tod. These kind of disguises smell too much of the Cudgel. I Would rather proceed
to reasoning again. For what will the world say? Don John is grown the Man, and
Todelet the Master, and by ill fortune too; for perhaps, at last, your Mistress
may love me, and I her.


D. John. Fear not that; for then the mischief will be mine: but I, being
Tod'let, may get acquainted with my Rivals man. I Will be a Lover from the
Kitchen to the Garret; and my Presents shall open the Locks of every bosom:
whilst thou (eating like a Shanker, and drinking like a Hole) shall shine in
gold Chains like the King of Peru, without having any share of my sorrows.


Tod. I begin to like the Invention.


D. John. Thou shall be feasted and crammed at Don Ferdinands; whilst I am
choked with my jealousies.


Tod. But may I not (to represent Don John the better) give your shoulders now
and then a taste of the Cudgel?


D. John. Yes, when we are alone, without Witnesses.


Tod. Well, Vermechulli shall my Pallat please,
Served in with Bisques, Ragous, and Intermets.
Wait close upon Don Todelet, thy Master;
And thou may be my Carver, or my Taster.
If thou do fetch me Girls, and watch, and trudge well,
Thou shall have food, if not, thou shall have Cudgel.

Exeunt. ACT. II.
Enter Isabella, Betteris. Isabel. BEttris, make up your Packet, without
thinking to reconcile me by long rattle; I Will have no more of you.


Bett. Truly, Mistress, I Am ignorant of the cause of your anger.


Isab. You know it not?


Bett. If I do, may I never be haunted again by men of Honor.


Isab. It Is no matter, I dismiss you.


Bett. Well my conscience is clear. If I have ever failed to serve you may I
burst like a boy'ld Pudding for want of pricking. But let Flatterers go fine
while Truth must be shut out o'dores and walk naked.


Isab. Yes, Dame Betteris, you are innocent: You have not opened my Balcone to
night, nor have walked barefooted to make less noise?


Bett. Alas! is that it? I left your laced linen drying on a Line, and went
into the Garden for fear some body should steal it.


Isab. Yes, and you discourst with my Linen: My ears deceived me, I did not
hear you talk.


Bett. Perhaps I was at prayers.


Isab. What, so loud?


Bett. Yes, that heaven might hear me.


Isab. And 'twas no man, but my linen, that leapt down from my Balcone.


Bett. Pray do not believe it.


Isab. I saw it, Bettris.


Bett. Ah, my dear Mistress, it is true. But Don Lewis --


Isab. O Heaven! how that name hurts me? was it Don Lewis?


Bett. Yes, Madam, your fair Cosen.


Isab. My fair Cosen! Thou black wretch! for what design had he admittance?


Bett. If it is a great sin to be charitable you have cause to be angry. But if
you will but hear me speak --


Isab. You may speak long enough before I believe you.


Bett. 'Twas last night when that delicate Don Lewis came to see you, and
because it rained I let him into the Hall; and, much against my will; for I am
tender of scandal: but the poor man, being impatient, went up; and presently
after I heard your Father Don Ferdinand spit aloud (for he always coughs when
he spits) and will be heard far enough. I Will warrant him as sound as any man
of Madrid.


Isab. Well, proceed to the ill purpose.


Bett. At this noise Don Lewis saved himself in your Balcone, which he found
half open, and I locked him in till you arrived with the old man; with whom you
discourst too long, and made Don Lewis impatient again.


Isab. Troth we were very uncivil to him.


Bett. I stayed till you were a bed; and then (being in my nature always
inclined to charitable deeds) I went to free him from his imprisonment.


Isab. Good heart!


Bett. He said he must needs speak with you one moment, but I warrant you, I
was sharp enough; and told him plainly that your Curtains were drawn.


Isab. That was severe indeed.


Bett. I saw tears fall from his eyes, and at the same time felt a few Pistols
drop into my hand. He conjured me with such sweet words; calling me, my Heart,
my dear Bettris, and then put on my finger a Diamond-Ring; which did so vex me
that I was ready to fly in's face.


Isab. That had been too cruel.


Bett. Nay, (...) but that his suff^rings wrought me again into pity; for truly
I cannot hate the man. But in your interest I know no body.


Isab. I thank you, good Mistress Bettris.


Bett. But when he saw I was so much in earnest that my face was all fire --


Isab. He saw the flushing of your anger though it were dark; but indeed all
kind of fire is most visible at night.


Bett. He leapt from the Balcone into the Street; where I heard them cry, kill!
kill! and this is the notable cause of your putting me away.


Isab. Well, you will forgive me if I must needs be too blame.


Bett. I built my happiness upon your Marriage. But if my zeal to serve you
were known to Don John (who they say is come to Town) I should hope for as ill
success as I have now.


Isab. How? Don John, too? the man I fear and most abhor. After my rage
against Don Lewis do you think to assuage me with the mention of Don John? Fare
you well, Maid of Honor, let me see you no more.


Bett. Let the Devil take Don Lewis who is the cause of this.


Exit Isabella. Enter D. Ferdinand at the other Do^e. Ferd. What Is the matter
Bettris, are you weeping?


Bett. Your Daughter, Sir, has dismissed me from her service, and for nothing,
Sir, but for wishing her favorable opinion of Don John, because he deserves it,
and you desire it.


D. Ferd. That Is a small cause for your dismission; but I Will endevor to
reconcile you. Bid your Mistress come hither. Exit Bettris. They have often
little quarrels; sometimes for a Curle disordered, or a black-Patch mis-plac'd;
and more often they differ in expounding of Dreams: but this is no time for
expulsion of servants. If Don John D' Alverad come, (who is expected to night)
I Will throw away my Staff, which is my Third Leg, and with my other Two lead 'em
a Dance.


Enter Isabella. Isab. Sir, you are perhaps, contriving my Marriage with Don
John; but I hope you will ordain me a death less cruel.


D. Ferd. Minion, you are for some unexperienced Gallant, that never travailed
but Northward, and that was to observe the variety of Flaxen Hair, and to bring
home Perewigs for Presents at Court; who spends the morning in tyring good men
with the repetition of ill Verses, and in the afternoon lies stretched out at
length, in his open Gilt Coach, like the Image of Laziness drawn in Triumph
through the City. -- The Baggage laughs when I would have her weep.


Isab. Sir, you have reason to be angry; but I Have as much cause to laugh when I
behold this Picture of a Suitor so deformed that he seems ridiculous.


D. Ferd. You judge of a Man by his Picture; let me see it. -- How the Devil
have I baited my Hook at Court, that I have been six Months a fishing for this
Cods-head? yet many have told me that D. John d' Alverad was a person highly
esteemed.


Isab. If he had been tollerably handsome your command might be obeyed,


D. Ferd. Well, however you shall promise me to use him civilly, and I Will then
find a remedy for your grief. Enter Lucilla, veiled. But here comes a Lady that
will not show her self, I wonder who let her in, and would not first ask,
whether we would be visible? Madam, without seeing your face, or inquiring your
name, you may freely command me.


Lucilla. Don Ferdinand, I expect no less from your civil reputation. I come to
you for refuge, and beseech you without any witness I may tell you my
misfortunes.


Ferd. You may Daughter retire. Exit Isabell.


Lucilla. I would I could so express my griefs that you might find some excuse
for my faults. But if you could number my tears perhaps you would confess that
my eyes have been sufficiently punished by my Crimes.


Ferd. This Stranger has no ill behavior.


Lucill. Sir, let me embrace your knees, and not rise from mine till I obtain
that succor which I hope you will afford me.


Ferd. This style is somewhat Romantic. My foolish Daughter never read
Romances, but, for my part, I esteem Amadis and all such ancient and discreet
Records of Love and Honor. Madam you seem not a person to whom a Gentleman
should refuse any thing.


Lucill. Sir, I must then give you the trouble of knowing my Race, and of
hearing my misfortunes. My Race you will easily know, for my dead Father often
told me, that he had made a friendship wi^h you at Rome, and that you are a
person both obliging and brave.


Ferd. I owe him much for that Character, and shall be ready to pay the debt to
you.


Lucill. Sir, Burgos is the Town where I received my first being, and
unfortunately the flames of Love. My Mother died at my birth, and my Father
deceased soon after her when he perceived the misfortune of my love. His name
was Diego d' Alverad. He bred me with great care and bounty, and he had much
hope of my Infancy; but alas! it was a false hope. My Two Brothers were no less
cherisht by him, and I as much by them; with whom I happily lived. But oh, how
love did change my destiny!


Ferd. A thousand curses take that Devil Love, it imbroyles us all.


Lucill. A Stranger who came to see the Triumphs at Burgos did in those
Turnements appear to have no equal. We first saw one another in an Assembly; I
was courted by him, and did endure his Courtship, or rather I was charmed by
him. He pretended to love me; and I loved him, but now, Sir, let my tears speak
for me.


Ferd. Sure all Lovers were born in April: they never mention Sunshine without
a shower after it. This may teach me to marry my Daughter to some Gentleman whom
she does not love. But, Madam, pray proceed.


Lucill. The rest is fatal, Sir, and full of shame. Alas my fault deprived me
of a Brother, and my afflicted Father soon died after him. My passion had so
overmaster'd my reason, that I still adored my unfaithful Lover, whose return
to Burgos I did two years vainly expect, and at last found that I was cruelly
forsaken: and then I forsook my Kindred, and, cursing fatal Love, am hither
guided by madness to seek that false man whom more than justly I ought to hate.


Ferd. Is not this sufficient to teach Parents to marry their Daughters without
any least mention of love. Madam, how the Devil could you be cousen'd with love?


Lucill. Alas, Sir, he told me he would be faithful. But Women should never
believe that beauty can sufficiently oblige the hearts of men, especially if
men be so handsome as to prevail on women.


Ferd. I am glad Don John's Picture renders him ugly.


Lucill. Oh Don Ferdinand! I am a fearful example for having too much believed
a cruel Tiger, who triumphs over me, disguising his name as falsely as his
faith: a name which no man seems to know, yet I am certain he lurks hereabouts.
To you I address my self as my last remedy, and I demand your aid to find him
out. I know the quality you bear about this place may apprehend him, and force
him to do me reason.


Ferd. I shall be one of Cupids Baylies, and watch to arrest a man for debts of
love.


Lucill. I Will not allege my Father nor his memory, but by your own glory will
conjure you, and not oblige you by any phrase of flattery.


Ferd. Madam, to be short, I am your humble servant; and such I have been ever
to your Father, who did me the honor to call me Brother. Dispose of all my
power; my Daughter shall endeavor to assuage your griefs.


Enter Bettris. Bett. Your Nephew, Sir, desires your ear for something of
importance.


Ferd. to Lucill. Madam, my return shall be sudden. Bettris lead her to my
appartment, and admit my Nephew presently.

Exeunt Lucilla, Bettris. The chance is odd that this Lady proves the Sister of
my elected Son-in-Law. I must present her to him if he will see her. My Nephew
and I will join our powers to seek her Lover, and to do her Justice. Enter D.
Lewis.

O dear Don Lewis, my brave Nephew, what brings you hither, how may I serve you?


D. Lewis. Sir, a friend of mine has lately advertised me of a quarrel coming
toward me, and I am come for your advice, who are a perfect Judge of Combats
of Honor.


Ferd. If you can employ no other whom you love more than me, nor that loves
you more than I do, I Am at your service. What is that Paper in your hand?


D. Lewis. I Will read it to you.


Ferd. Do, for I have lost my spectacles.


D. Lewis reads.

The younger Brother of him whom you killed upon some love-accompts, departs
from this place to day to go where you are. I know not perfectly the occasion,
but am certain that to give you notice of it is not ill done by your Servant
Don Pedro Ossorio.


Ferd. Where did you encounter him who is slain?


D. Lewis. In Burgos.


Ferd. Was he a Cavalier?


D. Lewis. Yes, and my great Friend.


Ferd. In single Combat?


D. Lewis. No, by mistake, in the darkness of the night.


Ferd. Tell me the manner of it.


D. Lewis. You remember the Triumphs at Burgos for the first Infant. A Friend
of mine invited me thither to show me the common valor of our Nation in the
Joco de Toros. The night after the Triumph he led me to see the Ladies at a
Ball, where I was conquered by a Beauty, and she by me; but this great
happiness soon turned into a great misfortune.


Ferd. Well, Sir, proceed:


D. Lewis. I was allowed the honor the next day to give her a visit, lov d her
sincerely, and being one night together I heard an attempt to break open the
door. I saw her tremble and drew my sword for her safety. She took the Candle
and blew it out. The door was opened, and I was attacqu'd, and in the
encounter, not having the use of my Eyes, there sell at my Feet one mortally
wounded; the darkness made my escape easy. But in the morning I was
overwhelmed with grief, being informed that the person slain was Brother to my
Mistress, and the same intimate Friend, who invited me to Burgos.


Ferd. These are the effects of love, and yet my foolish Daughter will needs be
in love before she marry.


D. Lewis. My escape from Burgos was easy, because I was not known in public.
You see the intelligence which is given me, and of what use your counsel may be
in the affair. A Gent^eman is in search of me, who is led hither by revenge. It
were loss of honor to avoid him, and it were cruelty to kill him. But some
body knocks at your Gate. Knocking within.


Ferd. And rudely too. Who dares be thus insolent?


Enter Bettris. Bett. O, Sir, give me a hundred Crowns for my good news.


Ferd. Pray stay till they are told out, and give me the news first.


Bett. Where is my Mistress? Her Suitor is below all over powdered, and
perfumed. He seems a merry and innocent man, for he laughs at every thing as if
he had no more cares than a Capuchin.


Lewis. Sir, it seems you have a design to marry my Cousin, and secretly.


Ferd. Yes.


D. Lewis aside. How am I wounded with this news!


Ferd. Bid my Daughter come down. Make haste.


Bett. You need not doubt my speed when I Am to bring Lovers together. Exit.


D. Lewis. How shall I bear this persecution?


Ferd. aside. I shall have use of all my understanding to get clear from the
perplexity of my divided interest. My Nephew has killed the Brother of him who
is to marry my Daughter.


Enter Isabella. Lewis. I shall grow mad.


Ferd. Come Isabella, we must prepare to meet your Suitor.


Isab. Or rather to meet death. Exeunt.


Enter Sancho, Todelet, in Don John's Habit; Don John in Todelets Habit. D.
John. I told you my Masters name.


Sancho. You did.


D. John And does your Master know that he is here?


Sancho. He does.


D. John. Sure Don Ferdinand's detained by some important business.


Sancho. He is.


D. John. I hope when that is dispatched, Don John shall have the honor to kiss
his hands.


Sancho. He shall.


D. John. This Laconick Fool makes brevity ridiculous.


Todelet. An Ass for brevity sake should have cropped Ears and a bob'd Tail.


D. John. My Master is arrived upon design of Alliance with yours, and I hope
we, who are their Servants, may become a kin to one another by friendship.


Sancho. It Is fit.


D. John. Your hand --


Sancho. Take it --


D. John. Your name?


Sancho. Sancho.


D. John. It Is well.


Sancho. Your name?


D. John. Todelet.


Sancho. Good. They embrace.


Tod. Friend, you are a man of brevity. I would your Master were so too. Shall
I not see him?


Sancho. You shall.


Tod. But (by your favor) in what quantity of time?


Sancho. A trice.


Tod. I Am satisfiy'd: but have not yet satisfied for your diligence -- I Am
sorry it is the fashion for Gallants to carry no money about 'em. Feels in his
Pockets and finds no money.


Sancho. That Is ill.


Tod. But my Trunks are coming.


Sancho. That Is good.


Tod. If my Sumpter proves lame I shall borrow of your Master rather than be in
debt to his man.


D. John. He means to represent me first by showing his bounty.


Tod. I grow impatient, and must be diverted. Friend, what is there here to see?


Sanch. The House.


Tod. I use to spend my time in things of more importance. Todelet.


D. John. Sir.


Tod. Inquire if his Master be learned.


Sancho. He Is so so.


Tod. Let Us visit his Library. Yet, now I think on it, I have had my head twice
cracked with reaching down great Books from high Shelves. Well, it is strange how
since my childhood I ever loved huge great Books, and could read in 'em as
easily as if they were but little.


D. John. This is to show he is a man of learning.


Tod. Next to great Books I love intolerable long Letters in short hand. If I
had one here, you should see me begin at Loving kind Friend, and in a moment,
end at Yours as his own.


D. John. This shows him a man of business and of dispatch too.


Tod. This (I take it) is your Ante-chamber. The Floor is smooth, but somewhat
bare: my Rooms at home are all matted.


D. John. How like a dull Rogue he boasts of his rich furniture.


Sancho. We use no Mats.


Tod. Why Friend?


Sancho. For fear --


Tod. Of what?


Sancho. Of Fleas.


Tod. Alas, poor things! they do no harm, we never use to kill 'em.


D. John. Now he shows himself a man of mercy.


Sancho. In this Country --


Tod. Well, speak your mind.


Sancho. Fleas use --


Tod. What?


Sancho. To bite.


Tod. We have abundance of 'em, but not a man of mine does ever feel 'em.


Sancho. That Is strange.


Tod. My Family feeds well, and then they sleep so soundly that Puneses cannot
wake 'em. Lord, how I love to hear my servants snore after dinner.


D. John. Now he shows his Hospitality.


Sancho to D. John. We shall all grow fat when your Master keeps house here:
yet you, methinks, are somewhat lean.


D. John. I thought this fellows Tongue had been wound up like a Clock to
regular stops, but now it struck above Twelve words. Sir I may trust you, who
are hereafter to be my faithful Friend. The chief reason why I am not fat is,
most especially, because I am in love with Three of our Neighbors Maids.


Sancho. Three?


D. John. I confess I am unfortunate in it.


Sancho. You are.


D. John. My Grandmother was a Poetess, and a great observer of love, and was
wont to put her thoughts into Verse, which were very pithy.


Sancho. And short.


D. John. She wrote according to her own Cyze, for she was a very short Woman.
Shall I repeat?


Sancho. Pronounce.


D. John. A Ruddy Sanguine Man.
Grows quickly pale and wan,
And is by Love undone
Even when he loves but one.
But I am much mistaken
If Two will not make
As lean as a Rake
A Lover fat as Bacon.

Enter D. Ferd. D. Lewis, Isabel, Bettris. D. Ferd. Don John, first for your
Fathers sake, then for your own I must embrace; nay let me bind you close to my
heart.


Tod. Sir, you may clasp me as hard as you please, for I Will assure you I am
very sound both Spring and Fall.


D. Ferd aside. Sound? that is an odd assurance from a Son in Law.

Sir, you are welcome.


Tod. I knew that before, Sir; which may give y^u a small taste of my
understanding; pray speak only things that are necessary; for I love few words.


D. Ferd. This Son in Law will prove wise.


Isabella draws Todelets Picture and looks on it aside. Isab. The Painter has
done him no wrong.


D. John aside. Her Beauty exceeds all that any Pencil can describe.


D. John looks on Isabella's Picture aside. Tod. My Father in Law looks as
gravely as an Owl at Noon pearcht over a Church Porch.


D. Ferd. I fear my Son in Law is not very eloquent, he speaks in private
between the Teeth.


Isab. aside. Was ever deformity copied with more exact proportion to the
Original.


Tod. to Isab. I can see you through my Fingers and know you at first sight by
the Picture you sent me.


Bett. He Is one of those subtle Spies who peeps through the Keyhole when the
door is open.


Tod. to Isabell. You think me a very desperate man.


Isab. Why so, Sir?


Tod. For coming near so bright a Sun as you a^e without a Parasol, Umbrellia,
or a Bondgrace.


Isab. You intend to be very witty, Sir.


Tod. I tell you again, my bright Sun, not one among a thousand would venture
his complexion so near you as I do. But what care I for being tanned*


Bett. '^is, but fleaing the old skin, and when your cheeks are raw the crimson
will appear presently.


Tod. That Damsel is too pert. Dear Chuck of my Cheeks, you should keep these
Paraqueeto's in a Cage. How many of 'em have you? Slight, I think I Am left
alone Todelet! where are all my People? Todelet?


D. John. Sir.


Tod. My heart beats too much at sight of my Mistress. If I faint with love be
sure to hold me up.


D. John. I shall, Sir.


Tod. Lady, you say nothing: but I Am glad you are silent, for if you should
show as much w^t as you do beauty, I were a dead man. Todelet.


D. John. Sir.


Tod. To drive away the sorrows of love I prithee break a Jest or two, or tell
my Mistress some of mine to cure her melancholy.


Isab. My Father has made a rare choice. This extraordinary Fool is only fit
for Christmas.


Tod. Don Ferdinand, do you always serve for a Skreen to your Daughter?


D. John aside. Unlucky Rogue! what Devil taught thee to ask that?


D. Lewis. That question is not very civil.


Tod. Those that are angry may show their teeth; but let them be sure that they
be sharp.


D. Lewis. Sir, no man will doubt yours.


Tod. Those who dare doubt mine may meet me -- at dinner; and after dinner may
walk a turn in the Field. It may be wholesome for some, but for others it may
prove dangerous.


Isab. He grows angry.


Tod. May not a man see a snip of her face? I pray, Lady of my lips, blink on
me a little with one eye. Don Ferdinand, let some body bring her near me; or at
least show me her Hand, or her Arm, or a little of her Leg.


D. John. This course Villain has been bred in a Bu^cher-Row.


Ferd. My Daughter had reason. My Son in Law is a Coxcomb.


Tod. Lord, how nice they are of their Brides in this Country! any where else I
might ever this have had a dozen kisses.


Ferd. How I am vexed at his want of breeding!


Tod. Father in Law you must pardon me. I am a little boystrous, but I am very
loving. My dainty Duckling may I know what gust you take in having the honor
to see me?


D. Lewis. That Is civilly asked.


Ferd. O impertinent Son in Law.


Tod. They laugh. I shall be loath to marry in so foolish a Kindred as have no
more wit than to laugh at me. Don Ferdinand, pray call for a Chair: you are ill
served; but I will vouchsafe to reach one my self.


D. Ferd. aside. I say again my Son in law is a very Coxcomb. Bettris reach a
Chair.


Tod. Sweet Syrrop of my Soul, pray tell me, do you wear Chopeens? in truth if
you do not, you are of a reasonable good stature, and worthy of me.


D. Lewis. An excellent good Complement.


Tod. That young man is given to prating. Tell me, my bright Sun, do you shine
on him?


Isab. He is my Cousin Germain.


Ferd. I pronounce the third time that my Son-in law is a Coxcomb.


D. John. This Cousin Germain revives my jealousy.


Tod. Lady, have you never an Ear-picker about you; there is something tickles
me within, and I broke mine with picking my teeth. What all laughing again?
Lady, you laugh scurvily! you laugh like a Munky that has stolen cher^ies; he,
he, he, he!


D. Lewis to Isabel. Cousin you do not satisfy the Gentleman, he asked you e'n
now how you did relish the honor of seeing him.


Isab. I must confess I never saw his Equal both in body and mind.


Tod. Madam, every one says as much of me. But the twenty thousand Crowns, are
they ready? Let Us dispatch the Marriage.


D. Lewis. How, D. John? you are mercenary.


Tod. Those who believe it are very desperate. But would I could meet 'em in
Alverad.


D. Lewis. In Alverad! Had you not a Brother, Sir?


Tod. Yes, whom a base Murderer killed in the dark.


D. John. If Don John could find the Murderer he would eat his heart; but the
Coward hides himself.


D. Lewis. This Groom is very impudent. But, Friend, I have been told --


D. John. What have you been told, Sir?


D. Lewis. That it was merely by mischance.


D. John. He ly'd that told you so; it was treachery.


D. Lewis. to Isabel. Do you observe his sawciness?


Isabel. Methinks his anger has something graceful in it.


D. Lewis. Then you allow his insolence?


Isabel. He shows no meanness in his courage.


D. Lewis to D. John. I shall find you.


D. John. You may, for I shall never avoid you.


Isabel. O pity hide thine eyes! how can thou see such Gallantry in such a
low condition?


D. Lewis. Were not in this place, I should make you silent.


Tod. My man is almost as valiant as my self, but a little rash.


D. Lewis. Uncle, shall I endure this from that Groom?


D. Ferd. I charge you be discreet. Here Is a fair beginning of a marriage.


Tod. My dear Dumpling let 'em quarrel; and let us talk and be witty and sell
Bargains.


D. Ferd. Sir, you have not yet seen the House.

Bettris make haste, open the Gallery. Nephew, I conjure you to make use of
your discretion. Come Gentlemen, what do you stay for?


Tod. I love the downright familiarity of Alverad, and hate Complement.


D. Ferd. That Is for saving of time.


Tod. We often (out of heartiness and haste) salute Ladies with our hats on.


D. Ferd. Do you so, Sir?


Tod. Yes, and take 'em by the hand without the tedious Ceremony of pulling off
our Gloves.


D. Ferd. It Is true, time is a precious thing and ought to be saved. Son-in-law
it becomes you. Exeunt Omnes.


Enter Betteris, Stephano. Bett. Retire to the Garret over that Chamber where I
must hide your Master, and there you must lie close.


Steph. I should lie closer if you were with me.


Bett. Certainly you men are very cold Creatures: you are always wishing for
something to keep you warm.


Steph. Ah Bettris, a Garret without a Chimney is a cold habitation. But if you
were near me --


Bett. I ^now but one Hoop in the world can bind us close together.


Steph. What do you mean?


Bett. A Wedding-Ring.


Steph. That Is a strong Hoop indeed, and will hold out long. I have no Land nor
House; and though there are many Houses in Town, yet those Tenants never get
much furniture who begin with a Cradle. I am not rich enough to marry.


Bett. That Is ill news, but I will tell you better.


Steph. I prithee do.


Bett. At night when the Masters are abed the Men shall have a Sack-Posset.


Steph. And shall they be very merry with the Maids?


Bett. Yes, unless the Men be in love, for then, alas, they will do nothing but
sigh.


Steph. What Lady is that whom your Mistress does conceal?


Bett. I know her not. Sancho does manage that design; her Maid is his
Sweetheart.


Steph. Shall she be with us?


Bett. He has invited her.

You wish my Company and inquire after her. None but a cold Bedfellow would
have two Warming-Pans.


Enter Sancho D. John, Laura. D. John. Signior Sancho, there is nothing more
Medc'nal against the Consumption of Love than a Sack-Posset. But shall I be at
it?


Sancho. You shall.


D. John. I am much obliged to you for the Invitation.


Sancho. You are.


D. John. I hope I may have leave to seal an acquaintance on this fair
Gentlewomans hand?


Sancho. You may. D. John salutes Laura.


Laura. You are pleased to make use of your authority.


Sancho. I am.


Laura. I Pray give me leave to salute Mistress Betteris.


Sancho. Do.


Steph. The favor ought to go round. I hope I shall not be a stranger to your
Mistress.


Sancho. No. Stephano salutes Laura.


D. John. Your authority extends so far as to make me likewise known to
Mistress Betteris.


Sancho. It does. D. John salutes Betteris.


Bett. Well, we shall be all happy when our Lords and Ladies are asleep. There
is nothing so sweet as Midnight and Sack-Posset. Is there Signior Sancho?


Sancho. Yes.


Bett. What can be sweeter in this bitter World?


Sancho. Buss and Posset.


Isabel within. Bettris.


Bett. My Lady calls me. Let every one hasten to their appointed stations.


Steph. The next time when our Masters go to bed early we must be contented to
sit up late.


Bett. Alas! we Servants are miserable. We must be fain to watch when they
sleep.


D. John. Pray let us meet cheerfully, and with short ceremonies.


Sancho. And long spoons. Exeunt all several ways but Don John.


D. John. I have more light to lead my jealousy.
And now must seek the man to whom Revenge
Is yet indebted for my Brother's Blood;
Then where my vain, imprudent Sister lives,
And where her perjured Friend. Well, it grows strong
In my belief that Isabella's Cousin
Is he whom I discerned in the Balcone;
Oh Isabell! be wise as thou art fair;
Turn not my love to dangerous despair.

ACT. III.
Enter Don Lewis, Stephano. D. Lewis. URge me no more; the lot is cast.


Steph. In troth Don John is much beholding to you. You have forsaken his
Sister, killed his Brother, and now pretend to his Wife.


D. Lewis. My hope relies on my perseverance, and on Betteris, and on thee; on
my Uncle, on Isabella, and on my self: I rely much too on the rudeness of Don
John's behavior, but most of all on the civility of my Goddess Fortune.


Enter Bettris. Bett. O, Sir, is it you?


Steph. None but a Maid, who loves to meet men in the dark would ask that
question with her eyes open.


Bett. You are still drawing the Fools weapon: I pray put up your Tongue. I
come not to you, but to your Master.


D. Lewis. Dear Bettris, tell me a little of the Son-in-law.


Bett. Would y^u have but a little when much may be spoken? He dined, and did
eat till his doublet grew so narrow that 'twas dangerous to sit near him; for
his buttons flew about like a volley of shot, and after dinner he retired to a
dirty Entry, where he slept on a Bench and snor'd in consort, like three fat
Carriers in one Bed. But I Will tell you what passed besides.


D. Lewis. My poor Bettris!


Bett. My poor D. Lewis!


D. Lewis. My fortune I expect from thee.


Bett. And I mine from you: but you have yet proceeded no further than promise:
yet that is sufficient to one who abhorres interest.


D. Lewis. I prithee ask my Man if I have not left my Gold under my Bolster;
and whether I am not to morrow to receive four hundred Ducats?


Bett. Well, well! he^r me in few words. Don Ferdinand your Uncle has chaff'd
himself into a Fevor: he would fain be disengaged. Your dear Isabella is more
vexed than he. Now is the time or never: you must endeavor to see her, and give
her as many promises as those m^ke who intend to keep none. Write her Poetical
Letters, and be sure not to leave out her Lillies nor her Roses: you must weep,
sigh, and pull off your Periwig, that you may tear your own hair: tell her
you will cut your own throat, or at least that you know an easy way to hang your
self.


D. Lewis. Concerning that, Betteris, you may safely pass your word for me.


Bett. If the insolence of passion will not prevail you must resume your
modesty, whine civily, and only wish your self dead; and be not amazed when she
grows impatient. What, you smile at this good counsel?


D. Lewis. No, but it seems a little new.


Bett. The p^actice of it is as ancient as the Love-Tricks in Troy. But I have
stayed too long. Beshrew my heart for my kindness to you. Go, Sir, steal
through the Garden door. Farewell, Sir, and I pray give your Man leave to shift
your Trenchers before they are empty. He looks leaner than Lent.


Steph. Farewell false money.


Bett. Remember that I clipped your beard by Moonshine with the Gardeners great
Sheers when you lay a sleep like a dead Perdu in the Arbor. O, you are a proper
Watchman to attend Lovers.


Steph. My Beard Mistress Marmalad.


Bett. Yes, when my Ladies little Dog smelt you out, by the broken meat in your
Pocket.


Steph. Well, I Will marry thee for a Month, that I may get authority to swadle
thee for having no Portion.. Exeunt.


Enter Ferdinand, Isabella. Ferd. I Will rather die of naked poverty than break
my word.


Isab. Dear Father!


Ferd. You are a Fool, and all that you can hope, is that I may deferr your
Marriage a few days. But was ever any business so encumbered? My Son-in law is
offended, and my Nephew being the cause of it, I ought to be so too. Shall I
abandon one and join with the other? I owe my self to one by blood, and to the
other by honor.


Isab. It seems, Sir, 'twas Don Lewis that killed his Brother.


Ferd. Yes, and to increase the perplexity, the Sister of Don John implores me
against him: how can I, in honor, refuse to assist her? and to day my Nephew
tells me, he has need of my advice against a man whom he has doubly offended,
and that man must be my Son-in-law. Head hold out one day, and split not during
this storm of business. Farewell, I Will go taste my Son-in-Law. Exit.


Isab. And I Will go weep. O Heaven! to what a Brute am I condemned? Was not my
aversion a sufficient torment without giving me a new affliction by another
passion? Was It not enough to be unhappy by the address of the Master, but I
must love his Man? Ah, my stars hate me too much, when they make me love one
whom I dare not name to my own ear. Must I adore him who never can be mine, and
at the same time abhor the Person for whom I am decreed? A third Evil is
joined to the other two. Don Lewis, whom I hate, loves me. At once I hate, and
fear, and am in love. O who can deliver me from this entangled destiny?


Enter Don Lewis. D. Lewis. It Is I, O charming Isabella! that will deliver you,
and disingage you from Don John: for since Don Lewis, whom you have despised,
is now admitted to your favor, your breath contains my Rivals destiny.
Proscribe him with one word, and, with this sword I am his Executioner.


Isab. Oh Heavens! dare you propose a mischief of this bloody shape? Be gone,
unhappy Wretch: thou art unworthy of that pity, which, to the injury of
Justice, thy name and blood being mine, makes me afford thee. How can thou
love me if thou think me capable even but to hear thy black design? Fly, fly
to Burgos with thy perfidiousness, and there go act thy Tragedies. Go and
deceive the Sister of the Brother thou have slain.


D. Lewis. Hah! if ever --


Isab. Peace, peace, thou blackest of ill-spirits, or I will fill the House
with exclamations.


Enter Bettris. Bett. Pray speak low; Don Ferdinand and the Son-in-law are upon
the stairs, they may hear you. How shall we shift Don Lewis away, for Don
John's man is in the next Chamber. I would he would show his extraordinary
discretion and good mien some where else.


Isab. What shall we do?


D. Lewis. If I durst appear --


Isab. Keep your expedients, for your own use; it is I that am concerned now.


D. Lewis. If his angry Man --


Isab. Hold, Sir, he seems not one whose anger may be tamed with threatening.
Bettris!


Bett. Madam, I tremble a^l over. What think you if I awhile conceal Don Lewis
in your Chamber?


Isab. Dispose of him any where, provided he be far from my sight.


Belt. Madam, be froward then a while; and raise your voice, and call me bold,
and impud^nt.


Isab. I understand you. Exeunt Don Lewis, Bettris. Isabella speaks loud.
You say Don John is not handsome.
What, he displeases you? you will mend his making, I like him as he is.
I would my Father heard you. You Are insolent, be gone!

Enter D. Ferdinand, Tod. and D. John. Ferd. We hear you Daughter. You are
angry.


Isab. It Is only for a trifle which my Maid has lost.


Tod. Humph. This will not pass; for, though I Am stuffed in the head, yet I can
blow my Nose as well as another to smell things out. No, no, I see I may make
love long enough before you smicker at me. You may even keep your Portion, I
shall find my Land in the old Place.


Isab. How, Sir, will you be gone?


Tod. When two or three have sufficiently forsworn themselves to you, then
you will tuck up your Petticoats and follow me to Alverad.


D. John. This dull Rogue, for fear he should not be unlucky enough to do me
mischief, makes it up with inundations of folly.


Ferd. Son-in-law, methinks your behavior is a little out of fashion, and, in
plain terms, you want wisdom.


Tod. Father-in-law, this is but a trick of mine to try her love. I Will sound
her heart though it lies as deep as her belly.


Ferd. Nay they are pollitick in your Province. But if my Daughter be
thoroughly angered --


Tod. These are a kind of witty f^umps of mine like selling of Bargains; I Will
come off well enough. Let Us walk into the Gallery.


D. Ferd. For fear this extraordinary Brute should find out his Sister, I Will
leave him in the hands of his Mistress. Stay here a while, Sir, with my
Daughter^. I must part from you one moment upon a pressing occasion. Exit. D.
Ferd.


Tod. My dainty Dears your Father being gone, and here being none but Friends
left, you may swear to me in private how much you love me. I Will say nothing to
any body. I can keep decrets; for when I Am asked what a clock it is, I never tell
for fear men should take me for a blab.


Isab. Sir, I Will deal f^eely with you. I was never in love till to day: I had
formerly an aversion to it, disdain was all my passion. Believe me, Sir, the
flame of love is only known to me since your arrival. But since my love can
meet none equal to it, should it rejoice when it incounters yours? No, Sir, to
the contrary; I Am in extreme pain to see you love me, and that I must likewise
love.


Tod. Humph! if I had not a great deal of wit^ I should hardly understand you.


Isab. Your passion equals not the price of mine,
Though what is with you, and to you belongs.
Is e'n all that which I do most adore,
Yet in you is all that which I abhor.

Tod. Hah! what belongs to me, and is with me, you adore, and what is in me,
you abhor. Lady to such dark sayings as these, the ancient Philosophers of
Alverad make answer in a subtle question; which is, Ridle my Ridle what is this?


Isab. Sir, I must justify my meaning to you,
You doubt my flame, but, Sir, I say again
I love that which is yours, and love it much.
In seeing it I altogether see
The object of my love, and then I burn and tremble,
Burn with desire, and tremble with my fear.
Y^u cause at once my joy and sorrow too,
What evil can there be more strange and rare?
Which when I hide I then almost declare.
If I, to ease my pain, my mind reveal
I danger bring to that which I would heal.

D. John. She has wit prevailing as her beauty, but it is mystical.


Tod. If men swear they are bewitched when they are in love, then I, being in
love, may say you are a Witch, especial^y because you speak things as hard to
be understood as Charms.


D. John O Love, why art thou born with the disease of jealousy. All curses
meet upon Don Lewis.


Tod. You, my Serving man, come nearer and make love for me, and afterward
we'll do it by turns.


D. John. But Sir --


Tod. How Coxcomb! perhaps you would give me counsel. Am not I your Master?
does any man know so much as you the love I bear her, and who then can better
tell her of it? That Is fine in faith; belike I want understanding to direct
what is fit to be done.


D. John. Madam, I must obey since I am commanded.


Tod. The Fellow is afraid! Madam, he wants a little breeding, yet I have been
a Pattern to him above seven years.


Isab. Sure he has been an ill observer then.


Tod. Sirrah, I say advance! and court her handsomely, whilst I go to the Gate,
and consult with the Porter how to scatter a little Gold amongst the Servants
to show my bounty and make Friends.


Isab. How shall I then get Don Lewis out: curse on this Fool. Sir you must
needs stay: for if The Original be gone you will have an ill account of the Copy:
it is a hard thing to draw Love well.


Tod. If she should be now really in love with me, D. John courts her in
whispers. then I were in a fine case. My Master wants no Cudgels; and I should
be the most beaten Bridegroom that ever meddled with more than his match. Let me
consider. Hah, Master Valet de Chamber. Have I put you there to do nothing. You
talk in her ear, Sirrah, either speak out, or keep farther off.


D. John. Sir, I Am ashamed to speak loud, your Worship will but laugh at me.


Tod. No doubt of that. But I Have a mind to laugh, for to say truth
I am afraid of sighing. She Is damnable handsome! aside.
D. John to Isabel aside. When Love's afraid, do not that fear despise;
Flame trembles most when it does highest rise;
And yet my love may justly be disdained,
Since you believe it from a Lover feigned.
I am not here that which I ought to be,
I serve, yet from all bonds but yours am free.
Though Player-like I feign my Masters part,
Yet real jealousy affl^cts my heart.
For whilst his feigned Rival I appear,
I then another real Rival fear.

Isab. This language has more mystery than mine.


Tod. A real Rival. That Is I, or Don Lewis. A pox o'these intoxicating Riddles;
can any man stand still when charms make his head turn round? I Will hear no more
of 'em. Avaunt Todelet! thou art a foolish Conjurer! Presto, be gone!


D. John. Is your Worship in earnest?


Tod. I Have a thought in my head worth the weight of it in gold. Hah! now I have
lost it. Sweet Nosegay of my Nose, when I remember you I always forget my
self: or else it is that Baggage, Bettris, which transports me; for, to say
truth, she runs in my mind too. My Serving-man be gone.


D. John. I must obey you Sir.


Tod. Youl'd fain stay to sing loath to depart. Why when I say! --
D. John goes and stands close at the door. I will be left alone with my
Mistress.

Isab. How, Sir, alone? What will the Servants say?


Tod. what can they say when I think fit to be private?


Isab. I Am sure Bettris will take notice of it.


Tod. That Is true, for Bettris likes me so well, that if she see us making love
it may cost her half her life. But that is all one, I love you only.


Isab. Yes and Bettris also.


Tod. Faith Lady I am free of making my best parts known. What, I have made you
jealous of me? That Is another of my Politic Love-tricks. I Am grown so subtle
that the Devil will be afraid of me But let him shun me then: for take one time
with another, he does me more hurt than good.


Isab. But, Sir, what mean you? why must we be alone?


Tod. to show my confidence: for let 'em say what they will, I dare trust my
self with you. I have not seen the Balconee yet. Let Us go take the Air.


Isab. There is no wind stirring.


D. John. What new fi^k of folly has entered into the Rascals head? I must
observe him.


Tod. Come along sweet heart.


Isab. You shall excuse me, Sir. I Will not stir from hence.


Tod. How, not stir? my Dear, you must know I Am very chollerick --


Isab. What drawn by force? you are insolent.


He offers to reach her hand. Tod. My Duck you are squeamish. Lord, what
difference there is in People? you see I am not so --


Isab. Rude wretch forbear! were not for that patience which is ordained me by
my Father, I Would tear your eyes out with these hands.


Tod. With those hands? you would please me more, if you would let me kiss 'em.


Isab. Sir, you are mad, and would make me so too. Is this the brutish
Courtship of your Province? Exit.


D. John. O Villain! you would presume to kiss her hand.


D. John surprises him. Tod. It Is a strange thing! to see how men may be
mistaken.
'Twas she, Sir, would presume to kiss mine.

D. John. Slave! you are in jest then, and you think I Am so too.
I Will make you repent your impudence -- D. John strikes him.

Tod. Sir, why Master, Pray Sir?


D. John. Pattern of Rogues! thou Gallows climber!


D. John kicks him. Tod. Nay pray, Sir, do not punish behind; all that I said
to her, was face to face.


Enter Isabella. Isab. It Is anger, and grows loud. Pray heaven they have not
found the mischievous Don Lewis.


D. John. Dog! you may be glad that my respect to her presence stops my fury.


Tod. Now she is here, If I should strike him he dares not discover himself.
Todelet assaults D. Jo^n.

Ill teach you to speak ill of Isabella. Is she but reasonable handsome? Hah!
--


Isab. Ah do not strike him Sir. Be not cruel to your Servant.


Tod. speaks low and fast to Don John. Tod. Sir, I must counterfeit your person
to the life, you use to kick too. I have a great mind to give you a t^ste of my
foot, that I may resemble you thoroughly.


D. John. Be less in earnest when you counterfeit, or I Will cut your throat.


Isab. Rude man! what has he done to you?


Tod. These are chollerick heats which pass away, Lady. If I should kick him I
could not hurt him; he is all oak behind, mere Wanscote-board. We who have
tender toes are ill provided for tough Bumms. D. John speaks softly to him again.


D. John. Sirrah! were not she here --


Tod. He sits too much on bare Benches and Joynt-stools. I must buy Cushions
for him to make him softer.


Isab. But how has he deserved this usage?


Tod. He said your beauty could not kill a man a mile off.


Isab. Was that all, Sir? If he hates me, alas! he knows not yet he is
ungrateful.


D. John. I can no longer defer it. I must discover my self --


Tod. Sirrah, begone. Expect nothing from me but a Cudgel to measure your bones.
Lady, may I not strip him naked, and keep his clothes now I turn him away?


Isab. O no, Sir, If I have any credit with you, turn him not away.


D. John aside. Did ever Rogue use his Master thus, or Master so foolishly
trust the discretion of his Man?


Tod. My Lilly white Lamb! you are too merciful. I cannot stay near you upon
such cowardly terms. I Will into the Garden a while. We men of metal use to
walk a turn to cool our courage. Exit.


Isab. aside. I blush, and know not what to say. Is love
A crime when it usurps a Monarchs power
In giving dignity to that which it esteems?
You were ever while another person and to Don John.
Did represent Don John; and then I spoke
Some words which you might misinterpret to
Be Love. But, you are now poor Todelet,
And ought to alter your opinion of
My passion since your person's changed.

D. John. Madam, if I had reason to believe
That you esteemed Don John, I should grow weary of
My being as I am, and represent again
The person that I was.

Isab. Sure you esteem him much, since you can take
Such pleasure in assuming of his Love.

D. John. Next my desire of Heaven I wish Don John.
Made happy by your love with Hymen's rites.

Isab. I Will leave you till you learn to ask of heaven.
A better destiny for me, that so I may
Be taught to make an equal wish for you.

D. John. Her love does still grow darker, yet I see,
By too much light my cause of Jealousy. Exit.

Enter Bettris. Bett. Don John, your Country-Lover, is gone into the Town to
learn civility. He needs not stay long, for he may be taught it in the street
by every Mule he meets.


Isab. Did you see him go out?


Bett. Madam, he is not found about the House; and I may now release Don Lewis
from his confinement.


Isab. Be sure you do it presently; and then make haste to find me in the
Garden. Exit.


Bett. I saw just now the weeping Lady. She Is unluckily broke loose too. I
would we were well rid of these foolish Lovers. Sure common understanding has
left the World. Young people cannot meet privately but they must needs fall in
love. Exit.


Enter Lucilla veiled. Lucill. It Is strange Don Ferdinand should use me thus.
Is this protection when he strait abandons me? He told me, he would return in a
moment; and then (as if grown weary of civility, and of lending me his Chamber
for shelter) he went perhaps to divert himself in the Town. I heard just now a
noise like the confusion of a quarrel. This is an ill sign of my secure
retreat. I must proceed in order to my safety; and yet I ought t'advertise them
before I go. Sure this is Isabella's Chamber; the Door is open; I Will in, and
take my leave of her. Enter D. Lewis

Hah! I discern a man, and I cannot avoid him.


D. Lewis. I hope my friend Bettris (whom I have bound to me with the strings
of my Purse) does mean to make this Chamber my Lodging. O dear Isabella!
whither would you run so fast?

He spies Lucilla veiled. How, will you not vouchsafe to hear me? Alas! allow
me but one word. You have reproacht my love as ctiminal; thinking some other
Beauty has possessed my heart. Have I not sworn, that she who does pretend to it
had but the promises of my pity? and since I saw her at Burgos, I never did
retain her in my thought?


Lucill. O Heavens! I have not patience to hear more. She opens her Vail. False
man! behold her now: For I am she who too much has loved thee, and whom thou
never lov'dst. She, whose fatal and unexperienced heart too soon believed thy
many Oaths. She, who does hate thee now, and will proclaim thy perjuries. She,
whom thou call'dst thy Soul and Queen, is now without a Brother, without her
honor, and is less provided for than Birds blown off to Sea by Tempests.


D. Lewis. Hear me but speak!


Lucill. No Traitor, no. Thy former perjuries have stopped my ears so much that I
can hear no more. Help ho! help!


D. Lewis. Ah, Madam, give me then leave to swear, and you shall soon be
satisfied.


Lucill. Soul without faith! Can thou again expect belief? Help ho! help!


Enter Don John. D. John. This grief is loud, and it is a woman's voice.


Lucill. O Heavens! whom do I see?


D. John. Hah! Is not that my Sister?


Lucilla aside. I call for help, and Heaven has sent destruction in a Brother.


D. John aside. My eyes cannot mistake. She is my Sister;
And the other is the object of my jealousy.
I have enough of anger for 'em both.

D. Lewis. He carries mischief in his Eyes, but seems
In doubt, on which of us he should direct it first.

D. John aside. I am too certain of my Sisters crime,
But have not such sufficient proofs as may
Allow my jealousy just leave to be
Revenged on him; I Will then begin with her. O thou
Unhappy, wicked woman! --

Lucill. If I am wicked think me then
More fit to have some time for prayer.

D. Lewis. Hold! hold! I Will undertake her quarrel,
Though with that voice which brought thee hither she
Was calling for revenge on me. But tell
Me by what title thou pretend'st to have
Authority to punish her?

D. John. I ought to do it.


D. Lewis. That Is insolence. A^t thou not a Servant?
D. John's my Master, and his honor's mine.

Lucilla aside. My ruin was prepared by some design.
Else wherefore should my Brother hide himself
In this disguise?

D. Lewis. Shall I endure to be affronted twice by him
Who serves my equal? -- Lucilla endeavors to go out.

D. John. Hah! Are you going? stay! who brought you to
This House? and wherefore did you call for help?

Lucilla. You shall know all. I entered in this Chamber to see Isabella, where
I found this man; but cannot tell for what intent he there did hide himself. I
then cried out at the surprise, and tremble still --


D. John. Enough! My jealousy is apt to credit his offense.
I Will shut the Door -- Goes backward and shuts the Door.

Lucilla. My fear will kill me to prevent your cruelty.


D. John. Don Lewis I shall give you cause to show your valor --


D. Lewis. I think it honored when it is used in her defense, but it deserves a
nobler trial than your hand can make --


Lucill. Oh fatal hour! how many deaths shall I endure?
My perjured Lover is yet kind when he
Does strive to rescue me. a noise of knocking within.

D. Lewis. The People of the House will force the Door.


D. John. No matter, Sir. Let us dispatch --


D. Ferd. within. Let Us force our passage, and break thorough.


Lucilla. I Am counseled both by fear and love to open it.


D. John speaks low to Lucilla. Stir not to let them in; for if by thee I am
discovered --


Enter Don Ferdinand and Isabella. Lucilla. Ah! Don Ferdinand! call all your
Servants to your aid.


D. Ferd. Proceed not in your fury, for by death
I swear, that he who does not sheath his sword,
Ingages me against him. Oh what strange
Unlucky wonders meet to day t'amaze
And ruin me? Nephew, who put you here?
Ah! Lucilla, who discovered you? And you, speaks to D. John.
What Devil urges you? who since you came into
My House have spent no minute but in quarrels.

D. Lewis. Hear me, and you shall strait know all.


D. John. No, let me speak! for I can better tell
It, Sir, than he. But I must first demand
If Lucilla did not in your House conceal her self?
And likewise if Don Lewis be not your near Kinsman?

D. Ferd. The one and the other too is true.


D. John. And is it not reason that a Servant, Sir,
Should own an interest in his Masters honor?

D. Ferd. That cannot be denied.


D. John. Then, Sir, observe if I am wronged.
I entered here, urged by Lucilla's cries.
She found (as I believe, by accident)
Don Lewis in this Chamber where your Daughter lodges.
I in Lucilla saw the signs of a surprise.
It Is evident to reason that he was hidden here all day;
For I have so observed all passage to the street
That it was hard for him to escape my Eyes.

D. Lewis aside. This reasoning does appear too much refined,
For one of his course quality.

D. John. My Master (who is to marry Isabella,
And is Brother to Lucilla) must be offended
For his Mistress or his Sister: and it
Is likely he is wronged in both. My duty
Therefore is to finish my Revenge upon Don Lewis:

D. Lewis. You are a man of rare dispatch, who are
So sure to finish that which is not yet begun. --

D. Ferd. Don Lewis, stay! Art thou mad? Stay Todelet! I prithee hold! This is
the most perplexed encounter that I ever saw.


Isab. He certainly is jealous for his Master.
Ah Todelet! let me entreat you to retire.

D. John. Madam, for your sake I will prescribe the means how To defer this
quarrel; which is, that each engage his promise to me. You, Don Ferdinand, to
render Lucilla in her Brothers power when he requires it. And you, Don Lewis,
to make a trial of your valor with Don John when he invites you to the Field.


D. Lewis. I cannot without some torment, make promises of honor to one of thy
low condition.


D. John. Don John, Sir, is no more a man than I am.
But if he fails to call you suddenly
T'accompt, then you shall know whether I Am now,
Or may be made hereafter, fit to entertain your sword.

D. Ferd. Enough we promise that which you desire
Nay, Nephew, you are wont to yield to my Authority.

D. Lewis. Well, Sir; your pleasure is my Law; and here I give my promise.


D. John. And I mine, that Don John shall justify this quarrel.


D. Lewis. Nothing does then remain but that I seek
Your Master out to morrow.

D. John. Your journey, Sir, will not be far to find him.


D. Ferd. I Will be the foremost in the search.


D. John. You Will give me leave to follow you.


D. Ferd. That will be needful, and without delay.


Isab. This man is brave and loyal where he serves.
All is perplexed. O Love lend me thy Clue
To lead me safe through this dark Labyrinth.

Lucilla. Don Lewis now, does, after cruelty,
Show some remorse in my defense; and I
Am apt to think him penitent. But death
Will soon a period give to Love and Fear.

D. Ferd. To morrow early is the appointed time to seek D. John.
Night now has drawn her Curtains close. Let me
Conduct you to your several Beds, where sleep
May quench that fire which makes your anger rash.

D. John. My precious rogue stole out to shun a quarrel.
His fear does ever make him sick, and I
Shall find him drunk, for that is his constant cure. Exeunt.

Enter Stephano, Sancho. A Table spread with Linen, Trenchers and Spoons are
set out, and five Chairs. Steph. This Room standing in the Garden, at distance
from the House, seems built for our purpose. Our happy hour is near. Dear
Signior Sancho, shall we be merry?


Sancho. As Maids?


Steph. Is there any Creature, except Man, that has the wit to be merry at
Midnight?


Sancho. The Owl.


Steph. You Are in the right. But what shall we have to make us rejoice besides a
Sack-Posset?


Sancho. Fiddles.


Steph. Your words are seldom many, but always pithy. Hark! there is
something stirring behind the Hanging.


Sancho. A Rat.


Steph. If it be a Rat, then it has shoes on, for it treads hard, I rather
fear it is the old Rat catcher your Master, that has caught us here in a Trap.
Who Is there?


Tod within speaks low. A Friend.


Steph. It Is a Man's voice, but he speaks so low, that he seems more afraid than
we are. Who is it?


Tod. within. It Is I.


Steph. That were some answer to the question, if we knew him that made it.


Tod. within. Who are you?


Steph. To testify that our being here is not for any harm you may know that
we --


Sancho. Are we.


Steph. Well said Signior Sancho; that is a valuable return of intelligence from
us for what he gave of himself.


Tod. Nay, if you name Signior Sancho. Enter Todelet.
Don John may appear.

Steph. aside to Sancho. Our sport is prevented. We may e'n hang up our Fiddles
and our selves by 'em. Who sent him hither?


Sancho. The Devil.


Steph. Pray, Sir, what occasion brought you behind the Hanging?


Tod. I was led thither by Conscience.


Steph. Conscience is a good Guide, Sir.


Tod. Don Ferdinands house is so full of quarrels as makes it very wearisome to
one that has been already too much tired in the Field with wicked
entertainments of honor.


Steph. Sir, you show both your valor and your reason.


Tod. My Man Todelet is honest: but the Cuttlers of Toledo are not able to make
swords enough to furnish his Duels.


Steph. Say you so, Sir?


Tod. If the old Roarer, Satan, were young again, my Man were fit to serve him.


Steph. aside to Sancho. The Man of blood which he mentions is your Guest to
night, Signior Sancho, but not fit to be treated with a tame Sack-Posset. What
shall we provide for him?


Sancho. Raw Puddings.


Tod. Friends, to deal entirely with you, I stole hither to hide my self partly
out of Conscience, but more out of discretion: for it is not fit a Gentleman of
my Possessions, and near marriage, should upon every peevish humor of his
Servant venture his Estate and Body --


Sancho. Politic.


Steph. But, Sir, Your Man is coming hither. We expect him in a moment.


Tod. I Will not see him till his foolish quarrels are ended.


Steph. Then, Sir, you must please to retire again behind the Hanging.


Tod. Agreed. My Friends, no words where I am.


Steph. Fie, no, Sir. But we shall stay here long. I hope you can have patience.


Tod. Lord Friends, you do not yet understand my disposition, for it is my
patience which makes me steal from quarrels.


Steph. You must be as little heard as seen. I hope you are not troubled with a
Cold, nor apt to fall asleep?


Tod. What mean you?


Steph. Why, Sir, I would not have you cough.


Sancho. Nor snore.


Tod. Friends, I say again you know me not thoroughly. Tell not me of snoring: I
dare snore with any man in Spain, and (hap what hap may) I Will venture again
behind the Hanging to hide my self.


Steph. Nay, Sir, we know you are valiant.


Sancho. And wise. Exit Todelet.


Enter Betteris, Laura. Bett. Sancho, our entertainment is provided, are your
stomachs ready?


Sancho. They are.


Laura. Then help to bring it to the Table. Enter Don John.


Sancho. In state. Exit and brings in a great Basin with a Posset.


Bett. Signior Todelet you make good your promise, for yo^ come in the very
nick.


Sancho. In Posset time.


Enter two young Women who assist in the Dance. D. John. Who are these?


Bett. Two young married Neighbors that longed for Sack-Posset.


D. John. Are your Ladies asleep!


Bett. They went to bed as early as Brides, and I hope will lie as long as
Bridegrooms.


D. John. Then the Maids may be as merry as the Men.


Steph. And encounter a whole Pail of Posset.


Enter Todelet. Tod. I Will meet as many quarrels as there be Drunkards in
Dutchland rather than miss a Sack-Posset.


D. John. Ha! how comes he here?


Bett. Beshrew your heart Signior Don John for starting forth so suddenly. It Is
well we we^e all awake.


Laura. If we had not been used to meet men in the dark it might have frighted
us.


Tod. Ladies, without sans ceremony, I Will sit down first.


Sancho. And I.


D. John whispers Todelet. Villain be gone to my Chamber; you will still discover
your course breeding.


Tod. Prithee forbear thy good manners to thy Master, sit down, sit down; I say
sit down. There are seasons when Masters may be familiar with their Men.


D. John whispers Todelet. Sirrah, I Will cut your throat.


Tod. whispers D John. I had rather you should cut my throat than cosen my
belly.


D. John. Villain, have thou the impudence to stay?


Tod. Lord what ado here is with civilities out of season: once more I charge
thee to sit down, and I give thee leave to be familiar.


D. John. Rogue! to morrow will come.


Todelet. Still over-mannerly! Ladies pray take your spoons. This Coxcomb my
Man is so troublesome with his untimely respects.


D. John. You will not stir then?


Tod. Prithee put thy hat on. Ladies, when I am at home and a little in drink,
I often sit with my servants.


D. John. Ladies and Gentlemen, having my Masters leave I will presume on yours.


Sancho. You may.


Tod. I suppose the Posset is very hot, but Coragio is the word. It Is but the
spoiling of a few good teeth. I Will venture at it.


Sancho. And I.


Tod. Hold, I will first taste -- It Is as hot as if they had strewn it with
parcht Pepper instead of Cinnamon. He sputters as if his mouth were burnt.


Sancho. Stay! stay!


Bett. Why Signior Sancho?


Sancho. Stir it -- They all stir and then eat together.


Tod. Ladies you eat too fast.


D. John rises and whispers Todelet again. D. John. Dog! Show more civility,
and do not disgrace the person whom you counterfeit.


Tod. I tell thee 'twill not make me sick. I have been used to abundance of
Posset. This good natured Fool takes such care of my health.


Bett. Signior Todelet pray sit down again and take care of your own health;
Possets are very wholesome.


Laura. Pray do, Sir, The Cinnamon is good against wind.


Steph. Mistress Bettris, here is to your good health, and to yours Mistress
Laura.


Sancho. To both. Sancho slabbers his Beard.


Tod Signior Sancho, that sponge your Beard, soaks up too much of the Posset.


Sancho. It does.


Tod. I only civily suppose it does.


Sancho. All stay --


He takes a huge knife out of his Pocket, scrapes the Posset off from his Beard
and then eats it. Tod. Who will pledge the Founders health?


D. John. Let it come. I am your Man.


Tod. You are so; but a very saucy one: you use to talk and give counsel over
your liquor.


D. John. Your Noble Worship may say your pleasure. I know you love men that
ply their Posset.


Tod. I am for men of few words. Let such a one answer to Masaquedit. Here Is
the Founders health.


Sancho. Tope.


D. John. Signior Sancho, you made a promise of Fiddles. I pray forbear your
spoon while that you may call for 'em.


Sancho I shall.


Laura. Servant I pray do.


Tod. Signior Sancho, let us have fair play. Did you invite your Beard to half
the Posset?


Sancho. Few words are best.


Steph. In what sense Signior Sancho?


Sancho. In Posset.


D. John. Come, Sir, dispatch; for brevity is as convenient in Posset as it is
in Speech. I Will give you a Song if you will call for Music.


Sancho. Firk your Fidles.


The SONG in Recitativo and in Parts.
D. John. THe Bread is all baked,
The Embers are raked;
It Is Midnight now by Chanticlears first crowing.
Let Us kindly carouse
Whilst 'top of the House
The Cats fall out in the heat of their wooing.
Time, whilst the Hourglass does run out,
This flowing Glass shall go about.
Stay, stay, the Nurse is waked, the Child does cry,
No Song so ancient is as Lulla-by.
The Cradle's rockt, the Child is hushed again,
Then hey for the Maids, and ho for the Men.
Now every one advance his Glass;
Then all at once together clash,
Experienced Lovers know
This clashing does but show,
That as in Music so in Love must be
Some discord to make up a harmony.
Sing; sing! When Crickets sing why should not we?
The Crickets were merry before us;
They sung us thanks ever we made them a fire.
They taught us to sing in a Chorus:
The Chimney is their Church, the Ov'n their Quier.
Once more the Cock cries Cock-a-doodle-dooe.
The Owl cries o'r the Barn, to-whit-to-whooe!
Benighted Travelers now lose their way
Whom Will-of-the-wisp bewitches:
About and about he leads them astray
Through Boggs, through Hedges and Ditches.
Hark! hark! the Cloister Bell is rung!
Alas! the Midnight Dirge is sung.
Let 'em ring,
Let 'em sing,
Whilst we spend the Night in love and in laughter.
When Night is gone
O then too soon.
The discords, and cares of the Day come after.
Come Boys! a health, a health, a double health
To those who escape from care by shunning wealth.
Dispatch it away
Before it be day.
'Twill quickly grow early when it is late:
A health to thee,
To him, to me,
To all who Beauty love and Business hate.

Tod. Well, my Man were an incomparable Varlet if he would forbear to give me
counsel in whispers. Todelet.


D. John. Sir.


Tod. Lead 'em a Dance. I Will have a Dance.


D. John. My feet are at your service, Sir.


Whispers Todelet. As you shall feel to morrow by a score of kicks which I
reserve for you.


Tod. Hark, he is giving me counsel again. I say lead 'em a Dance.


The DANCE. Which being ended a Bell rings within. Bett. My Ladies little Dog
has waked her. Alas! now the sweet of the Night is coming we must all part.


D. John. whispers Tod. Sirrah, follow me to my Chamber.


Exeunt all several ways but Todelet. Tod. Not to night good Signior Don John.
I Will sooner follow a D^um that beats for Volunteers to the North of Norway.
The back door of the Garden is only bolted within. I Will steal forth, and to
morrow when sleep has made him tamer I Will return.
I Will rather feed with Fiends on Brimstone-Broth
Than eat Sack Posset with a man of wrath. Exit.

ACT. IIII.
Enter Laura, Stephano. Laura. YOu are very inquisitive.


Steph. And you are very secret.


Laura. Do you intend me that as commendation?


Steph. Yes, and yet I do not thank you for it.


Laura. You may take your praise back again, for I will not be commended for
keeping that secret which I do not know.


Steph. Can you be ignorant of the Lady whom you serve?


Laura. I told you I had not served her above three days. But still you are
inquisitive and why I pray?


Steph. The endeavor of knowing things shows diligence of the Mind, and you
should praise me for it.


Laura. Those may praise Spies who employ 'em.


Steph. You take me then for a Spy?


Laura. So impertinent a Spy that I wonder you do not walk with a dark Lanthorn
when the Sun shines.


Steph. What to seek chaste women as Diogenes sought honest men. Come, I
confess you have wit.


Laura. I thank you, Sir.


Steph. I would you would thank me for being in love with your beauty.


Laura. Love! Is that Fooles-Bauble in fashion still?


Steph. It Is the only fashion which never changes.


Laura. Mistress Bettris will hardly believe you.


Steph. No, she believes in nothing but Marriage.


Latra. O, cry you mercy, for indeed Marriage is grown as dangerous as love is
foolish.


Enter Sancho. Steph. I Will retire to make that Coxcomb j^alous. Exit Steph.


Sancho. How! hah!


Laura. O Signior Sancho, it is well you are come.


Sancho. Too well.


Laura. Your Friend Stephano would fain be your Rival, but you are the man for
whom I mean to sigh.


Sancho. Yes, much!


Laura. I Will lay my life you are jealous.


Sancho. Who, I?


Laura. Pray come from behind your Beard and show your bare face if you are
angry.


Sancho. I am.


Laura. If you are, I can endure it.


Sancho. You can?


Laura. Yes.


Sanc. Who cares?


Laura. You do.


Sancho. Not this -- Makes a sign of disdain with his thumb at his teeth.


Laura. It Is well.


Sancho. It Is ill.


Laura. It Is not.


Sancho. You ly.


Laura. Hey day!


Sancho. Hey too!


Laura. Farewell. --


Sancho. Go. -- Exit Sancho,


Enter Stephano, Bettris. Steph. How now Mistress Laura?


Laura, This Steward, though he be exceeding dull, is very sharp at reparties.


Bett. Why, what has he said?


Laura. He gave me the ly.


Steph. It Is impossible.


Lau. If he did not I Am an E'vnuch.


Steph. None but a E'vnuch would have don't.


Laura. Don Ferdinand has been gallant in his youth: he shall repair my honor.

I Will tell him how often this Tarquin-Steward would have kissed me by force.


Steph. Kiss you! fie, that is a paw-word.


Bett. No, no, he is a cleanly man, and would only have brusht your lips with
his Beard.


Laura. May be so, for they grow somewhat dusty for want of use.


Bett. Don Ferdinand shall not wake his sleeping sword in this quarrel; t^ust
me for your revenge.


Laura. Why, what will you do?


Bett. I Will render Sancho up to your correction, and he shall be then as blind
as Cupid.


Steph. But how?


Bett. He shall feel our persecution and not see it.


Laura. You have some design, but it is very dark.


Bett. You know the Ladies and our Masters are lately much retired with
thoughtfull intanglements of love and anger: which will give me opportunity to
invite solemn Sancho this Evening to our Room of Revels in the Garden.


Laura. Well, what then?


Bett. You likewise know, he passionately loves a Sack-Posset.


Steph. Most longingly.


Bett. Then you apprehend my Bait; but instead of that for his entertainment
he shall entertain us with sport sufficiently ridiculous, though it be more out
of fashion than himself or a Morris.


Laura. I long to see it but --


Bett. No more questions. Let Us presently go in and consult.


Exeunt. Enter Isabella, Lucilla. Isabella. You must not think of your escape
from hence.


Lucilla. Whilst you are civil you are cruel too.
Fair Isabella, let me take my leave.

Isab. My Father is not easily deceived;
Whilst you attempt it you deceive your self.
Your reconcilement with your Brother may
Seem difficult at first, but if you doubt
My Fathers skill to govern him, you must
Depend on Heaven, and then you must have faith;
Which out of Temples we call Courage.

Lucilla. Nothing but death can quench my Brothers wrath,
Pray free your self from the unfortunate;
These Tears agree not with your Nuptial joys;
And let me tell you (what you soon will find)
Don John is nothing less than what he seems.

Isab. I saw him in the Garden but just now, and my Maid
Walking toward him. Go hide your self.
Pass through the Gall'ry up the Tartas-stairs into my Closet, where
I will meet you strait. I will awhile conceal my self in some close
Arbor to observe him and Bettris together. Exeunt.

Enter Don Lewis, Stephano. D. Lewis. Some heavenly power contrives these
accidents; they have a secret Method in them, and more than Fortune makes me
still unhappy.


Steph. I am amazed that you by chance should court her whom you forsook, and
meet the Mistress here from whom you fled so many Miles.


D. Lewis. Have thou discourst with her Maid?


Steph. Yes, but she is newly come into her service, and is either a stranger
to her Ladies designs, or else so secret that no man but a Husband can see her
bosom bare.


D. Lewis. Heaven takes Lucilla's part against me, for I have done her wrong.


Steph. O, have you so? you Lovers are very diligent Spies and bold, but very
incredulous; you always are scouting abroad, yet never see or believe mischief
till you feel it.


D. Lewis. I think she loves me and with true passion.


Steph. But you love another, and that is a rare remedy for her disease.


D. Lewis. I am perplexed beyond the help of reason. I know there are Laws
against irregular Love, but Nature never made 'em. I would thou were valiant.


Steph. So would not I. I Am content to have no holes in my skin rather than pay
a Surgeon to sow 'em up.


D. Lewis. Well, however I would thou had courage.


Steph. Then I should be an Ass in spite of my understanding, and fight for
Fame, the Fools Mistress.


D. Lewis. Don John's man is saucily insolent, and his condition is below the
revenge of my sword; but if thou had courage to undertake him --


Steph. Sir, I never questioned my own courage, and I wish no man may, for I,
and others too may be mistaken.


D. Lewis. I am going now where I shall meet D. Ferdinand, who will bring me an
account of Don John.


Steph. Sir, I told you my infirmity when you first received me under your
Roof. I Will serve you faithfully, but I must obey the King, who does enjoin
peace amongst his Subjects.


D. Lewis. Well, though thou have no courage, yet I am satisfied with thy
diligence. I stole hither chiefly to make thee increase thy acquaintance with
Laura, Lucilla's Maid: and whatsoever shall succeed upon this engagement of my
honor, be sure to endeavor that she may give good impressions of me to her
Mistress.


Steph. This, Sir, is a work of peace, and I dare go through with it; but as
for matters of strife if you would take my advice --


D. Lewis. No more words. I Will take no counsel from men that are afraid.


Steph. Well, Sir, Fortune be your Friend. But I humbly conceive that men of
discretion seldom depend upon her courtesy.


Exeunt several ways. Enter Jodelet and Bettris. Bett. I will assure you, Sir,
you have been sought, and for my part, I was so concerned in your absence that
I offered to employ the Town-Cryer.


Jod. It had been to no purpose, for that public voice cannot be heard. Alas,
he is grown hoarse with crying for lost Maidenheads.


Bett. Sir, you are sometimes merry, but always wise.


Jod. Alas! not I! yet it seems I am of some importance, since I have been so
much sought. But who were the searchers?


Bett. Your Father-in-law, and Don Lewis. Your Man too was so sad, as if he had
not only lost his Master, but his wages.


Jod. I owe him nothing but a Cudgel for being so saucy as to miss me without
my order. May not a Master steal out to seek a Mistress unless he ask leave of
his Man?


Bett. But where were you, Sir.


Jod. I was invited by a Friend to a dish of stewed Tripes with Garlic. What
Key is that?


Bett. It belongs to your Camber. Don Ferdinand has appointed you another
lodging near the Garden.


Jod. I had rather it had been near the Kitchen. I esteem his Cook above his
Gardener. The steam of Beef to me, who am not overcurious, is better than the
odor of violets. But why am I removed?


Bett. The old Gentleman is afraid of scandal. And, to say truth, it might do
some harm to you (I mean to your modest reputation) if, before the Marriage
Night, you should be lodged too near his Daughter.


Jod. Nay, let her look to that; I care not what People say, when I am
innocent. But, dear Bettris, thou do not know how much I love thee.


Bett. How should I know it? you take me to be old; I Am none of those who
pretend to knowledge.


Tod. I ever loved one of thy complexion; ever: and since I saw thee first I
have been as hot as any Pepper.


Bett. Why truly Sir (though I blush when I say it) I ever loved all the Don
John's in the world; and when you first came hither my foolish heart -- but I Will
say no more.


Jod. Nay we must be secret: for if the least notice be taken of it, I shall
strait have flushings in my face; and blush like a rose.


Bett. I Am sure you make me hide mine. I pray stand farther off.


Tod. Poor little Fool. Well, innocence is a strange thing; it makes us strange
to one another, but a little of that which ancient People call wickedness will
make us familiar. I prithee show me the way down to my Chamber.


Bett. sighing. Hey down a down! in troth you are an odd man. You make me sigh
e'n when I sing. Here take the Key: I Will be gone.


Jod. Pretty Thief! I could find in my heart to weep when I think thou will be
hanged for stealing men's hearts. Dear slut -- I am Maudlin-kind, would I had
one of thy Hoods to cover my face; I shall be so ashamed if I Am seen thus
whineing for thee. But it is no matter; go, lead the way to my Chamber. I Will
sneak after thee.


Bett. You must follow me apace then; for I Am a very light Huswife. She runs
away.


Jod. The Bunting is flown. Now I could e'n weep indeed. I must for very shame
over-take her. Isabel starts from the door and surprises him.


Isab. Stay, Don John! what, are you coursing my Maid?


Jod. We are only at Childrens play. Are you so old that you have forgot it?
It Is hide-and-seek, and when Maids run away, then the Boys make haste to catch
'em.


Isab. Is It nothing else? But however, I did not think you had been so wanton.


Jod. The tricks of youth are left when we grow old.


Isab. But you will beget an ill opinion of your Chastity; and give me cause to
doubt your affection.


Jod. Our future Spouse, you may go spin! Madam-Nature is a greater Lady than
you, and I was always her humble servant; and those who speak against it may
stop their mouths with a Fig.


Isab. It seems you are displeased. I Will leave you, Sir.


Jod. Most wise Lady, and also most beautiful, you cannot do better.


Isab. I Will take your opinion. Fare you well, Sir. Exit.


Jod. Humph! Are you so proud because of your portion: this is only her want of
breeding. Methinks I counterfeit a Don John rarely; for Husbands of quality
must be sometime discontented with their Wives, and often pleased with their
Maids.


Enter Don Ferdinand. D. Ferd. Don John, I am glad (after some affection and
care in seeking you) that you are not lost.


Jod. Most careful Sir, I also am glad, and for the seekers sake, because the
loss would be his. I think that was spoken again like a Don John. But what are
your commands?


Ferd. Have you heard nothing of your Man Jodelet? nothing from any of his
acquaintance?


Jod. I use not to converse with my Man's Companions.


Ferd. But something, Sir, will be proposed to you, which in a season before
Marriage, may be, perhaps, a little unpleasant.


Jod. How? what is it?


Ferd. You must absolutely; but, Sir, excuse me, for I speak with some regret.
--


Jod. What, must I, Sir? Pray speak the worst, and let it out for your own
ease, if you are troubled with keeping it in.


Ferd. You are invited to the Field; and it imports you much.


Jod. Is that all? A turn or Two in the Field is wholesome after a full stomach.


Ferd. But, Sir, it is to fight.


Jod. That may import me much indeed. I do not like the phrase of being invited
to the Field to be killed. Men are very simple when they go into a Grave to
take the Air.


Ferd. It is the fashion, Sir, and men of honor have allowed it.


Jod. The fashion? But, Sir, if, without resistance, I am contented to go
peaceably into the Field, why should any man who meets me there be angry?
especially when, perhaps, his being pleased would at that time better agree
with my disposition?


Ferd. I know not what you mean.


Jod. I am sorry for it: I held you to be an old Gentleman of a long
understanding: but to speak plainly, why should a man take the pains to walk a
mile to meet another who is of a different humor?


Ferd. Have you been bred to ask that question?


Jod. Don Ferdinand, you seem sometimes not very wise. I doubt that in your
youth you have been inclined to this foolish way of invitations to the Field, and
have been hurt in the head. I say your reason at present is not exceeding sound.


Ferd. Come, Courage Don John; and first let me know, why you infer I am not
wise?


Jod. Because you come to tell me of a quarrel which I knew not, nor perhaps
did not desire to know.


Ferd. Sir, in this I have done my duty, and you will do well t'acquit your self
of yours, without being served by the valor of another. To day you ought
t'encounter him who killed your Brother. And I am sorry, Sir, to tell you, that
he killed him in the night.


Jod. Hay! was it at night?


Ferd. I, Sir, at night.


Jod. Then for my part, let the Devil fight with his own match; for if he be
able to kill a man without seeing him, he will be sure to kill me when he sees
me.


Ferd. This sounds strangely.


Jod. Besides, Sir, this dangerous Enemy fights by advantage, for having found
the way how to kill one of my kindred, he knows by that, the fashion how to
kill me.


Ferd. Sir, you ought to consider --


Jod. Sir, I have well considered it, and must tell you, as a great secret,
that all the family of the Alverads do ever fight one and the same way.


Ferd. Don John! do you think that you have courage?


Jod. A plague on it; I have but too much. Alas, it is not for that, Sir, do not
ask me whether I have courage, but rather tell me where he lives? Is It far from
hence? Must I stay for him? or do you know his Lodging? Or may I inquire it
out? and, in the mean time, tell me but his name.


Ferd. It is Don Lewis de Rochas.


Jod. A pox on him. I knew he would escape my hand. Don Lewis de Rochas? why
that is your Nephew. Sir, you must know I reverence all men of your name.


Ferd. I partly thank you, Sir.


Jod. Any man of the Family of the Rochas is so considerable to me that I will
lay my head at his feet. And particularly, as for Don Lewis, if you please, I
am very well pleased to love him.


Ferd. But, Sir, I have not told you all; for he has done a second injury,
which should more provoke you to revenge. Your Sister has too much reason to
complain of him.


Jod. Sir, as for my Sister, truly he may be ashamed to wrong her; but I have
made a vow, and the Ladies must pardon me for it --


Ferd. What was your vow?


Jod. Never to draw my sword in a Woman's quarrel.


Ferd. Sir, I am much deceived if you are not a Coward.


Jod. Ah Father-in-law! if that could possibly be, yet your discretion should
not meddle in nice things, which (by the care I ought to take) should never
concern you.


Ferd. But you shall know that it concerns me much.


Jod. Bless me! what a strange Father-in-law would you be? Has the Devil sent
you hither to tempt me? not only to homicide, but also to kill my new alliance,
your Nephew; nay and before consummation, which, for ought I know, may likewise
kill your Daughter.


Ferd. I would thou were valiant but one minute, that, without loss of my
honor, I might kill thee before thou grow'st a Coward again.


Jod. O fie, Don Ferdinand, I have found your disposition; you would fain be
too cruel; but I Am resolved to be merciful; and will not tell you how valiant
I am.


Ferd. But I am now resolved to tell you, that your man has given his word to
fight for you.


Jod. His word? The jealous Coxcomb needs not keep it; for I did never doubt
his courage.


Ferd. Is that all?


Jod. Why then, Sir, if he will needs fight for me, let him know I shall not be
jealous that my own valor is less than his.


Ferd. And yet you will not fight, either for your Brother or your Sister.


Jod. A man must be in humor when he fights, and let me die like a Dog (which I
would not say falsely to get the whole world) if, to my remembrance, I ever had
a less disposition to fighting than now. Mistake me not, I speak but according
to my remembrance.


Ferd. Well, I thought you valiant, but I am cousen'd.


Jod. Sir, I confess I have taken too much pleasure in deceiving the world, for
I have cozened many who thought me valiant, and many who thought me a Coward.


Ferd. You have given your self a rare recreation.


Jod. But, Sir, let us leave the pleasant part of our discourse, and be a little
serious.


Ferd. Do so, but with as much brevity as you can.


Jod. I pray tell me, Sir, Suppose that with a Sahagun, or with a Rapier of
Toledo, I were pierced like a Cullender, or suppose that with a Syrian
Scemiter, or a Backsword-blade of Houndslough, I were minced into a Py; how
would my Brother, or my Sister be the better for it?


Fer^. Well, for your Fathers sake my ancient Friend, I Will leave you whole,
without being either pierced or minced.


Jod. For his sake, Sir, I will with patience endure your courtesy.


Ferd. You shall do well in doing so; but for my own sake, you must, instead of
my Daughter, seek another Wife in Madrid.


Jod. What, you would have a Cid to your Son-in-law, that should kill you
first, then marry Chimena?


Ferd. Expect nothing from me but scorn and hatred. O incomparable Coward!


Jod. I am (O Don Ferdinand!) despite of your cruelty, and of your black Teeth,
your most humble and most faithful Servant; and I am as much, or more, to the
Lady Isabella.


Ferd. I am not yours; and when you are out of my house (which must be
suddenly, and without noise) I shall do my self the dishonor to force you to
another kind of account.


Enter D. John. D. John. Don Ferdinand! I pray, Sir, what puts you into choler?


Ferd. My ill choice of a cursed Son-in-law.


Jod. Don Ferdinand, I Will be gone, that you may speak better of a Friend behind
his back. Exit.


Ferd. Let him go Jodelet. He disavows you in all, and has told me plainly, he
was not of opinion that he ought to take notice of injuries; and that he was
never inclined to revenge. Nay he has almost professed that he has lost his
courage.


D. John aside. It Is strange that he took no more care to keep it having so
little.


Ferd. Pray call him back to save his honor. Tell him what he ought to do,
being doubly affronted by Don Lewis. Dear Jodelet, show the friendship of a
Servant by persuading a Master to courage.


D. John. Sir, I am sure he has a kind of Country-courage.


Ferd. What do you mean?


D. John. I mean, he is very obstinate, and will seldom yield to persuasion.


Ferd. I Am sorry for his Fathers sake; especially since I have proceeded so
far toward an alliance. If I were doubly injured as he is, I should not
behave my self like him. His enemy stays for me at the end of the Street: I Will
go to him.


Enter Jodelet. D. John. Do, Sir, for my Master is come back, though I fear I
shall find him too haughty to be counseled into courage.


Exit Ferdinand. Jod. Is he gone, Sir?


D. John. Yes, but tell me Jodelet, what new affront have we to revenge?


Jod. I am the Son of a Sow if he has not removed my patience so far from me
that I can hardly reach it again: yet I Am as unwilling to be angry as another.
Sir you must disguise your self no longer. These false habits may grow to be
Fools Coats, and Don Lewis will turn all into laughter. But you did challenge
him for me?


D. John. Yes, and without telling him that I was Don John. And in troth I did
suspect that the young Gallant had courted Isabella. In short I found him
hidden in her Chamber; and (but for an accident which I must conceal from thee)
we should have met in the Field.


Jod. That is to say, you had invited him to take the Air in a Grave.


D. John. I have deferred the bus ness till I see one thing more evident, which
is yet but the subject of my suspicion: for, perhaps, I may find it but a
false-Game which Bettris plays to get money.


Jod. That Baggage carries her Purse in her Bosom; and according to the
Northern Proverb) is as liquorish at a Penny as at a Posset.


D. John. I have some reasons to believe that Isabella is very ignorant of the
Artefice.


Jod. Sir, there may be more in it than you suspect. I Am loath to say it, but (if
I could speak without making any words) I would tell you that I think Don Lewis
offends you in private.


D. John. Ah, say no more: I guess too much. All my past misfortunes and the
present concur against me: but I have some comfort yet, for no body takes
notice of it.


Tod. None know it (for ought I know) unless it be the People.


D. John. Thou make me mad. I will consider nothing but revenge.

Is Don Ferdinand our Friend or Enemy?


Jod. Don Lewis is of his blood; but for the honor of yours, he does that
which no man ever did for another. He would have Don Lewis give you
sati^faction, and Don Lewis stays for me near this house^ who still believes me
to be Don John.


D. John. I must kill him: but men of action are often parted in the street.
The war which Honor makes in streets does quickly end in peace, and I grow
doubtful where to fight.


Jod. It Is great pity there is not some Amphitheatre; built at the public
charge of Butchers, for the honorable exercise of cutting men's throats.


D. John. Revenge is often interrupted in the Field, because now even all
peculiar Fields are turned to common Roads about this populous Town. If I could
find some House, though it is against the fashion used in Duels --


Jod. Stay, Sir. I Will fit you with a place. I have the Key of a low Apartment
where we are to lodge. There you may conveniently be revenged, almost in the
sight of your Mistress, and yet neither she nor her Father can see it.


D. John. Thou have made an excellent choice my dear Jodelet.


Jod. My dear Don John.


D. John. Go and appoint him a meeting in the Evening.


Jod. But rather, Sir, do you go. It Is now high time that men should know who
you are. How can you think to continue your fury and pass for Jodelet? Go, go,
Sir, discover your self, and fight soundly. Revenge is a hearty food for those
who have a stomach to it.


D. John. How Jodelet? because for a mere provocation of jealousy, for a
simple suspicion, I have disguised my Name, will thou therefore have me
discover my self before the injury be evident? No, thou shall remain Don John a
while, and invite him to the low Chamber, to measure Weapons there, and to
consult about contriving the privacy of the Duel.


Jod Then you command me to be still Don John?


D. John. I do rather conjure thee.


Jod. Well I obey you, Sir. But if by chance (as men are often impatient) he
should draw his sword before he enters this House, what shall Jodelet do? who
has no inclination to war, and is, perhaps, contented to sojourn in this
foolish world.


D. John. Make signs to him far off. He Is prompt, and will not fail to follow
thee till he comes where I will stay to kill him.


Jod. There Is another scruple, which lies in the very bottom of my Bowels.


D. John. What Is that?


Jod. He may be short sighted, and thinking my sword drawn, may run at me.


D. John. Fie, fie! thy imagination is too subtle. He has an Eye like an Eagle
and will distinguish, at a miles distance, any little Fly from a Flea. Thou
shall becken him far off, then lead him to me.


Jod. These appointments are somewhat hard. But, Sir, pray be sure that you
likewise take heed of mistakes. Men's eyes are often dazzled with choler. If I
(without thinking of you) should enter before Don Lewis; and you (without
thinking of me) should run a tilt at my Belly --


D. John. Thou have a Jesuitical way of making impossible scruples.


Jod. Nay, Sir, I know if I am wounded, you
Will cry, in troth, poor Jodelet, I Am sorry;
Excuse a foolish chance! Then I, good soul,
Shall quickly be contented and soon whole.

Exeunt several ways. ACT. V.
Enter Isabella, Lucilla, Bettris. A Candle on the Table. Isab. MAdam Bettris,
what do you here?


Bett. I am preparing a warm Chamber for your benumbed Lover; and, I beseech
you, from whence come you, and Madam Lucilla.


Isab. We have been sighing in a shade.


Lucilla. Madam, I must tell you again, if fortune should bring the whole Sex of
Men before you, and give you leave to make your own election, you could not
choose a more worthy Husband than Don John; and when you know him better, you
will confess my belief is guided by reason.


Isab. And I must needs declare (since your opinion is so confident against
mine) that one of us is very ignorant.


Lucilla. You make me wonder, Madam; but if all wonder did not proceed from
ignorance, I should not quickly yield in this debate.


Isab. Alas you are his Sister; and that may well excuse your partiality, you
may allow me liberty to tell you this because we have contracted a friendship.


Bett. Were I my Mistress, if there were no more men in the world, I would
marry Don John, because I would have children, and because all children are not
like the Father.


Lucilla. Bettris, I cannot be angry when you please to be merry.


Bett. Madam, what ever your griefs be, I wonder you are not merry too, for Don
John makes all the world laugh.


Isab. Bettris, you are too rude.


Bett. Madam, you are too grave. If I were to be Bride; like you, I would not
carry my self like a Nun.


Isabel aside. I am unhappy above the help of Fortune; ordained to be possessed
of what I hate, and by unnatural custom I am made ashamed of what I love.


Bett. Madam, let us hasten up stairs, some Noise within like a Key turning a
Lock. aside. body opens the Door and will surprise us. It Is Laura, who (as I
appointed) makes a noise about the Lock to fright these Lovesick Ladies and
make them retire to take their Medicine of sighs. Madam, I hear't again.


Isab. You are scared.


Bett. If you had been as often privately in love as I have been, youl'd soon
be afraid at the opening of a Door.

Exeunt Isabella, Lucilla. So, let them feed on sorrows of Love; which is
commonly at Court the ill second Course at the promising Feasts of Lovers,
whilst we, poor Wenches, are contented with Country sports. Exit.


Enter Sancho, Stephano, and Laura, with a Scarf in her hand, another Spaniard
and two young Women. Laura. The ly, Signior Sancho, is hard of digestion; but,
having first swallowed the gilded Pill of Love, it prepares the stomach for any
thing.


Steph. And I have said so much, to cure your jealousy, as would make an old
Italian trust his Wife with a young Painter, and leave her with him to draw her
naked.


Sancho. Not naked.


Steph. You shall, besides the materials of our last Collation, have an
innundation of Olio, where you may bathe your knuckles till you cure 'em of the
Gout.


Laura. But we must enable our appetites with exercise. We have appointed a
Dance for Blind-man-Buff, in which you shall be hoodwinkt, and appear all over,
Cupid the second.


Sancho. Bating Beard.


Laura. Come, Gentle Love, let me blind you; and then --


Sancho. Collation.


Steph. It Is prepared within.


Sancho. Mighty Olio's?


Steph. A Sea of Olio, and in it Hams of Baijon lying at Hull with Sails
furled up of Cabbidge-leaves.


Sancho. Then Bisks.


Laura. Imbroyder'd with Pistachoes.


Sancho. And Mussels?


Steph. Broyl'd; and then (to make you corpulent) roasted Chestnuts stewed in
Gravy.


Sancho. And Chitterings.


Steph. I, I, to fill up Chinks.


Sancho. And Ragous?


Steph. Strewn over with Saltpeter and Jamaica-Pepper, to make you thirst for
whole Flagons of Scargos and Ravidavio; and you shall be a very --


Sancho. Drunken Cupid.


Laura. Pray Love be humble and stoop a little --


Sancho. I yield. Laura hoodwinks Sancho with a Scarf.


Enter Bettris. Bett. We have now both place and opportunity for mirth. The
Ladies are retired, Don Ferdinand's abroad, the three Strangers are severally
dispersed, and gone, I think, in the quest of wandering Love.


Laura. We have a stayed old Cupid here who wears his Quiver in his Pocket, full
of Tooth-picks instead of Arrows, in expectation of a Feast.


Bett. What, blinded already? Come then, let us begin.


They put themselves into several Stations and Sancho in the middle. Steph. Now
we have blinded so your sight
That even at Noon the Rays of light
Are lost as if your Eyes were out,
We Will turn you once and twice about.
About, about; about again;
Twice for the Maids, once for the men.

Bett. Here stands a Maid, and there a Man.


Omnes. We all are near; catch whom you can.


Steph. We closed your eyes lest you should see;
And so your Ears shall useless be.
For now, as in the calm of sleep,
All shall commanded silence keep;
Least any Man, or any Maid,
Be by distinguished voice betrayed.

Bett. Here stands a Maid and there a Man.


Omnes. We'll all start fair, Catch whom you can.


They Dance, in which the men kick Sancho by turns, and he at several times
says the following words. Sancho. That Is a Man -- That Is no Maid -- That Is a
Horse -- Courage brave Bumme --



The Dance being ended a Bell rings. Bett. My Lady rings. She wants me. Let Us
away.


Sancho. Where Is Collation? He pulls down his scarf.


Laura. Signior Sancho, I took the ly from you, and now you must accept of one
from me. I promised you a Collation, but there is none. You must e'n fast and
pray for better manners.


Bett. We did this to save you a labor: for when no Crumbs can fall upon your
Beard you need not brush it.


Sancho. I could eat --


Laura. What?


Sancho. Thee. Exeunt Sancho one way, and the rest at the other Door.


Enter Don John. D. John. I hear 'em coming. I Will leave the Door open, take
away the Key, and conceal my self in the Alcove.


Enter Jodelet, Don Lewis. Jod. Now where is the evil Spirit my Master? Hah!
vanished! he is gone, quite gone! This Don Lewis is as famous as Cain for matters
of killing, and, which is worse to me then no help, he shuts the Door. Well,
since I Am pent in I would I were but as valiant as an imprisoned Cat, that I
might fly at his face. It Is very inconvenient to be a Man without Manhood, O
that Traitor, my Master!


D. Lewis. Now, Sir, we are enclosed, and may fight without interruption.


Jod. aside. I would he were hanged that is not here to part us.


D. Lewis. You mutter, Sir, you may express your anger with your Sword.


Jod, Who I, Sir? I scorn to mutter any thing against any man who will give me
any reasonable satisfaction.


D. Lewis. I was bravely invited and am ready to do you reason.


Jod. Sir, I shall always report you are not only a very reasonable man, but
are also willing to consider --


D. Lewis. What mean you by consider?


Jod. That Is well asked, Sir and I am apt to answer your questions, if you will
spend a little time in discourse.


D. Lewis. Is this a time to be spent in words?


Jod. Nay, Sir, I see you are hasty; but, perhaps, I may have patience to hear
you out.


D. Lewis. To hear me out? Do you take me for a Talker when I come to be in
action?


Jod. aside. This it is to meet with brute Beasts that are not capable of
discourse. I Am quite forsaken. My Master has, certainly, no kind of conscience
--


D. Lewis. What the Devil do you seek?


Jodelet looks up and down. Jod. aside. Two things, which I fear I shall not
find, my valor and my Master.


D. Lewis. This is a mystery! still you are muttering, but what look you for?


Jod. I hope you are alone.


D. Lewis. How, Sir, do you bring me hither to ask that?


Jod. Lord you are so collerick that one cannot speak to you: may not a man ask
a question for your good?


D. Lewis. I have attended to see your sword out; and Honor taught me that
patience: but now I Will trust you with no more time -- He draws.


Jod. Bless me! what a long spit he draws? I have been a raw fellow at
fighting, and now am like to be roasted.


D. L^wis. Come, Sir. Are you ready? for I scorn to take advantage.


Jod. In t^oth I see you are a man of honor, and I could find in my heart to
consider a while how I may requite your courtesy.


D. Lewis. Courtesy? I disdain to receive it from you. Prepare your self --


Jod. Stay, stay a little, Sir!

Let me advise you as a Friend to lay aside your passion when you fight, for in
good faith you are too hasty.


D. Lewis. Is this behavior equal to your former heat? Methinks y^u grow cold.
Your courage is an Ague, for it comes in fits. But I shall cure it.


Jod. aside. Heaven I thank thee heartily! for I spy my Master. Ah, Sir! come
out! do you want courage?


Speaks softly to Don John behind him. D. John. Retire as thou art fighting
that thou may amuse him.


D. Lewis. Quick, Sir, draw; for I have told you that I scorn to take advantage.


Jod. Nay an'you grow so angry, Sir, then I say again, stay! for I scorn all
advantages as much as you do. He takes up the Candle.


D. Lewis. If you have any odds I cannot see it.


Jod Lord! how your passion blinds you? do you think I Am so base as to fight
with Rapier and Candle against single Rapier?


D. Lewis. Lay down the light then.


Jod. Honor is a Fool in the Field when it wants stratagem.


D. Lewis. I think he is madd; for still he mutters and looks back. D. John, I
suspect the temper of your brain, as much as I doubt the c urage of your heart;
you seem to have a great quantity of the Coward, but more of the Fool.


Jod. Not so much of the Fool as you suppose, Sir --


He puts out the Candle. D. Lewis. What art thou all Coward, and coverst thy
self in darkness?


Jod. Did not you kill my Brother in the dark?


D Lewis. If that will more incense thee, know, I did.


Jod. aside. Then try your Cats eyes once ag^n. He retires.


D. Lewis. Say you so, Sir?


Jod. aside. The Devil's in the Dice if you throw twice in and in, without any
light.


D. Lewis. Where are you, Sir?


Jod.. aside. What a fool were I if I should tell him?


D. Lewis. You are bashful, and would not have your courage seen.


Jod. aside. I Am a little valiant when I spy no naked Weapon. Now good speed to
one push at hazard -- He steps aside, thrusts at great distance at first, and
at last hits D. Lewis, then retires to the Alcove. I think that touched
something. I hope I have not run my sword through one of the Caesar's eyes in
the Hanging --


D. Lewis. The Wretch has drawn my blood. I feel it, for it wets my hand. But
now by this, more than before, he does deserve to be my Enemy.


D. Ferd. within. I Am certain that is my Nephews voice. If I can feel no Key in
the Lock, then mine will give me ent^ance.


D. John. Go forth from the Alcove or I Will strangle thee.


D. Ferdinand opens the Door, and enters with a Light. D. Ferd. Hah! what is the
business here my Friends?


Jodelet steps out of the Alcove. D. Ferd. lays hold on D. Lewis. Jod. I Am
taking satisfaction for my injuries.


D. Lewis. I have lost blood, and will be strait revenged.


D. Ferd, Is It by Stoccado, or Stramason?


Jod. A thousand Satan's take all good luck. I shall pay soundly for having the
honor to give the first wound.


D. Ferd. Let me see, Nephew? your hand is hu^t.


D. Lewis. It Is but a slight prick.


Jod. Would I had two in my right hand that I might get an excuse to let my
sword fall.


D. Ferd. Now my dear friends, fight freely! I come not here to make peace. The
one (who suffers by a deep and double injury) is by promise to be my
Son-in-law. The other is my Nephew, who must be satisfied for loss of blood.
I Will look on each with the same eyes which in my youth did love to see the
exercise of honor. Fight, and fight bravely; but first let me place the light
conveniently for both.


D. Lewis. Your counsel wlll be quickly followed, Sir, by men who know your
courage.


Jod. Rare counsel indeed, which exhorts us to a Duel. This old man is heartily
wicked, and may be held the very Father of the Hectors.


D. Lewis. My anger makes me insolent and cruel. And that I now may dare you to
do more than you durst do till darkness hid your fear, know, I Have deceived your
Sister, and have killed your Brother.


D. John enters from the Alcove. D. John. Since I am thus confirmed, Honor has
leave of conscience to be bloody in revenge -- Stay Sir!


Jod. aside. O, are you come? In true Tragedies let every man act his own part.


D. John. You do not know Don John, Behold him here. You did deceive my S^ster,
and have killed my Brother; and are now, against your self, th'audacious
witness of such double wickedness as Justice cannot hear but with a double
sense of anger and of shame. I wish you had more than a single life to answer
both.


D. Ferd. But is the Man become the Master?


D. Lewis. Make haste to let me know, which of the two is more worthy than the
other to be my Enemy: which is Don John?


D. John. That name is mine.


D. Lewis. Then what is he?


Jod. I Am no Don John, I dare assure you, Sir; but yet am so well bred, that I
can give way to my Betters in all quarrels.


D. John. Under a Servants name I have endured my injuries whilst I had got no
more than a suspicion of th'offenders person to authorize my revenge; but since
you proudly have declared you did those injuries, you cannot think that I
should longer bear them. My there is blood incites me to revenge.


D. Lewis. The cry of blood may cease when the revenge of it is near.


D. John. Know my revenge is heightened by that black dishonor which has
stained my Sisters beauty, to whom you have ignobly shown a want of such
compassion as does use t'accompany true courage.


D. Lewis. Are you the true Don John, renowned for valor, and yet strive, with
softning pity, to allay that courage against which your honor does contest?


D. John. You ought to think my vengeance for my Brothers death allows not
words to respite deeds: but, by degrees, I am proceeding to the reason of this
short delay.


D. Lewis. This is such temper as I never knew.


D. John. That I may make my Sister feel my justice more than cruelty, let me
be now obliged even by an Enemy, with so much truth as men of noble Race can
never want.


D. Lewis. What would you ask?


D. John. Whether your many vows (broken as fast as sworn) did not seduce my
Sister from her Father's house to seek you in disguise? and whether in those
vows you did not make a sacred Contract of immediate Marriage?


D. Ferd. This Son-in law is as prudent as he is valiant; though I did
pronounce the other Son-in-law a Coxcomb.


Jod. That Is I. But patience, for I Have already shed blood enough.


D. Lewis. Though when our swords are drawn it is then no season for confession,
yet, in a just compassion, for her sake, I will declare a blushing truth. Your
Sister owes her affliction to my repeated vows of Marriage.


D. Ferd. I swear -- by the honor of all Mustachios, and of all the Beards in
Spain, my Nephew is a Traitor.


Jod. Bless me! what a horrid Oath was that? no choler shall transport me to
swear by more Beards than my own.


D. Ferd. Had thou a heart so cruel as to o'rcome a Virgin by thy vows, and
then forsake her for her faith? Son-in-law I Am wholly now of your side, and
will renounce my blood in him; who does deserve to have it shed not by a single
hand of Honor, but by confederacy of common force.


Jod. Now for the French mode of fighting! D. Ferdinand goes to D. John's side.
I fear I shall, by a trick of honor, be made a Second to the wrong side.


D. Lewis. Stay, Uncle! shall the virtue of Confession make you my Enemy!


D. Ferd. Yes, where Divines are not the Duellists --


D. John. Hold, Don Ferdinand. My honor will not suffer me to share in such
advantages.


D. Lewis. That Is spoken like a true Don John.


D. Ferd. Then I alone will fight with him. --


D. John. My honor will less yield that you, Sir, should deprive me of my
Enemy, Sir, I beseech you, hold!


D. Ferd. Then take him to your self; though such who Traitors are to Virgins
deserve their punishment from every hand.


D. John to D. Lewis. I have another question now, to which a civil Foe will
give reply; and it is to cure my greatest pain, my jealousy; so great a torment
as I could not wish to my most fatal Enemy, no, not to you.


D. Lewis. Sir, now you teach me to be civil. Proceed to tell me your disease
if you will hasten to the remedy.


D. John. Know, I am jealous.


D. Lewis. Of whom.


D. John. Of you.


D. Lewis. Of me.


D. John. I saw you leap from the Balconee of this House.


D. Lewis. Did you see it?


D. John. Yes, I saw it, and, since that, found you concealed in Isabella's
Chamber.


D. Ferd. aside. Hah! Can I have patience to hear more?


D. Lewis. If I in this shall new confession add to what I spoke before, you
cannot think it is from the effect of fear, for honor does oblige me to it. If I
have been your Rival than my l^ve did wrong your Sister rather than injure you
because I did not know Don John: and Honor now does join with Truth to make me
call on Heaven to assist me when I Isabella vindicate; who with disdain refused
all love but what her Father should prefer.


D. Ferd. aside. That is some motive for my patience.


D. Lewis. I further must declare that Bettris, to promote th'address I made
for Marriage, did, unknown to her Lady, hide me then in the Balc^nee, and after
that concealed me in her Ladies Chamber; for which she was in hazard of her
service.


D. Ferd. aside. I remember my Daughter would have dismissed her Service; which
gives my patience another comfort.


D. John. All my disease of jealousy ends here, and I Will continue still to be
a civil Enemy, for I will thank you for my cure.

But now --


D. Ferd. Stay, stay Don John! The next Demand belongs to me. Why did you make
your visit here in a disguise?


D. John. Sir, it is fit you should be satisfied. I changed my habit when I saw
him escape from the Balconee, supposing in another shape, my jealousy might
sooner be informed.


D. Ferd. I hear enough. My honor now makes me forsake your cause, and leads
me to the other side. You are my Enemy.


He goes to the side of D. Lewis. D. John. It Is my misfortune then and not my
choice.


D. Ferd. You came into my House not as a Lover but a Spy; and with a stratagem
(course, and below my dignity) advanced your man to woo my Daughter. Prepare
your self for my revenge --


D. Lewis. Pray hold, Sir! hold! you punish me too much in taking from my Sword
that Enemy who first made me his choice.


D. John. Don Ferdinand, you never can so much provoke me as to raise my anger
against the Father of the Mistress whom I love.


D. Ferd. You loved with too much insolence, and doubtfully, when you designed
your Man to court her in your shape.


D. John. I may, without dishonor, crave for that your pardon: and when you
shall resent my change of shape, you then forget Love's ancient Histories; for
my disguise is not the first that love has worn. But I conjure you by my
Fathers friendship, to forgive the foolish Arts of Jealousy.


D. Ferd. Well, for his sake, I am appeased, and bury your offense; but it is on
this condition that I may now restrain your Combat till I treat with each for
both.


D. John. To this I yield.


D. Lewis. To show that you have taught me temper I consent by your example.


Jod. My Master taught Don Lewis discretion and I taught it him. 'Twas ever
said of Don Jodelet, that he did much incline to peace.


D. Ferd. You, by your sword, Don John, have leisure to receive
Such satisfaction as your honor does require
For all my Nephews broken faith, which now
Afflicts your Sister, but he can never bring her back to her fair Fame
Unless he marry her; and I presume I need not now persuade
What Justice and Religion does enjoyne.

D. Lewis to D. John I doubly am prepared. First, I will meet your Sister in
the Temple to perform my former vows; and then I will return and meet you here,
or in the Field, to pay the debt I owe you for your Brothers blood.


D. Ferd. D. John, none yet did ever celebrate the sacred Rites of Hymen with a
Tragedy; and I Am obliged to tell you that my Nephew often has lamented your
unhappy Brothers death, who in the dark was wounded by mistake, and I have
heard my Nephew vow that he did wear your Brother in his bosom as his dearest
Friend.


D. Lewis. This truth which you affirm does more, perhaps, become your Tongue
than mine whilst I continue in this posture against an Enemy.


D. John. The season now is fit to tell, why I have here
Made some delay of my revenge. My Brother is alive.

D. Lewis. Alive? Heaven is propitious in this wonder!


D. Ferd. I am alike surprised with wonder and with joy!


D. John. Much blood my Brother lost by that unlucky wound you gave him, which
some hours deprived him of the chiefest signs of life; but, being to a
Surgeons house removed, he was by his great Art, in a few days, made hopeful
of his Cure. I did conceal the good success even from my servants, and in
Madrid divulged that he was dead.


D. Ferd. What could you mean by making that report?


D. John. I thought, Don Lewis, that the rumor of his death would make it
harder for you to escape the rig'rous Law in order to my Sisters injuries, who
then forsook my Fathers House in your pursuit.


D. Ferd. My dear Don John, since you perceive your Brother only wounded by
mistake, and that wound cured: Don Lewis and your Sister ready to be joined by
Hymen's hand, and I prepared to make my Isabella yours; let me behold a knot of
Friendship tied between two Enemies. Come both, and cheerfully embrace.


D. John. Don Lewis, all offenses past shall vanish like the dreams of Infancy.


D. Lewis. And all that we hereafter to each D. John and D. Lewis embrace.
other do, shall last like the examplar deeds of men renowned.


Jod. Peace is proclaimed. I Will rest contented with honor gotten in the dark,
and sheath my Sword as Gamesters put up false Dice, to hide 'em after they have
won money.


Enter Isabella, Bettris. D. Ferd. Come Isabella, you shall now, and with your
own consent, be given to Don John.


Isab. with my consent? Are there such Miracles when Lucilla says all faith is
lost; or else at least, that men have none.


D. Ferd. Behold the true Don John.


Isab. to Ferd. Though I Am not worthy of your favor, Sir,
Yet use me not with scorn.

D. Ferd. You may perceive my joy, and cannot think it counterfeit.
You shall know more before I lead you to the Priest.

Isab. This is a Miracle which I am willing to believe.


D. Ferd. Give me your hand, which must be mine no more, for it is now your
Nuptial Pledge.


D. John. Give me your pardon, Madam, 'ere I take your hand,
Pardon the cause for which I did assume
My Servants shape; but I am now the true Don John.

Isab. aside. Prophetic Love! thou taught'st me to believe it e're he said it.


D. Ferd. Bettris, I will not chide you now. This day permits no anger.


Bett. Indeed I ever thought this was the true Don John.
Though, in the dark, I twice mistook another for him:
Which made me hide Don Lewis; first in the Balconee,
Then in my Ladies Chamber.

D. Ferd. Go, go, make haste; and call the Lady Lucilla.


Exit Bettris. Jod. Truly she was mistaken, Sir. Her eyes are much decayed with
watching late to prevent th'unlucky meeting of Lovers.


D. John. Come, Sister, you shall weep no more. Enter Lucilla and Bettris. Don
Lewis is your best Physician and can cure your grief. He is my Present to you;
take him, and forgive him.


D. Lewis. Can you forgive me, Madam? The Priest will do it when he joins our
hands.


Lucilla. He is ordained to be the example still of what
We are to do; and I shall quickly follow it.
This is a sudden change; I will not now examine how it comes, nor chide you
when you tell it me.

Jod. Bettris, you have a great mind to take my hand too.


Bett. Troth you must wash it first: for when your Gloves were off I still
suspected that you were no more than an uncertain Don, called Jodelet.


D. Lewis. Don Jodelet, I have a small mark of your favor, which I wear on my
right hand: but I intend not to requite it till you are Don John again.


Jod. Sir, you may deferr your requital as long as you please, you know I Am one
of those who scorn to be too hasty in calling for satisfaction when men are any
thing willing to give it.


D. Ferd. The Clouds which hovered o'r my Roof to day
Are all dispelled. Make me your guide. I Will lead
You first to Church, and then prepare for Feasts.

Enter Laura, Sancho, Stephano. Laura. Why should we stay listening here any
longer? We have heard 'em talk of strange changes, and of wonders more
fortunate than we could wish.


Steph. Don Ferdinand spoke of Feasts: we cannot have a better Cue for our
entrance. We may safely step in, Signior Sancho.


Sancho. We may.


D. Ferd. Come happy Lovers, follow me.


Jod. Pray stay a while. For matters may not pass
So smoothly as you think. Madam, you have
Of mine a little Picture which you please
To pin upon the Curtain of your Bed:
You keep the Picture, yet are well content
To lose The Original. That Is fine in faith
Sweet Lady, Humph! but 'twill not do. Restore
It to me or be sure you never walk
Abroad alone after the Sun is set.
Don Jodelet is such a furious Spark
As will have satisfaction in the Dark.

Exeunt Omnes. The Epilogue. In a BALLAD, sung by Two.
1.
Ladies, who fine as Fi'pence are,
You Men with bright Rose-noble Hair,
Both all and some, for we now except none
O thrust out your Ears and lift to our mean.
Attend and eke hearken out of pure pity
To tidings doleful, yea in a sad ditty.
The Players grow poor and down they must fall,
Though some say they get the devil and all.
Alack, and alas! our hearts are e'n broken:
But because in all Plays
You still look for new ways
We mean now to sing what ought to be spoken.
2.
Since now those Poets get the Vogue
Who still, with a bold Epilogue,
Dare rattle Spectators and cry 'em down,
As you do their Plays, we'll tell you your own.
First, loving kind friends, who come from the City,
You never think any Play can be witty
But that in which Courtiers shrewdly are jeered.
Out on it, and fie! was ever the like heard?
Why would you have us to bob and to gibe 'em,
When the wiser complain
That in private, for gain,
You are the men who endeavor to bribe 'em.
3.
Some Gallants, though nameless, come here
Expecting our Poets should jeer
The City for Custards and for the Show
When Pageants through rain do pass to and fro.
Those very old frumps, perhaps, would be pretty;
But, Gallants, we have not the dullness to fit ye.
They grow too stale, and the Reader who looks
Upon the sad Notes of many Shop-books
Will think that the Cits have seldom undone ye.
Rather you, every year,
Spoil their Shows and their Cheer,
For they want your Wit, and you have their Money.
4.
Now up wi' Boots, and have at all!
Even you whom we Town-Gallants call;
Who with your round Eeathers make a great show;
We mean you did wear such three years ago;
Come then, and stand fair, that now we may hit ye,
Because even like Turks without any pity,
You visit our Plays, and merit the Stocks
For paying Half-Crowns of Brass to our Box.
Nay, often you swear, when places are shown ye,
That your hearing is thick,
And so, by a Love-trick,
You pass through our Scenes up to the Balcone.
5.
And some (a duce take 'em!) pretend
They come but to speak with a friend;
Then wickedly rob us of a whole Play
By stealing five times an Act in a day.
O little England! speak, is it not pity,
That Gallants even here, and in thy chief City,
Should under great Perukes have heads so small,
As they must steal wit, or have none at all?
Others are bolder and never cry, shall I?
For they make our Guards quail,
And 'twixt Curtain and Rail,
Often Combing their hair, they walk in Fop-Ally.
6.
Gallants relent and eke repent,
For your so foul nay, bad intent
Of paying us Brass instead of true Coin;
And, for amends we only enjoin,
That every Man, to declare conscience in ye,
Shall whisper a Friend, and borrow a Guinny;
Which in our Box you may carelessly throw,
And pay him who lends it to morrow to mow.
And now to conclude, it is fit to acquaint ye
That though this Epilogue
Does not flatter and cogg
Yet a new Ballad may pass for a dainty.
FINIS.

