MEDITATIONS COLLECTED AND ORDERED FOR THE USE OF THE ENGLISH COLLEGE OF
LISBO. BY THE SVPERIOVRS OF THE Same College.

Declinate a me maligni, and scrutabor mandata Dei. Depart from me ye
malignant, and I will search the commandments of God. Psalm: 118. THE SECOND
EDITION. In which all the Latin sentences are translated into English for
those that understand not Latin.

AT DOWAY, By BALTAZAR BELLERE, 1663.

A PARABLE TO A PIOUS SOUL, AS Yet but an apprentise in love.
We read of a Gentleman that had two friends, with whom for a long time was
all his conversation, joy, and content: but being at lenght constrained to part
company, yet in his absence he still continued his former love with them; and
to this purpose sent them daily his letters, messages, gifts, and presents;
and his friends as often repayed him with great thanks and gratitude, both
equally extolling his liberality, setting forth the magnificency of his
presents, and wishing they were able in the least measure to requite him: but
yet with this difference (as appeared by their letters, and the Gentleman at
lenght clearly perceived) that the one of them in his answers was totally
poured out in the praises of the presents sent him, setting them out for the
most rare, most excellent, and most vvelc^me to him, that no exprefssion could
sufficiently declare, how he esteemed them; next he returned the Gentleman a
thousand most humble sincere and cordial thanks, for his love and favors;
and finally offered him (and this most unfeignedly) a thousand protestations of
his gratitude and loyal service: but in all this not one word of any desire,
wish, or longing he had for his speedy return. Whereas the other friend,
though he omitted it not, yet was he briefer in the like expression of the
value and esteem of the presents, of his thanks, gratitude and service, etc.
but to signify the other point of the desires, the longings, the deaths he
suffered for the long absence of his friend, all time was too short, all paper
too little.

He asked him an hundred times over and over, how many weeks, days or hours
it would be till he returned: that, if he had time for it, he would send him
word, whether and when he should come forth to meet him: or rather that he
would make such speed himself, that all messages more might be prevented:
finally that he lived in the mean while only upon his memory, for the
preserving and refreshing of which and for no other end or content he had in
them, he daily and hourly read over the letters, and reuiewed the gifts he
had so often received from him: but alas being but poor shadovvs without
substance they could not continue life; and that therefore nothing but his
own presence, and that speedy too, could ease his grief or give him content
and rest. The Gentleman, as I said, well perceived this difference of
affections in his friends; and that the one seemed to love his gifts, the other
his person: yet to make a real trial of both, he suddenly and unlooked for
returns home, and going severally to visit his friends, he finds them both
looking over the letters, and unfolding the tokens he had formerly sent the^:
but the former, seeing him entering in at his chamber door, rose up, bad him
kind^y vvelcome, and presently with many thanks showed him the tokens and
Jewels he had sent him, beginning afresh to praise and extol them: when the
Gentleman seeing this his friend esteem his wealth more then himself,
departs as suddenly as he came, and steppeth over to the other; who as busy
and poring as he was upon the letters and presents he had, no sooner espieth a
glimpse of his best beloved, but leaping up and throwing all by, falls in his
sweetest embraces, without memory or thought of any thing, no not of thanking
him for the many gifts and letters received: all his longings are turned into
fruitions, all his sighs into joys, and the tears that yet remain or rather
increase, are eye-vvitnesses as I may say that he has in his arms the sole
and total object of his true and candid love, which was of his person, not
of his gifts or benefits.

Our greatest God and truest friend, A quo (as we may say) omnis amicitia in
caelo and in terra nominatur; from whom all friendship in heaven, and in earth
is named; came down in person, treated, lived and conversed with us,
according to that; In terris visus est, and cum hominibus conver^atus est; he
was seen upon the earth, and was conversant with men; teaching us the way
to heaven, curing our infirmities, and by his own death freeing us from the
bondage of the devil and guilt of sin: and all this to gain our love, and
to settle a true and lasting friendship with us. This done he departed from
us; and that for our good also; Expedit vobis vt ego vadam. It is expedient for
you that I Go. Now no sooner a^sent, but he daily and hourly sends us the
messages of heavenly inspirations, the gifts of the holy Ghost, the presents of
all fort of comforts and benefits, nay his svvetest letters too, to wit the
holy Scriptures his own hand vvriting, and other pious and devout books
penned by his Secretaries, but signed with his own spirit, and loue-seale.
Now, like the above said Gentleman, he finds amongst us two sort of
friends: for some (how nigh might I say, all?) look so much upon the
blessings they enjoy, whether temporal or spiritual; take such notice and
content in the comfort, and devotion they feel in prayer, holy Scriptures, and
devout books, that thinking themselves now full of piety, and happiness,
they never cast up an eye, a thought, a sigh toward their absent friend:
never long for his svveet presence; never return him their thanks and duty
for himself these are clearly convicted not to love God, so much for
himself, as for his gifts; nor to respect his honor, will, and pleasure, but
rather their own profit and content. Wherefore let such be sure, they shall
never enjoy Gods special, and as I may call them, personal visits; nor have
the comfort and revvard of a true lover.

But the true friend and lover of God indeed (I dare hardly put him in the
plural number, Ne ille vnicus sit, Least there be none but him,) proceeds
after another manner: he omitteth not to think and run inate on the doctrine
and commands his Lord has left among us, and serves them most exactly; he
lets not a day, nor scarce an hour pass, without a tender remembrance of
the bitter death and passion he suffered for us: he looks full often upon the
presents his loving Lord daily sends him, that is, meditateth with love and
gratitude upon the innumera le benefits of all sorts shovvred down upon us
all: nay as often reads over his kindest letters of holy Scriptures and pious
books. But his sole end in all this his busy diligence is no other then to
seek and find out, if possibly, his best beloved himself; but he being absent
and gone, his labor is by the above said means and helps to retain at least
in his soul a lively memory of him; and in this sad banishment. Comedit and
vivit de micis quae cadunt de mensa Domini sui: He eats and lives of the
crummes that fall from the table of his master: but alas this does not satisfy
his staruing soul; she cannot live long upon such course bread; hence spring
her hourly sighs, tears and longings for her best beloved; Quemadmodum
desiderat ^ervus ad fontes aquarum, ita animae mea ad Te Deum vivum; veniat
Dilectus in hortum suum. Even as the heart desires after the fountains of
waters, so does my soul long after thee my living God; O let my beloved come
into his garden. Now if her dearest Spouse (as be most confident, he will and
very often too) come down, as I may say, in person, to visit her, and fill
her with a feeling presence and manifestation of his sacred divinity; o how
she then leapes up and cleaues unto her beloved, forgetting all her former
occupations, lections, meditations; finally united, inflamed and immersed in
the depth of the Deity, she can neither think nor say any more but Dilectus
meus mihi and Ego illi. My beloved to me, and I to him. AN ADVERTISEMENT.

THese Meditations suffi^e for the whole year in due and right order, for the
great Feasts thereof, as well moveable as immovable: only for the variation
of Shrouetide it is to be observed, that the Passion of our Savior, set down
in the fifth Chapter of the second Part, is to begin on Sexagesima Sunday
wherefore; in ease the precedent Meditations of our Saviors life, come short
and reach not out to the said Sunday then make the supply out of the Appendix
at the latter end, of the state and vocation of a Scholar and Priest But if,
on the contrary, the said Meditations of our Saviors life, exceed and remain
at the said Sunday of Sexagesima; then let those that are over, come in at the
end of the year, immediately after those of the vocation of a Scholar and
Priest, just before the Conclusion of the whole year; which is the
examination of our progress, etc. Wherein this only care is to be had, that
the number of the considerations taken in, or left out at either place, be
respectively restored and set aright in the places specified; which the
Confessarius of the house may at the heginning of the year peruse and set
aright, in a small note drawn for that purpose

THE PREFACE OF THE PARTS OF MENTAL PRAYER.
Mental prayer has chiefly five parts, which ought to be regularly observed
by all beginners: Preparation, Meditation, Thanksgiving, Oblation, and
Petition.

Preparation is in this sort: Per signum Crucis de inimicis nostris, libera
nos Deus noster: In nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti, Amen: By the
sign of the Cross, from our enemies our God deliver us: In the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen: then with low revere^ce
to the presence of God almighty; Gloria Patri, and Filio and Spiritui sa^cto:
Sicut erat in principio, and nunc, and semper, and in saecula saeculorum, Amen.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: Even as it
was in the beginning; and now, and ever, and world without end. Amen.

VEni Creator Spiritus,
Mentes tuorum visita,
Imple superna gratia,
Quae tu creasti pectora.
Qui diceris Paraclitus,
Altissimi donum Dei,
Fons, vivus, ignis, charitas,
Et spiritalis vnctio.
Tu septiformis munere,
Digitus paternae dexterae,
Tu rite promissum Patris.
Sermon ditans guttura.
Accende lumen sensibus,
Infunde amorem cordibus,
Infirma nostri corporis,
Virtute firmans perpetim.
Hostem repellas longius,
Pacemqueue dones protinus,
Ductore si te praevio
Vitemus omne noxium.
Per te sciamus da Patrem;
Noscamus atque Filium,
Teque vtriusque Spiritum
Credamus omni tempore.
Emitte Spiritum tuum and creabuutur, Et renovabis saciem terrae.
OREMVS.
DEus qui corda fidelium S. Spiritus illustratione docuisti, da nobis in eodem
Spiritu recta sapere, and de eius semper consolatione gaudere; Per Dominum
nostrum Iesum Christum Filium tuum, qui tecum vivit and regnat in vnitate
eiusdem Spiritus Sancti Deus per omnia saecula saeculorum. Amen.

COme Creator, Spirit divine,
Visit now the souls of thine,
Fill with grace distilled from heaven,
Hearts, to which thou life has given.
Whom the comforter we call,
Gift of God transcending all,
Living spring, fire, fervent love,
Ghostly unction from above.
Sevenfold grace thou do impart,
And gods right-hand-finger art;
Thou, the Fathers promise, which
Tongues with language does enrich;
Kindle light in everiesense,
Love into our hearts dispense,
Strengthen what in flesh is frail,
With a virtue can not fail.
Drive away our mortal foe,
Peace upon us soon bestovv:
As a guide, before us shine,
That all vice we may decline.
By thee may it so be done,
That we Father know, and son,
And in thee believe that do,
Flow from both, the holy Ghost.
Glorious may the Father reign,
And the son who rose again
So the holy Paraclite,
During ages infinite. Amen.
Send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be created, And thou shall renew the
fa^e of the earth.

LET US PREY.
O God which did teach the hearts of the faithful by the enlightening of the
holy Ghost; grant unto us in the same Spirit to know the things that are
right, and allwaies to joy in the consolation thereof; through our Lord Jesus
Christ, thy Son, who lives and reigeneth with thee in the unity of the same
holy Ghost world without end, Amen:

Thank God for thy being, and all the rest of his holy benefits in general;
but especially for bringing thee at present to holy prayer. How many are there
in the world, who, had they this opportunity and calling from God, how far
more diligent and devout would they be, then I am? Acknowledge next Gods
greatness, majesty and glory: then thy own baseness and poorenes; Natus in
immunditia, vivens in miseria, moriturus in angustia. Borne in uncleanness,
living in misery, and to die in anguish. Certain it is, thou have offended
God, but not certain, that thou have truly repented and satisfied: therefore
with great humility and confidence in his goodness, loquar ad Dominum meum, cum
sim pulvis and cinis, I will speak to my Lord whereas I am but dust and
ashes. Next join thy self with this family, which is now in prayer; and with
all devout persons in the whole Catholic Church Militant; then with all the
Saints and Angels of heaven, thy Guardian, the B. Virgin, and our Savior
Christ, saying amen to all the praises, they give God; Laudemus Deum nostrum in
idipsum. Let us praise our Lord in the self same. Lastly beg of God, Vt
illuminet intellectum, inflammet voluntatem, and recolligat tibi omnes sensus:
That he would enlighten thy understanding inflame thy will, and recollect thy
senses: and protest, that thou come hither only to learn to serve him, and
to do his holy will.

Meditation is in this sort: to ruminate over that, which was read, by little
and little; then to draw forth lome affection, as the love of God, or of our
neighbor; hatred of sin; love of virtue, as the matter shall administer: but
this not only in general terms, because that does not stick by us; but in
particular, to resolve upon some one thing which is to be put in execution that
day, as occasion is given. You must take hold of these good, affections
whenever they come, whether in the beginning, or middle of your Meditation,
for the end of the discourse is not to study or know, but only to stir up
pious affections; and therefore they must have their way. Good purposes being
concluded on, raise your self a little higher to God almighty.

Thanksgiving is in this sort: Thank God as the sole origin of all good
thoughts and purposes, and that he has given thee these. Then for thy
creation, conservation, redemption, vocation to the Catholic faith,
justification, use of his Sacraments, illuminations, inspirations, preservation
from many sins; and other particular benefits. Then thank him for all he
has done the Saints and Angels, with all the Church militant, but especiaily
for all the graces, privileges, and prerogatives bestowed upon our B. Saviors
humanity and on his B. Mother. Lastly thank him above all for that infinite
love and sweetness, with which he does govern all things. But to the end that
this be not only a verbal acknowledgement of what we owe to God, make thy.

Oblation in this sort: since all is from God, and all his, Redeant flumina
vnde manarunt, vt iterum fluant: Let the floods return from whence the sprung
that they may flow again: offer unto him, as an humble slave to his Lord, all
that thou have, or art: thy soul with all her powers, understanding, will, and
all the good purposes before made; then thy body with all its senses, and
labors; that thy life hence forward shall be only to serve him without proper
interest or respect etc. Then offer unto him all the virtues, merits, and
labors of his holy Son; for that is our treasure, by which only and fully
God is satisfied for all: then the merits of the B. Virgin etc. and desire all
creatures both in heaven and earth, to thank, praise, and serve him. Beati qui
habitant in domo tua Domine, in saecula saeculorum laudabunt te. Blessed are
they that dwell in thy house, o Lord, for ever and ever they shall praise thee.
Lastly

Petition is in this sort: acknowledge thy own weakness and nothing, and that
Omne bonum de sursum est, descendens a patre luminum. All good is from above,
descending from the Father of lights. Here thou must bend all thy forces and
beg most earnestly (for this properly is prayer) that for his own sake,
goodness, clemency and love, he has to his creatures, for the merits, virtues,
nay promise of his sweetest Son our Lord JESUS, who said, quidquid petieritis
Patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis: whatsoever you ask the Father in my name,
he will give it you: for those also of the Virgin Marie, and of all his Saints
and servants, he will, not regarding thy unworthiness, give and grant thee a
perfect love of him, and that in all things thy will be conformable to his; and
apply this in particular, that in such and such occasions I will do this, or
this, which I know to be his will to do.

Then beg of him a perfect charity toward thy brethren and companions for
his sake. Lastly thou may add for the universal state of his Church
militant; and for all infidells and all in mortal sin, and for all the
souls in Purgatory, for this family, the Protector and Superiors of it etc:
so desiring him to bless thee in thy good purposes now conceived, say Actiones
nostras quaesumus Domine etc. Prevent we beseech thee, o Lord our actions by
thy holy inspirations, and carry them on by thy gracious assistance, that
every prayer and work of ours may begin always from thee and by the be
happily ended, with Gloriae Patri, etc. Glory be to the Father etc. end with
a low reverence. Amen.

Remember in the day and occasions following, to put in practice the good
resolutions, and purposes thou have made in particular.

THE GENERAL ORDER or division of matters for Meditation.
THe estates and degrees of those; that tend to perfection, in general are
three, according to the three ways of purgation, illumination and union: in
the purgative way are Principiants or beginners, whose desire and labor is to
purge their soul from sin, vices, passions and disordinate affections, the
relics of sin; and to lay the deep foundation of their own baseness or
nothing: next to these, walk the proficients, in the illuminative way, whose
aim and exercise is, to adorn, lighten and enrich their souls with the
ornaments of true, and solid virtues, of all sorts: the last are the Perfect,
who by the way Vnitive attain a most perfect charity, close union, and quiet
contemplation of the divine essence and goodness, the highest slight of a
Christian soul.

According to these three Estates or ways to perfection, the general matters
of Meditation may be distributed into three sorts; To beginners in the
purgative way, may be assigned for matter of Meditation, the true knowledge of
themselves and their nothing; the grievousnes and deformity of sin: the
miseries incident to man's life; the four last thing of man, to wit, death,
judgment particular and universal, hell and heaven; all which are fit to
engender a fear of God, the beginning of wisdom, and contempt of the world.

To the Proficients in the illuminative way may be appointed all the
Theological and Moral virtues, or rather all the Mysteries of our B. Savior
his life, passion and death, in which all virtues, not in speculative
definitions, but practical examples, shine as in their fount or first origin.
Finally to the perfect, in the vnitive way, may be proposed the glorious
mysteries of our B. Savior after his triumph over death, together with those
of the B. Virgin his Mother; next the divine perfections of the Godhead in it
self, as well affirmatively as negatively; lastly the divine benefits bestowed
on man and other creatures, all motives to a perfect union of love.

LICENCAS.
VI este livro de Meditacoe^s. Na^o tem cousa contra a Fe, ou bons coustumes,
antes consideracoe^s muyto solidas, devotas, and doutas, and de grande proueito
pera os que se exercitarem nellas. Lisboa 25. de Ian. 1649.

P. Thomas Bartono.

VIsta informaca^o inclusa podese imprimir o livro de quese fas menca^o and
depois de impresso tornara a conselho para se conferir com o Original and se
dar licenca para correr and sem ella na^o correra. Lisboa 26. de Ian. 1649.

F. Ioa^o de Vasconcellos. Francisco Cardoso de Torneo. Pero de Silva de Faria.
Pantalea^o Rodrigues Pacheco.


POdese imprimir. Lisboa 30. de Ian. 1649.

Bispo.

QVe se possa imprimir o livro de Meditacoe^s de que trata visto as licencas do
S. Officio and ordinario que offeresse and depoys de impresso tornara a esta
mesa para se taxar and sem isso na^o correra. Lisboa o 1. de Fevreiro, 1649.

Pinheyro. Menoses. Andreda. Ribeyro.

ESta conform com o Original, Agosto. 27 anno 1649.

P. Thomas Bartono.

VIsto estar conform com o Original pode correr esto livro. Lisboa 31. de
Agosto 1649.

F. Ioa^o de Vasconcellos. Francisco Cardoso de Tornee. Pero de Silva de Faria.
Pantalea^o Rodrigues Pacheco.


LaVs Deo, MarIae, and sanCtIs eIVs.



THE FIRST PART, MEDITATIONS FOR Beginners or for the Purgative way.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of man's baseness or annihilation.
ALL men desire finally to see and know God, but many fail and come short,
because they begin at the wrong end, and strive to fly, before they can go:
the right path is, to begin with a true and clear view of ourselves, and with
an impartial and settled judgment of our own being and ability. These
begin to be read on the 9. of sept? at night.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. What man is according to his body.
1 COnsider first, these words of the Scripture Formauit Deus hominem de limo
terra; God formed man of the slyme of the earth. The earth is the lowest and
basest of Elements, ever trodden and trampled with the feet of men and beasts;
but mud, slime, or clay is so low and foul, as both men and beasts fly and
avoid it, knowing how every light touch thereof defiles: yet of this earth,
of this clay, how foul, how slimy soever, are formed and framed the tallest,
the stoutest, and most beautiful bodies of the greatest Monarchs, and Ladies
of the world: nay dirt and clay are more noble, then such bodies, if antiquity
be a sign of nobility: Vt quid superbis puluis and cinis? vt quid superbis?
why art thou proud thou dust and ashes: why art thou proud? be ashamed, seeing
all the world knows thy beginning, be as hamed I say, to carry thy self so
big, so splendidous, as if no less then gold and precious stones were the
ingredients of thy being: paint it over as much as thou please, it is but
earth, but dirt and slime: unless thou will perhaps say; it is true, Adam was no
better, being framed of the clay of the earth; but I not so, being begotten of
another fashion, and complexion: poor gallant, deceive not thy self; for the
manner of thy begetting is so foul that the name, nay the lightest thought of
it, defiles the purest mind, so that our B. Savior refused none of our
miseries, but only that; and the matter so horrid, so foul, that all other
dung is pleasant and grateful in respect of it; nay we dare not in discourse
give it a name, for our own shame and others offense.

Conclude hence with thy self never to boast nor grow proud of thy strength,
comeliness and beauty, nor of thy ancient stock and nobility, since the ground
work of all is ever clay and dirt, or if thou will needs strive further, thou will find for the fountaine-head just nothing, Nam ex nihilo omnia: for all are
out of nothing. Hence begin a true knowledge of thy self.

2. Consider secondly, what man's body is in the womb, in the cradle, and in
the rest of its life: I cannot imagine any prison so dark, so straight, so
loathsome, as the womb of a woman, in Which the child is enclosed, and
enwrapped in most foul, bloody and matterous skins or membranes, for no
less, then nine whole months; so straighned and pressed, that neither hand
nor foot can he stir or move: his food, the filthy menstruous blood of his
mother, a thing so nasty, and poisonous, as that what soever it touches, it
infecteth, like the plague or lepry; such is his house, such his diet. Now at
his birth, o how miserable, how poor, how naked? covered only with a thin but
most foul and bloody net; out of which being uncased, the first thing must be
done, is to wash it, ere it can be well touched or viewed: and then so weak
and seeble, that it can neither move, not help it self; all that it can do,
is to cry and bewail the general misery of man kind; and in this estate,
accompanied with a thousand more miseries, and dangers, it passes its cradle
and infancy. Being grown up to man's estate, I will grant it thee, let it be
the strongest, fairest, and best tempered body, thou will or can imagine
(which yet is granted to very few) thou shall find it but a painted wall, or a
sepulcher pargetted with chalk, white without, but within more stinking, then
any dunghill, more foul, then any puddle; witness the filth, that continually
flows from all its conduits and pores, witness the sweetest meats, no sooner,
eaten, then turned to the loathsomest froth or ordure in the world etc.

Conclude as formerly a true judgment of what thou art, and imprint it so in
thy mind, that it may ever check all rising fancies to the contrary.

3. Consider thirdly the condition of man's body after death; the soul being
once departed, behold how pale, how stark, how griesely the body remains,
how gallant and fair soever it formerly had been; a man can hardly see or
touch it without a certain horror of mind: no sooner stiff and cold but
presently it begins to corrupt and smell, hence is that great have and
bustling of its dearest friends and kindred, to heave it soon out of door,
and lay it low under ground, for fear of infecting the air, and causing
pestilence; whereas a dunghill may lie for weeks behind the door without
offense, and in the streets a dead dog or cat without much annoyance. Consider
now the grave, its second womb; some what larger, I confess, then the former,
but in other respects I see no great choice; as dark, as foul, as that,
besides swarms of worms and maggots for our restles bedfellowes: o were it
but opened after some twenty days, what a sight, what a sent should we have;
let him, that can, express it. It is said that a certain Tyrant tied dead
bodies to the quick for a torment': surely he was Master in that black art,
for the embracements of snakes, and the kisses of toades are far more
tolerable, then those of man's carcass half corrupted.

Conclude, neither to esteem, nor pamper thy body, since it is all at last but
food for worms: remember always the words of our holy mother the Church;
Memento homo quod puluis es, and in puluerem reuerteris: Remember o man, that
thou art dust, and into dust thou shall return. If dust be my beginning, and
dust my end, what do I deceive my self or others, as though I carried about
me some rich cabinet of pearls, or precious stones? when being opened, I am
found so stinking a puddle.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. What man is according to his soul.
1. COnsider first, how that, if thy body were originally clay and dirt, thy
soul, before God created it, was just nothing, that is, a pure privation of
all being, and of all those things which accompany a being: o who can describe
unto me, what or where this nothing is? It is neither in heaven, hell, nor
earth, nor in any of the unknown worlds; it differs more from the least sand,
the least moat in the sun, then the heavens vast orbs from an emmot, then
the infinity of God from the least of his creatures, for here at least we find
something to ground a comparison; but nothing? good Lord what can be made of
it, but just nothing? unless thy omnipotent hand descend powerfully into its
abyss, and draw thence this my soul into a noble, spiritual, and
intellectual substance, little less then the Angelical, nay representing thy
own immense Essence? but could thou merit or procure this thy being from
his hand? o nothing less, for nothing can say and do nothing: it was his
gracious bounty and liberality, that freely bestowed this being upon thee,
otherwise thou would have remained for all eternity as thou wast, nothing;
nay should God but for one minute withdraw from thee his conseruing hand, in
that very same instant would thou fade away into thy own habitation of
nothing: brag hence forward vain man of nothing, but thy own, that is, of
thy nothing in being, and again vanishing into nothing.

Conclude and say with the Apostle, Quid habes, quod non accepisti, si autem
acceperis, quid gloriaris? VVat have thou, that thou have not received? and if
thou have received, what do thou glory, and upon this bottemlesse ground
of thy nothing lay the pure foundation of thy spiritual building; for all
besides is not thy own, but given, but lent by thy Maker.

2. Consider secondly how true that sentence of the Wiseman is; Corpus, quod
corrumpitur, aggrauat animam, and terrena inhabitatio deprimit sensum multa
cogitantem: the body, that is corrupted burdeneth the soul, and the earthly
habitation presses down the understanding, that thinks many things. And
mark how many ways this is true; first, at her first union with the body she
is defiled and spotted with original sin, and so subject to all the miseries
both te^porall, and eternal, which spring from that source: then for the first
eight or nine years, in what, J pray, does the soul of a child differ from
that of a beast, in any exterior action or discourse? Afther that precious
jewel obtained, the use of reason; who is able to recount the darkness,
ignorance and errors of our understanding? the backwardnes of our will to
good, and pronenesse to ill? the distractions and failings of the memory? the
tempestuous storms and conflicts of the inferior powers, both irascible and
concupiscible? and the poor soul, like a boat betwixt two waves, tossed and
beaten from the one to the other, from love to hatred, from hope to fear, from
joy to grief, from anger to pusillanimitie etc. hardly settled or quiet for a
moment; and these waves of passions bring her at last, not to know what she
would have; this every one will feel in him self, more or less, if he will
sincerely examine and ponder his inward dispositions and daily inclinations,
hither and thither.

Conclude and frame a true conceit of the state and condition of thy poor
soul, dwelling in the midst of so much ignorance, and amongst so many passions
all violently drawing the contrary way: then humble thy self before the divine
majesty, and beg of him, Vt imperet fluctibus, and mari and fiat
tranquillitas magna; that he would command the waves and the sea, and that
there might ensue a great calm. That the poor passenger our soul, perish not
at last in so terrible and neuer-ceasing storms.

3. Consider thirdly the miserable condition of a soul, over which the beastly
lust of the sensual part has once gotten the dominion; how she is led in
fetters from sin to sin, from lust to lust, contrary to her own actual
reason and judgment; nay often with a certain abhorring and grief, to do
what she is compelled unto, to go whether she is dragged by her slavish, but
now all-mastering appetites: so that there is verified, what S. Paul says; non
quod volo bonum, hoc ago, sed quod odi malum, illud facio. Not the good which
J will, the same do I, but the ill which I hate, that I do. O most
deplorable condition! have you seen or heard of a Lady, noble, beauteous,
rich, heir apparent to her fathers kingdom, delivered over to a slavish
varlet, to be commanded, domineered and crossed in every thing, nay bound and
dragged by her slave, to what she most abhors and hates? truly I have
never heard of the like case: and yet so it passes with a poor soul, once
given over to her passions, a noble spirit, fair as the Angels, marked with
the character of God, heir to the kingdom of heaven, subjected to a base,
carnal, and hellish slavery. O quis me liberabit de carcere corporis huius? O
who shall deliver me from the prison of this body. This is the condition of
our soul, coming into this house of clay; and this is her living in it: but
when she must go forth again, what think you then? what grief, to be
plucked from her old companion the body, and together from all her old
acquaintance and commodities of this world? and what a strangeness, to
wander into an unknown, an unheard of Region? but what a horror to be
presented to the judgment seat? what trembling at so heavy an accusation of
all her life? and what anguish in expecting, what the doom and sentence
will be? if at length it come of eternal damnation, what then, sad wretch?
what then, poor caytife?

Conclude to look about, while time serves, and first to regaine the dominion
over our passions; next with humble fear to secure our salvation: for what
greater folly, then not to provide for a certain danger?

4. Consider fourthly, or rather conclude out of the former considerations,
both of thy body and soul, both their beginning and ending; conclude I say,
and settle with thy self, once for all, a true, sincere, and clear knowledge
of thy self: for rest most assured, that this knowledge is the only ground
and foundation of a virtuous life; the readiest way to know God, and the most
efficacious means to love him; and the want of it, the high way to all
perdition: settle therefore first with thy self this judgment; that by thy
body side thou art originally clay, then a painted mass or muck hill, lastly a
companion and food of worms; and by thy souls side, first just nothing,
priuatio entis; a privation of being. Next defiled with sin; and subject to
most slavish passions; lastly God knows, what her lot and destiny will be.
Having thus humbly, yet truly judged of thy self; next, desire or at least
suffer all others to think and judge the same of thee: for it were great
folly, nay hypocrisy, to desire all men, to think and speak as we do in
other matters, and in this only to be of a different opinion, both of what
we are, and what we esteem our selves: do therefore this, and thou have
gotten true humility; that is, a true knowledge of thy own baseness, and a
desire, that all others should, know and vote thee for such: and so art thou
armed to double proof; first against all inward rebellion of pride, vain
glory and self conceit, with a, Quid habes quod non accepisti; what have
thou that thou have not received? Next, against all outward assaults, both of
flattery and contempt; for neither can others contempt depresse thee below
what thou art, nor their praise and flattery raise thee, to what thou art
not. And this humility is the more solid, because common to all creatures,
being grounded not on sin, or other casual imperfections; but upon the pure
and simple nothing of ourselves, and the all things, we have from God: this
therefore humility, the Saints, the Angels, the Virgin Mary, nay our B.
Savior according to his humanity, had in most high degree: and therefore let
us never be ashamed to embrace it, and really to practice it?

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of the miseries of man's life.
1. COnsider first both the shortness and uncertainty of man's life: make the
longest a hundred years (and yet not one in a hundred thousand does attain
thither) what is that compared to Eternity? not so much as a moment, or the
twinkling of an eye; look back on what is passed, and thou vvilt scarce find
a dream, a shadow: but stay; out of these hundred years, we must yet cut of
a large share, first the time of childhood, wherein it cannot be said, we
live like men: then the time of sleep, a full third part with most men, of
the said hundred; next we may well cut of the latter part of old age also,
which is not vita, life; but labor labor, and dolor, grief; and senex an old
man: you know is bis puer: vvice at child: J dare not discount all the time
which is commonly lost or ill spent, least J should leave nothing, and yet it
may very well be done. The Wise man compares it to a shadow, to a post
riding by, to a ship under full sail, to a bird upon the vving, to an arrow
from the bow; Sic and nos nati continuo desiuimus esse. So we also being
born, forthwith ceased to be. Yet were this shortest moment of life but sure
and certain, some small comfort might be fancied: but alas! nothing in the
world stands so ticklish and uncertain; daily chances teach us sufficiently,
what ground we stand upon: Neque diem neque horam scimus. Neither the day
nor the hour do we know.

Conclude therefore to play both a good Merchant. and a good soldier: a good
merchant in providing rather for Eternity, then for this present moment: a
good soldier, in keeping a vigilant sentinel upon this our Castle, least the
enemy assail us, as commonly he does, vnavvares, or a sleep: o take heed, for
on this moment depends Eternity.

2. Consider secondly the frailty of our life, noe glass more brickle, no
flovver sooner blasted: a cold, a vvind, a vvarme Sun, the prick of a pin,
the bite of a worm, a great grief, nay the excess of a sudden joy are
sufficient to take away the breath and life of the strongest man in the
world: how often do we hear this and that man suddenly fallen dead? or
going healthy and sound to bed, found in the morning without life or motion?
and yet noe skill of Physicians can tell how, nor why? How well did the
Prophet cry out? Omnis caro foenum, and omnis gloria eius, sicut flos campi;
All flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof as the flovver of the field.
Fair and beautiful to behold, but blasted and withered with the least puff
of vvinde.

Conclude from hence the desperate folly of most men, that wake and sleep so
confidently in mortal sin, having noe more betwixt them and hell then the
slender thread of a life so frail; far madder certainly, then he that
should hang by a hair over a sulphurous fire-pit, and yet not endeavor to
free himself thence: madder I say, because the fall into hell has noe
return. Walk therefore always in the fear and grace of God, that when
soever this thread shall break, his holy hand may sustain and support our
poor souls from so hideous a precipice and downfall into the eternal
dungeon of hell.

3. Consider thirdly how full of miseries, disasters and calamities is this our
life, how short soever; from the cradle to the grave, what do we every where
behold, but objects of misery? what do we hear, but either wranglings and
complaints one of an other? or the groanings of every one under his own
burden? no man content with his own estate, but all in perpetual motion to
seek rest and content, where it is not to be found. Let us see and hear S.
Aug. in the 20. chap. of his Meditations: how can we call this a life, in which
we live? which humors so alter, griefs weaken, heates dry up, the air
infects, meats oppress, fasting quaileth, sports dissolve, sadness consumes,
cares rend asunder, quiet security destroys, riches puff up, poverty
abateth; youth lifts on high, old age boweth down, infirmity breaks: and
after all this, what succeeds, but furious death, the full point and period of
all her delights? so that fitly may it be termed, a living death, or a dying
life. And yet, good God? how do men pass by all this? with what little
feeling do they drink up these bitter potions? nay like spiders disembowell
them selves to weaue a thin net to catch flies.

Conclude with thy self, to seek thy content and happiness, not in this life,
so miserable, so frail, so short; but in the eternal life, where neither
force, nor chance, nor durance of time can bereave us of it: and so let all our
cares and toils here be directed to the bliss, and happiness, that there we
hope for.

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. What man is according to his moral, or spiritual
Being.
1. COnsider first, that if man be nothing of himself, but all from God
according to his natural being; truly it is far more evident, that his
spiritual and supernatural Being is from God alone, after a more special and
immediate manner: all grace, all virtues, all gifts supernatural are so purely
and freely from the liberal hand of God, so independent from any merit or
desert of nature, that not all the wisdom of Philosophers, strength of Giants,
power of Kings and Emperors, not whatsoever art or force the whole world can
apply, are able to merit, or fetch down from heaven the least grain or degree
of grace, faith, hope, charity or any other supernatural virtue; so that
every one must say with S. Paul, Gratia Dei sum id, quod sum. By the grace of
God I am that which I am. Nay, which may more humble us, beggars can cry and
beg for an alms, but poor man can neither beg nor cry, no neither wish
nor desire the least supernatural grace or virtue, unless God of his own
pure goodness, do first, move, stir, and help him to do it: Non sumus,
quoth S. Paul, sufficientes cognitare aliquid ex nobis; tanquam ex nobis; sed
Deus est, qui operatur in nobis and velle and perficere pro bona voluntate. We
are not sufficient to think any thing of our selves, as of our selves, but it
is god that works in us both to will, and to accomplish according to his
good will.

Conclude and settle in thy soul a full persuasion, that all thy good is from
God, both in the desire, in the obtaining, and in the conseruing thereof;
acknowledge thy continual dependence of him, and thank him for all gifts
bestowed on thee.

2. Consider secondly, how according to S. Augustine we are, not only, what
we are, by the grace and gift of God, but also what we are not; that is to
say, all the ills we want, all the sins we have escaped, is from no
strength or worth of ours, but from the sole gracious protection of God; for as
the same S: August. most truly says, there is no sin so great, no crime so
horrid, that any one man has committed, but any other man whatsoever may as
easily perpetrate and commit the same, or greater, if God withdraw his
all-succouring hand from him, and leave him in puris naturalibus without
grace, to him self. This at first sight may seem strange; yet most true, if
we consider, how all men are framed of the same clay, all equally spotted with
original sin, and consequently equally subject to the like infirmities; this
thou shall perceive, if thou examine well thy natural inclinations, sudden
pushes, and interior motions to diverse sorts of vices, besides what outward
occasions may unawares bring us into.

Conclude, that according to this doctrine, all the sins, all the crimes,
which thou have seeue or heard in the world, nay all which thou can imagine
possible, fall all within the sphere or compass of thy weakness, and ere now
thou ^adst been guilty of most or all of them, had not god preserved thee: o
what acknowledgement do thou owe him? what humility? what thanks giving?

3. Consider thirdly, what a poor worm man is, compared with God almighty:
what is one drop of deaw to the vast Ocean? what one grain of sand to the huge
earth? surely almost nothing: if then this same Ocean, this same earth, with
the immense orbs of the heavens, together with all the number and universality
of creatures; in a word, the whole created machine, compared with God, be but
as a drop to the Ocean, as a sand to the earth; what J pray, do thou expect
to be, in comparison of God? who in respect either of this world, or of that of
Angels, art so small a portion, so already upon the point of nothing; surely
thou can not but confess thy self, a mere nothing, a consumed,
indiscernable atome, before that vast immensitie and divinity of God. O how
true? Substantia mea quasi nihil ante Te Domine. My life is as nothing before
thee o Lord.

Conclude out of all, what hitherto has been considered, two principal
points, or resolutions, which may stand by thee at all occurrences, and upon
all occasions: the first is, to carry always before thy eyes, but especially
when thou come to pray, or to speak before God, that wonderful greatness and
excess of majesty, above thee and all other creatures; and so with most
profound humility and reverence, to stoop ever before him, as a poor slave
before a Monarch; and to tremble, as a moat before the Sun. The second is,
that whatsoever abilities or perfections thou art endowed with, as of strength,
health, beauty, nobility, understanding, knowledge, virtue, nay working of
miracles etc. thou never for these conceit thy self before an other, that
wants them; because now thou know, that all proceed from God alone, when,
how, and to whom he pleases. These two points will keep our soul in equal
poise, never to rebel against God, nor to exalt our selves above our neighbor

THE SECOND CHAPTER, Of the multitude and foulness of sins.
THE grounds, we have hitherto laid for our humiliation, are common to all
men, great and small, just and sinners: now let us see what every one has
added to this general misery by his own proper will and malice, to wit by
the multitude and grieuousnesse of his sins against God, himself, and
neighbor.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of the deformity and multitude of the sins of men.
1. COnsider first, that neither earth, nor hell it self, has a monster so
foul, so ugly, as is any one least mortal sin: this is made clear, first
by the sad effect it wrought in the Angels, creatures so noble, so beautiful,
so curiched with all gifts, both of nature and grace; yet for one only
mortal sin, and that also only consented to in mind, not put in execution,
were in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, turned eternally into most foul
devils, monsters so ugly, that the very sight of any one of them, is
sufficient to strike dead the stoutest Giant: what effect, do we think, may
sin have in man, dirt and clay? if it blast so foulely the stars of heaven.
Secondly, as man's soul gives life and being to the body, so grace is the
supernatural life of our soul; behold then how foul, how stark, how horrid
a thing man's body is, dead without a soul; and be sure, that a soul without
Gods grace, is far more foul, stinking and hideous, worse then any toad or
spider in the sight of God and his Angels.

Conclude, and begin at length to conceive a true horror of mortal sin,
which hitherto thou have set so slight by: and to lament the miserable estate
of poor blind worldlings, who glittering so outwardly, feel not their own
inward stench, and filthiness, Sed bibunt sicut aquam, iniquitatem. But drink
iniquity as it were water.

2. Consider secondly, that a soul in mortal sin, is compared to a castle
or city seized on, spoiled and sacked by a bloody enemy. Sicut ciuitas, quae
vastatur and desolatur sicut in vastitate hostili. As a city that is waste,
and made desolate as in the spoil of enemies. A soul, in the state of grace,
shines as beauteous, as the face of an Angel, is adorned and enriched with
all the graces, virtues and gifts of the holy Ghost; the adoptiue daughter of
God; the true spouse of Christ; the Temple of the blessed Trinity; the throne
of the eternal Solomon; the seat of the divine wisdom; sister to the
Angels; heir apparent of heaven; a glorious Queen in her princely robes. But
see the deplorable change, the sad alteration, caused in her by a mortal
sin, consented unto; instantly the holy Ghost, with all his gifts, leaves
her; the Angels fly away from her; Christ with his holy Mother and Saints
forsake her: and therewith the devils come tumbling in, and take possession of
her: behold her now poor, wretched, infirm, rifled of all, foul as a devil,
become the whore of Satan, the dunghill and puddle of swine etc.

Conclude to have a care of the purity of thy soul, seeing it imports thee
no less, than to live with Christ, or the devil, in heaven or in hell: which
depend on these two estates: of being in grace, or in mortal sin.

3. Consider thirdly the multitude and number of thy sins: count the years,
the months, the weeks, the days, thou have lived; and thou will find them
far short of the number, thy sins will amount unto; for, Septies in die
cadit iustus: Seven times in the day does the just fall. pass over briefly,
and in general, yet not sine amaritudine animae tuae, without the bitterness
of thy soul, the whole course of thy life; next, the powers of thy soul, and
senses of thy body, and see, which of them has happily been free from
offending God: then the use of the holy Sacraments, if thou have never sinned
against those divine conduits of grace, at least by so many relapses into
sins, again and again confessed and pardoned. Lastly how many have thou
drawn into sin, either voluntarily or by thy ill example; see here what a
swarm of other men's sins occasioned by thee, come upon thy head! and when
all this is done, be sure there are many yet behind, either unknown or
forgottten; so that our daily cry must be, ab occultis meis munda me Domine,
and ab alienis parce serve tuo. From my secrett sins cleanse me o lord, and
from other men's spare thy servant.

Conclude truly to humble thy self before the divine majesty; and seeing we
have so often offended him, let us as often and earnestly beg pardon of him:
and, as yet never a day passes vvithou some sin, so let never a day pass
without a new and special sorrow for the same.

Consider fourthly, thy present daily sins, and imperfections, since God
has freed thee from those grievous ones of thy life past, and called thee
particularly to serve him: and thou vvilt soon vvonder at thy own frailty
and misery: first mark, how little thy love is of God almighty; J speak not
of an imaginary love, which we may frame to our selves of God, but of a
real and active love which says little, and does much; how cold we are to
please him? how seldom do we prefer in effect his holy will before our
own appetite, commodity, and pleasure? see in particular where, when, and
how often, thou have really done it, or rather not done the contrary; and vhen
thou have happily done so, observe well the imperfections, the coldness, the
by-intentions, that have crept into the best of thy actions: how little profit
have we made of his bounteous benefits? and how slack to follow his holy
inspirations and callings? Secondly, see what thy carriage is, toward thy
neighbor, whom Christ has commanded thee to love, as thy self; is this so
really in effect? do thou never vvrong, offend nor scandalize him in words,
in rash judgments, in deed? art thou in all things obedient to thy Superiors,
loving to thy equals, careful and gentle toward, thy inferiors? how many
of us can say half this without a great prejudice to truth, and our
conscience?

Conclude and ask pardon of God, and thy neighbor, for the small love shevved
to either; and purpose, yet with humility and fear, to amend thy carriage
toward both really and effectually.

5. Consider fifthly, how thou stand within thy self; how full of proper
will and love, how vvedded to thine own judgment and opinion; how with
obstinacy thou art ready to maintain and make good, whatsoever thou have
erroneously or unadvisedly spoken or done: what little mortification interior
and exterior: how full of pride, vain glory, presumption, boasting, ease,
delight, gluttony etc. examine well thy thoughts, affections and desires,
whether they commonly go, whether they are carried; for there surely lies
thy summum bonum, thy greatest good, thy treasure: mark again thy words and
conversation, how vain, how inconsiderate, how often svvaruing from truth;
thy tongue, how little mortified or bridled, but ever vvagging. Lastly sift
thy deeds and good works, and thou shall find a great deal of chafe amongst
them, a great many imperfections. But above all observe the boyes-play, thou
do use in the performing of thy good purposes and desires, both of prayer and
other things, every day new purposes, and no soouer made, but broken,
forgotten, or let slip; and in this vveauing and vnvveauing, this vvinding up
with one hand, and vnvvinding with the other, passes away the whole time
of our life.

Conclude to settle in thine understanding a true judgment of thy self, as
thou art at present; and thou shall find no great matter to boast of: make at
length a manly resolution once for all, to amend thy faults, and to serve god
constantly: but do this with great humility, for fear, least this purpose
vanish away with all the former.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the grieuousnesse of sin, as it is an offense of
God.
1. COnsider first, that the malice and deformity of the least mortal sin is
infinite, that is, without limit or comparison foul and horrible; and that by
reason of the infinity of God, the person offended. A blovv or affront given to
a pesant, is an offense, but small; to do the like to a Citizen, is greater;
to a gentleman, greater; to an Earl, Duke, Prince far more enormous; but to
a King, or an Emperor, now it seems to exceed all the limits, all the
bounds of humanity. What then shall we say of an affront, an offense done
against almighty God? who is every way infinite and boundless, in majesty
greatness, nobleness, power, beauty, riches, wisdom, goodness etc.
certainly, as he in himself is infinitely worthy of all reverence, love,
obedience; so, who soever does mortally offend him, does with most infinite
and boundles blame offend against all those his titles and respects.

Conclude, and stand amazed to see what little account vvordlings make of a
mortal sin, and so committ them without number or remorse, Bibentes sicut
aquam, iniquitatem: drinking iniquity as it were water. But resolve thou
with thy self, to be vviser, than to offend the infinite wisdom of God;
what a malice is it to contemn infinite goodness? what a baseness, to slight
infinite noblenes? but what a frenzy, to strike at boundles majesty? and what
a madness, not to fear omnipotency?

2. Consider secondly the particular ingratitude and disobedience of mankind
above all other creatures: no creature in the world has received half the
favors from God, that man has; and yet none of them all, ever offends God,
but only man. To them God is only a Creator, a Conseruatour, a Governor;
but to man, he has showed himself also a Savior, a father, a friend, and
whatsoever else can oblige or force love: and yet all the vast heavens; the
Elements, Earth and Sea with all the beasts, fish, and foul contained in them,
most promptly and readily obey every beck of their Creator; and that with
such an irresistable propension, that sooner will they sink into nothing, then
swerve from the least of his commands: only proud man, more obliged to
obedience than all, lifts up his head against him, breaks his commandments
with facility, contradicts his will, to comply with his own pleasure and
appetite. But thou will say, other creatures of necessity do, what they do,
so that they cannot gain say or offend; but man is endued with free will, and
so may resist. Alas! this increases his ingratitude; to abuse so noble a gift
against the giver; and to dishonor his Creator in that very thing, which he
bestowed on him, to honor and serve him, in a more noble way than the rest.
Conclude, and when any temptation assayleth thee, say; hold, what do thou
man? toades and snakes offend not god; and dare thou offend him etc.

3. Consider thirdly the goodness, the love, the clemency, the benignity, the
mercy, the sweetness, the tenderness, with which our good God does govern,
cherish, and maintain us all in general; besides what he has, and daily does
for thee and me in particular, worthy every ones ponderation and gratitude:
consider these, I say, and surely if we have any feeling in us, we shall
never will fully offend or spurn against so great, so good a Lord; In quo
viuimus, mouomur, and sumus. Jn whom we live move and be. But if any heart be
found so stony, as not to relent at so great a fire; let him lift up his eyes,
and behold before him Christ Jesus, his Savior, stretched and nailed upon the
cross, bathed in his own blood, and tears for thee; struggling with the
agonies of a most horrible and opprobrious death; and crying out from that
height to all faithful souls, that they would take heed of sin; that is,
spare to crucify him continually, who has once most willingly died for them.
O what a shame, what a confusion is it for men? who so easily tread under feet,
and defile the blood of Christ with their daily sins and abominations.

Conclude thou to be none of that number, but with true sorrow and contrition,
for what is past, seriously to amend thy life for the future; and that out of
gratitude to God and thy Savior, seeing that sin does so much offend him,
and let this his complaint of ungrateful children, serve thee for an antidote;
Haeccine reddis Domino, popule stulte and insipiens? nunquid non ipse est Pater
tuus, qui fecit te, possedit and creauit te. These things do thou render to
our Lord thou foolish and unwise people? is not he thy father that has made
thee, possessed and created thee?

4. Consider fourthly, the monstrous treason, and affront done against God in
every mortal sin: for upon the coming of a temptation, God almighty on the
one side, places himself before the soul, with all the titles and
obligations, that she has to love and serve him, of Creator, Redeemer,
Spouse etc. offering her his love and friendship for ever, promising her
heavenly and eternal rewards, if now she will not forsake him, but keep his
law. On the other side the devil with his slights, and deceits offers her
some little and base toy or other, of a small interest, puntillo of honor, of
a beastly delight etc. The sinful and wretched soul considering and hearing,
what both allege, at length with horrible impiety turns her back to her
God, her Savior, and adoreth the devil, rejects Gods friendship, despises
his promises, renounceth heaven, and in stead of all, makes choice of that
interest, that delight, for her final end and happiness. O accursed frenzy! o
unheard of treachery of a miscreant wretch!

Conclude with the profoundest humility, shame, confusion and sorrow thou can
for the oftentimes thy soul deceived, blinded, beguiled, has committed this
so horrible a treason, and made this desperate trucke: with a solemn
protestation, never to commit the like any more.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of the hatred God bears to sin.
1. COnsider first, how not withstanding the great love, that God bears to
men in general, and the true amity, he has with the just and devout: yet
let the iustest man in this world, nay the greatest Angel or Saint in heaven
(were it possible) commit but one of the least mortal sins; God at that very
instant, declares himself his bitter enemy, casts him out of his favor,
and banishing him from his right to heaven, condemns him to the galleys and
slavery of hell. So that it is a common phrase of Scripture, to term sinners
the enemies of God, and God their enemy; what can be more fearful and
terrible, then for a poor caytife to have omnipotent majesty his angered
enemy? and consequently all creatures both of heaven and earth, most ready and
forward to take revenge of their Creatours wrong, and nothing, but a beck of
his is wanting, to put it in sudden execution; according to that: Et pugnabit
cum illo orbis terrarum contra insensatos. And the round world shall fight
with him against the senseless. O miserable wretch, how can thou look? how
can thou breath? surrounded with so many potent and enraged enemies. Far
better were it, quoth S. Anselme, to live in hell amongst the devils, in the
grace and favor of God, than in all the pleasures of this world, in his
enmity and disgrace.

Conclude with admiration of Gods patience and longanimity with thee in thy
sins, when all creatures crying for revenge against thee, and ready to take
it, he alone, the party offended, has so often held their hands, and his own:
thank him; repent in time; and take heed, how thou put thy self in like
danger any more; for he is Patiens redditor. A patient revvarder.

Consider secondly the hatred God bears to sin, by the rigorous and
fearful chastising of the same. And first, in the Angels that fell;
creatures by nature most noble, in dignity next to their Creator, adorned with
all supernatural graces and virtues: yet for one only sin of pride, and
that but once only consented to in mind, they were in an instant, without a
moment of repentance granted, cast for ever from that happy state, into the
flames of hell, turned into foulest devils, and made an eternal subject of
Gods revenging wrath. O eternal God, who will not fear thy anger and
indignation? Secondly in our first parents Adam and Eve, created with original
justice, endowed with all graces, Lords absolute of the whole world, placed in
a Paradise of delights, cast out by Gods justice, made subject to a corporal
and spiritual death, and to the calamities, which we all feel, and cannot
help: and for what? for the eating of an apple, which God had forbid him. And,
which is most terrible to think, for that one sin, not only they, but all
their offspring, that is, all men without any new and actual sin of their
own, have been, are, and to the worlds end shall be borne to the same doom
of death and misery.

Conclude first, with most humble thanks to the divine goodness, for sending
his only Son to redeem thee out of so great a misery, and danger of
greater in the next world: secondly tremble to think of a sin; least Gods
heavy hand light upon thee, with a sinall vengeance once for all.

3. Consider thirdly the pains of hell which exceed all comparison, all
imagination; yet all due to one mortal sin, by the divine justice most exact
and upright. God is of most infinite compassion and mercy, as all his works
do testify; and yet he has heart, to see a poor soul, created by himself,
and redeemed with the blood of his only Son, lie howling and gnashing her
teeth in those eternal flames, without ever having the least pity of her^
neither will that moment ever come, that he will remit her the least of her
pains; but after millions of millions of ages, will be as fresh in his anger,
as the first day he threw her into that pitiless gulf. O terrible
indignation! that can endure so long in a heart so mild, sweet and noble: or
rather; o most deadly malice of mortal sin, that can cause and stir up
such an endless wrath! But these are his enemies, you will say, and are duly
punished: see then the souls of Purgatory, his friends, his future courtiers;
who, set a side eternity, suffer equal torments to those of hell; and yet the
sin is pardoned, the guilt blotted out, only full satisfaction has not been
made.

Conclude, what we are to expect at Gods hands, whether foes or friends, if we
sin against him: and be not so mad, so desperate, as worldlings commonly are;
who think sin, but a trifle, a fleabite, that can be wiped of with a wet
finger.

4. Consider fourthly; that nothing does so much express the great hatred God
bears to sin, as the death and passion of Christ, a person of himself of
infinite dignity, holiness, and innocence; and consequently beloved of his
Father with infinite love, Et in quo sibi been complacuit: And in whom he was
well pleased. Not-withstanding, having taken upon him the discharge of our
sins, see with what rigor the divine justice handled him; and although the
least drop of his sacred blood, was a superaboundant satisfaction for all, yet
his heavenly father, that man might practically see, how he detesteth sin, he
would have him suffer all the torments, he did, with a most ignominious death
on the cross amidst thieves and villains; Propter peccata populi mei percussi
eum: for the sinnet of my people have I stricken him. So that, not only Pilate
and the Jews were the authors of our Savior his death, but also the justice
of his Eternal father, to revenge himself upon sin.

Conclude with a timely fear for thy sins: for if Christ our surety has
paid so dear, what shall the transgressour himself expect? and if in the
green and innocent wood the fire of Gods wrath take such hold; what will it
do in the dry stubble of sinful souls?

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. Of the malice of sin by the damages it brings to
the sinner.
1. COnsider first, what a soul does loose by a mortal sin; to wit, the
grace and friendship of Almighty God, the virtues and gifts of the holy Ghost,
an inestimable treasure; and faith and hope, which remain, lie dead, void and
unprofitable. She loses the title of the daughter of God; the fatherly
protection, that he has of the just; the title and right to the kingdom of
heaven; the gracious robe of sanctity with which the holy Ghost had vested
her. She loses the reward for all the good works done in the whole course of
her life; and remains spoiled of all, poor and naked: in a word she loses
God, that is, all that can be said good, and remains like an other Job,
covered from head to heels with an universal leprie, having nothing to sit
on, but a dunghill of her own foul crimes; nothing left her, to scrape her
ulcers, but a broken shard of free will, which, though not destroyed by sin,
becomes notwithstanding most feeble, weak and subject to every blast of her
enemy.

Conclude with a strong hatred against sin: for seeing, that all creatures
do naturally hate that, which hurts or wrongeth them, is it not great
reason, that man abhor the monster of sin? which is only able to bereave
him of his last end, and eternal felicity; a damage, which all the world
beside cannot do him.

2. Consider secondly, what the soul gets by a mortal sin, that is,
what miseries she falls into: first she sells her self, and that, at a
very vile and low rate, as a slave to the devil and to sin it self; Qui
facit peccatum, seruus est peccati: he who commits sin is the servant of
sin: turned hereby from a pleasant garden, that Angels delighted in, to a
dunghill, a puddle, for swine to wallow in; from a retiring chamber of the holy
Ghost, to a den of Basiliskes and dragons. Secondly she incurreth the sentence
of death and eternal damnation, which is given in the instant that the sin
is committed; and although by penance it may be recalled, yet no man is fully
certain, that ever it is recalled: a fearful case to be sure of the sin,
but not sure of the pardon. Thirdly, sin is a disease incurable, for nothing
less then Gods omnipotency can ever cure or remedy it; so that, who sins,
of himself remains eternally in it, unless God most powerfully free him:
and who knows, when and how often, God will do so? Finally a sin seldom
cocometh alone, but brings others, either with it, or after it.

Conclude with an humble acknowledgement of Gods mercy toward thee, who has
so long suffered thee with patience, and so often pardoned thee thy sins: and
resolve to do true and serious penance for what is past, and to live more
warily he reafter, and to bear a constant hatred to sin, bereauing us of so
much good, and heaping on us so many evils.

3. Consider thirdly, or rather out of what has been hitherto considered of
the malice and hurt of sin, settle in thy soul this most true and necessary
conclusion; tovvit that all the creatures of the world jointly, cannot do
thee so much harm, as one only and least mortal sin: so that, although all
the men in the world should conspire to afflict thee; all the fiercenes of
tigers assail thee; the poison of adders and toades infect thee: nay though
all the Angels of heaven, and devils of hell, with a large and general
license from God Almighty, should join in one, to do thee all the hurt, their
wit and power could reach unto; yet could they not touch thee so to the
quick, nor hurt thee so much, as thou, poor soul, do thy self, by
consenting to one mortal sin: for all these have no power over thy will,
by which alone thou adhearest, or flyest from God, thy last end and only
good. And is this the uttermost? no, for I say further, that God Almighty him
self, with all his omnipotence, cannot hurt or annihilate thee so much, as
does one mortal sin: vvonder not at this; for all that God can inflict on
thee, is but pains, torments and punishments, which are all less evils,
then the evil of sin. So that S. Anselme esteems it better, to be in the
pains of hell without sin, then with it in the glory of heaven; according
to that Ecelesi 28. Vtilis potius infernus quam illud. Hell is more profitable
then it. Conclude therefore Malorum omnium maximum esse peccatum, sin of all
evils to be the greatest. And he our greatest enemy, that causes it in us,
that is our selves.

4. Consider fourthly, for the avoiding also of venial sins; that they also
do truly and really offend God Almighty, as it appears, both by that he
admits no man into heaven with them, and also punishes them so terribly in
the flames of Purgatory. Ueniall sin, although it destroy not charity, yet
it vveakeneth and cools the fervor, she other wise would show in all our
actions: it is like a misty and dark some cloud, that obscureth the brightness,
grace, and beauty of our soul: it hinders the inspirations of the holy Ghost
from vvorking; it dulleth the spirit and feruor of prayer; it leaves the soul
feeble, drovvsie and in a certain lethargy, benumming, as it were, her
powers and vital parts. Finally which is vvorst of all, venial sins
dispose to mortal, according to that Qui negligit parua, cadet in magna: he
that neglects sinall faults, will fall in to great ones: for it is almost
impossible, that, who sets light by venial sins, should not fall into
mortal.

Conclude therefore, carefully to avoid all manner of sin; and like a loyal
servant to thy Lord, to forbear, not only great sins, for which he may
turn thee out of doors, but also any the least thing, that may displease him,
or make him frown at thee: or like a true friend, that will not in the least
matter disagree, or contradict his friend, and know that a venial sin ought
not be committed to gain the whole world, or to save all the infidells and
sinners in it. This is most true, and yet how few do practically think so?

THE THIRD CHAPTER, Of Death.
ALthough death were first caused by sin, yet nothing does more withdraw,
and strengthen a man against sin, then the serious consideratian of death;
according to that sentence of the holy Ghost Memorare nouissima tua, and in
aeternum non peccabis. Remember thy later ends, and thou vvilt not sin for
ever. If therefore the avoiding of sin be necessary to salvation, surely the
means to avoid it, that is the consideration of death, must be requisite, and
not much less necessary.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. How much it imports us to prepare in time for death.
1. COnsider first, that as nothing is more certain, and inevitable, then
death; so nothing is more uncertain, and unknown, then is the day and the
hour of it: for the first; the rule is general without exception, that all
must once die; neither the mother, nor the Son of God have been exempted
from this law. So that, the hour will once come to me, that am now young,
healthy and lusty, in which I must for ever bid adieu to this world and all
that is in it: once will the day come, whose night I shall never see; or the
night, whose morn will never shine upon me. Neither can this day or night be
far of from the youngest of us; for death comes by the post and most commonly
when least expected: as the rich man in the Gospel, having hoarded up for many
years, and intending nothing but a merry life; received suddenly the sad
tidings, Stulte, nocte hac animam tua^ repetent a te: thou fool, this night
they shall require thy soul of thee. Death therefore is shortly most certain;
but when? what year? what day? what hour? J will tell you: the year, the
day, the hour, a man least expects, or fears it; and when he is making
greatest proiects for a long life: and this is all the certainety I can tell
you; and the comfort J can give you, is, that death comes like a theife.
Wherefore

Conclude to follow our Saviors counsel, Semper vigilate, quia nescitis diem
neque horam: vvatch always, because you know neither day, nor hour. be
sure it will come, be therefore sure also to look for it daily.

2. Consider secondly, the sad case of mortals; who of death know nothing, but
that once it will come, but when; but where, but how, it is altogether
concealed from them: whether it will be sudden, or foreseen; natural or
violent; by fire, water, or sword; by the fall of a tile, prick of a pin,
slip of the foot, or any other of those million of chances, which happen in
the world every day. O how disastrous and dangerous are these sudden claps! But
suppose thy good hap bring thee to thy bed, with the assistance of thy friends,
the succor of Physicians and the comfort of the holy Sacraments (for never
hope to exceed this) can thou yet tell me what thy infirmity will be?
whether long or short? gentle or sharp? cleanly or noisome? bereauing thee of
thy wits, or giving thee time and ability to dispose of thy soul, estate and
family? nothing less; no strength, no riches, no wit or learning, can help
any man to the knowledge of the least of these.

Conclude therefore, that seeing thou have no privilege or Carta de securo,
letter of safety, above thy fellows, to be ever in a readiness for all hours,
all chances, to purge and cleanse thy soul of what is past; and for the
future, to live so, as thou would wish to have lived, when death comes; and
do nothing now, that thou would then repent to have done.

3. Consider thirdly, that death being so certain and the time, the place, the
manner so hidden and uncertain; yet some comfort would it be, if it might be
twice done, that if a man should err the first time, he might learn his
lesson the better against the second: but alas* we can die but once, and
howsoever that happen, well or ill, no less then an unchangeable Eternity
depends upon it: if well, it is well; but if ill, no retraiting back, no
redress under the absolute power of God: which way the tree falls, when it
is cut down, there it remains for ever; and if it fall to the North of
hells scorching colds and flames, dying in mortal sin, nothing remains but
eternal torments without pity, patience or ease. O momentum, a quo d^pendet
tam longa aeternitas! o moment, on which depends so long eternity!

Conclude and conceive great fear of that dreadful moment, on which so much
depends and which so few consider or prepare for, till it be too late; use thy
best endeauours, to get perfect this lesson of dying well; that thou be not
out, when thou come to putt it in practice: and if thou likest my counsel,
allot at least one day in the week to this purpose, dedicating all thy
prayers, actions and devotions of the said day to God Almighty for a happy
death, and commending thy self to the B. Virgin Marie, thy Angel Guardian,
and other thy especial Patrons, that they assist and help thee at that hour:
this has been the practice of many Saints.

4. Consider fourthly the great, yet general error of men; who think then,
when they are sick and like to die, to do great acts of devotion, as love of
God, sorrow for their sins, strong purposes of amendment etc. but alas! how
we deceive our selves? believe me, we shall be so far then from gaining any
thing a new, that I pray God, the best of us all may retain then, and hold,
what he has gotten in his life and health time. Observe what thou art able to
do in matter of devotion, if thy head ache, thy teeth pain thee, or any other
small indisposition trouble thee: and then tell me, what thou art like to do,
when a mortal anguish comes upon thee, and the pangs of death invade thee,
with all the troop of griefs, fears, and desolations, which are usual at
that time. O delusion of the Devil! and just also permission of God! for why
or how should a man gain that, at the hour of death, which, he has all his
life time slighted and neglected? why shall he have his journey pence, that
never put his hand to work, till the sun was setting? No, no, devotions,
good works, prayers and the like done in health, they are secure and of great
esteem, and will stand by us, even at the hour of death; when God knows how
we shall otherwise help our selves; or who else will help us: for commonly
in what estate sickness finds us, in the same death carries us hence.

Conclude to follow the counsel of the Wise man, Quodcunque facere potest
manus tua, instanter operare, quia nec opus, nec ratio, nec sapientia, nec
scientia erunt apud inferos, quo tu prop^ras. Whatsoever thy hand is able to
do, work it instantly; for neither work, nor reason, nor wisdom, nor
knowledge shall be in hell vvhither thou do hasten. and beg instantly of God
for his grace, to dispose and prepare thy soul in time for that last hour.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. How Terrible and fearful Death is.
1. COnsider first, the terror and fear, that naturally seizes on man, when
his death is nigh, and knocks at the door; that is, when the infirmity
seizes on all the vital parts; when the Physician forsakes him; when his
friends, if any truly such, be at hand, tell him, he must now die; and
finally when the sick man himself is at length fully persuaded, that he must
presently seaue this life; part soul from body; and pass from this habitation
of men into an unknown and unheard of region. This fear is so general, that
the greatest Saints, nay the Saint of Saints our Blessed Savior was not free
from it. Caepit timere, taedere and moestus esse: he began to fear, wax
heavy, and sad: and the Philosopher defines Death, Terribilium omnium
terribilissimum. Of all dread full things the most terrible. Yet vvordlings in
their health and iollities do little fear death; both because they ever
think it far of, and never consider what it is; but when they see it
present at their beds-head, then they sing another song.

Conclude to meditate often upon death, and daily, as it were, to expect it,
for Tela prauisa minus feriunt; foreseen darts hurt the least: and children
are less frighted at a bear or lion, which they often see. Make also many
acts of Resignation, willingly to accept and admit of death, whensoever God
shall send it thee; for these good acts will at that time bow and conform thy
will to thy Creatours.

2. Consider secondly the extreme grief and sadness, which those will feel at
the hour of death, whose affections are set upon the things of this world,
when they shall see and feel their departing from this life, and all that they
loved in it, never for all eternity to return again: when that long a dios:
adieu, must be given to the whole world; when hereafter, there shall be no
more day nor night, sun nor moon, spring nor autumn, friends nor kindred
nor acquaintance; no more riches, offices, dignities, sports, braueries nor
iollities: all must be left behind, nothing saved or carried with us: but most
of all think upon the sad and heavy farevvell, which the soul is forced to
give the body, her most ancient and individual friend, sister and companion,
borne and bred together, partakers of one another counsels, actions and
fortunes; and now, like to run the same doubtful doom of Eternity: this
it was, that made King Agag cry out; Siccine separat amara mors? does bitter
death thus separate? and the Wise man to say: O mors, quam amara est memoria
tua, homini pacem habenti in substantijs suis? O death how bitter is thy
memory to a man that has peace in his riches.

Conclude with a timely resolution and courage to disaffect and withdraw thy
self from these worldly baits of riches, honors, pleasures: and especially
to mortify thy body and cut short all disordinate love toward it; for so
shall the soul, when the time comes, be more free from these cloggs, to fly
vpvvard to her Creator; and the body will be more vvilling to part with so
sharp a Mistres.

3. Consider thirdly, that unspeakable anguish and confusion of the poor
soul at the point of her departure, to see her self at the brinck and
entrance of Eternity, an endless abyss of durance, an Ocean, to whose
yonder shore the poor sayler never reaches; and yet most doubtful of her
lot; whether it will be damnation, or bliss: o what fear, what horror
will it be, to see herself so nigh, so long, so endless an age? not knovving,
whether it must be of life, or death. Then are our eyes set vvide open, to
see, both what Eternity is, and also what a moment, shadow, and dream our
passed life has been: then shall we wonder and groan, both for having
endangered the lot of Eternity, for a life so short, for delights so base;
and also, for falling so late into the reckning of time, so precious, yet so
idly spent; and yet in which so much might have been gained. O what would
we then give for one of those days, which now we so slightly pass over,
and spend in vanities, idleness or worse; and if we had it; how well and
holily would we spend it?

Conclude to be provident, while time is, and to spend it, as then we would
wish: follow our Saviors counsel, to work while the day lasts, for when
the night of this life is come, it will be too late.

4. Consider fourthly, what frights will then assail poor man, even now
forced to appear before the dreadful bar of Gods judgment seat; where all
the thoughts, words, and deeds of the least moment of his life, shall be
examined, and accordingly rewarded, without favor, appeal, or dilation. O
what an army of sins of all sorts, great and small, will then show
themselves before the eyes of our memory, many of which we now little
esteem or remember; and like vipers of our own breasts, cry upon us, that
they are our brood, and therefore will not leave us, till we come together
before the high Judge: and alas, we cannot hinder them from going with us,
because we are sure, we once committed them, but not sure they are forgiven
us: this it is, that must be tried at the said bar. On the other side; see
how the devil inuadeth us with all his skill and force, knowing this to be the
last cast; some he tempts with despair, others with presumption, others with
impatience, but most he deludeth with the hope of yet recovering, and that
then they will perform a serious, and perfect repentance etc.

Conclude firmly these three good purposes: first carefully now to fly all
sort of sin, which only at that hour can torment us: secondly to work now
a perfect penance for all thy sins past, while time and health serves:
finally to serve God now faithfully, and as thou ought; and to procure
beforehand the aid and assistance of the blessed Angels and Saints.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of the soul and body now separated.
1. COnsider first, the condition of man's body after the soul has left it;
dead, stiff, cold, pale, ugly, heavy as a logge; hasting so fast to
corruption, that the great have the best friends make to heave it out of door,
can hardly prevent a sensible stench and ill smell: finally so horrid, that not
many are to be found, who dare sleep a night, I will not say, in the same bed
with it, but in the same room only: and we read of a tyrant that joined dead
bodies to the quick, for the greatest torment he could invent. But how is it
treated by its dearest friends, father, mother, wife, or child? a tear or two
may be shed out of tenderness, but most commonly for fashion or proper
interest; and presently a grave made, a vvinding sheet, and it may be a coffin
prepared; carried out of doors, laid in the hole, the earth vell trodden and
beaten down: a requiescat, God have mercy on his soul: and a dios: a dieu.
And who has more than this? now in the grave, what companions, but swarms of
maggotts and worms what condition, but of a loathsome corruption? and finally
what end, but of earth and dust, from whence it came?

Conclude with a true desire of mortification and poverty: to what purpose are
riches and bravery, whereas a poor sheet must be our last livery?

2. Consider secondly, the difference between the body and soul now parted
and traveling diverse ways, according to their nature: the body immediately
tends to corruption; but the soul remains eternally, as long, as God shall
be God: the body dead and incapable of joy or pain; but the soul capable of
both, and sure of one for all eternity, the body is carried to the grave,
well accompanied with kindred and friends; but here the soul is forsaken of
all; and poor silly creature is to wander all alone through darksome and
unknown Regions, and every where besett and rounded with most cruel and
fierce high vvay-robbers, to wit legions of devils the inhabitants of those
fearful shades. O what would the poor soul then give for a good and
faithful guide, and two or three good companions to assist her? it is true, she
never wants the presence of her good Angel; but alas! that will comfort her
but little, unless her other company be futable, to wit her works and deeds
done in this life; if these be good; o then she passes merrily under the vving
of her Guardian but if bad, then all is eternally lost.

Conclude seriously to provide good company against that sad time, and have a
care to shake of ill company in time: next labor to make friends, the B.
Uirgin, thy good Angel, and other Patrons.

3. Consider thirdly, the great difference that is betwixt the death of the
just, and that of sinners: of these it is said, mors peccatorum pessima: the
death of sinners is very ill: but of those; Pretiosa in conspectu Domini mors
Sanctorum eius: Precious in the sight of our lord is the death of his saints. A
sinner at that hour has all the before said causes of fear, without any
ground of comfort or ease: and I speak not only of great sinners, of whom
we may say, Quod iam iudicati sunt; that they are allreadie judged. Whose case
is totally desperate and terrible; but of weak and feeble Christians also;
such as the world is full of: what fears, doubts, and tremblings will these
suffer, whether they shall be saved or no; o what would they give for a little
security? but suppose they have this; then presently they fall into the most
insufferable pains of Purgatory, until the last farthing be paid: and o Lord
how long will that be? But a just and holy man, o how resigned, how desirous,
how secured of eternal bliss! how comforted with the presence of his Savior,
the aid of the B. Virgin, Angel Guardian etc. and finally how willing to pass
from his former toils to a present rest? from the miseries of this world to
the now appearing joys of heaven?

Conclude now diligently to provide for what then thou will so much lament, if
thou want it, as rejoice, if thou have it; to wit a lively hope of thy present
salvation: and nothing in heaven or earth can secure thee this, but a holy and
virtuous life: let this finally be thy daily prayer: O bone Jesus, illumina
oculos meos ne vnquam obdormiam in morte; nec dicat inimicus meus, praeualui
aduersus eum. O good Jesus illuminate mine eyes, that I sleep not in death at
any time, nor let my enemy say, I have prevailed against him.

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. Of the particular Judgment after death.
1. COnsider first, that the greatest terror of death arises not so much from
death it self, as from the judgment, that follows at its heels: the time
therefore of this judgment is the first instant or moment, after the soul is
parted from the body: in which the whole cause is punctually and iuridically
concluded and sentenced, as if it were a process of a hundred years:
wherein the accuser and accused shall stand at the bar; the charge made up,
the plea and answer received; proofs taken, vvitnesses examined, and a final
and definitive doom and sentence pronounced: and no vvonder, for the Judge is
both omnipotent in power, and thence commands all at a beck; and also
infinite in wisdom, and hence searches the deepest secrets of hearts. The
place of this judgment is commonly thought, to be that, wherein a man dies;
so that God being immense and every where, raises in that very place his
invisible seat, before which the poor soul, scarce yet out of the body,
suddenly appears.

Conclude hence two things: the first a great fear and care of that moment,
on which eternity immediately depends, never to be recovered, never
recalled: the second, that whereas men ordinarily die or may die in the house,
chamber nay bed, where they live and sleep; never to dare to commit any sin
therein, but ever te look on them, as the place of judgment: and who dare
offend at the bar?

2. Consider secondly, how suddenly the poor soul is bereaved and forsaken
of all her friends; for all leave her at deaths door, none can go to the
bar with her; none there plead for her; only her Angell-Guardian presents
her before the Judge, and the Devil presently follovveth at her back; and
lays home her charge to the full, not sparing the least word, work or
thought of all her life; but charging and exaggerating every thing; and
produces two infallible vvitnesses for what he says, to wit the Judge
himself, the knovver of all secrets, and the guilty conscience of the soul
accused: on the other side the good Angel pleads and alleges for her, what
possibly he can, as both the good works she has done, as also the sorrovv
and repentance she has had of her sins. O! with what anguish stands the
poor creature expecting the eternal doom of misery, or happiness? what
would she give now for a dram of repentance, to give a general answer to
the Devils accusations? and what for a pound of good works for her Angel
to bring in, and to weigh down the scale?

Conclude with a most serious and strong resolution, to set all things
against this moment; first by crossing the black book of sin, by a true
repentance and confession; next to augment and add daily to the book of good
works: Age, age nunc, charissime, quidquid agere potes: do now, my beloved
Brother, do now what thou thou can. Quoth Thomas a Kempis.

3. Consider thirdly, how terrible a thing it is, to enter into judgment
with God almighty, who is of infinite purity, sanctity, and perfection:
hence King David cried, out, Non intres in iudicium cum seruo tuo Domine, quia
non iustificabitur, coram te omnis viuens: enter not into judgment with thy
servant, because noe man living shall be justified in thy sight. hence S. Paul
trembling said; Nihil mihi conscius sum, sed non in hoc iustificatus sum, est
enim Deus qui iudicat. I am not guilty in conscience of any thing: but I am
not justified herein, for he that judges is god. For first the sins which
we account light, and most venial, will appear in the eyes of god, great,
foul and heinous: do not holy men here with us esteem sins great and
heavy, which vvordlings think either very small, or nothing at all? does not
a curious paynter find a fault, a blemish, where others think all perfect,
and complete? what estimation then, think we, will the infinite holiness of
God have of the least of our sins? what spotts and defects will that divine
paynter find in this our mould of clay and dust? Next, he will sift so
narrovvly our just and good works, that very fevv of them will be found
perfect and clear in his eyes; but full of self love, by-intentions and other
imperfections.

Conclude to work thy salvation with fear and trembling; never to presume of
thy good deeds, nor to slight and lessen thy ill deeds: remembering always,
that God is the judge of both, in whose presence the heavens are not pure.

4, Consider fourthly these five qualities of our judge at that day: the first
is, that he is the party offended and injured by our sins, who is now to
take his own revenge of the guilty: o who will not tremble to be judged by
him, whom he has offended? Secondly, he is most wise and able to search the
very depth of our hearts, and to balance aright every thought, word and deed.
Thirdly he is omnipotent, so that no man can stop his hand, no man resist his
will. Fourthly he is supreme sovereign: no power created or increated above
him, and hence his sentence is final, and without appeal. Lastly, he will
come then so full of wrath and indignation against the wicked, that if all
heaven and earth should join in petition for the least sins, that were, he
would remain inexorable and immovable.

Conclude with thy self this necessary and wholesome resolution: that
whereas on the one side, the Judge is most terrible, and most inexorable; on
the other, the cause to be judged of the greatest importance and consequence,
that can be imagined: resolve, I say, ever to live in fear of the Judge; ever
to secure thy cause with the greatest diligence thou can.

Consider fifthly, how after that the whole plea is concluded, the Judge
pronounces the definitive and eternal sentence of life or death: if of death,
he casts the foul soul from him, with an unspeakable disdain and curse
never to see the glory of his face any more: then the good Angel deserteth
and forsakes her also: go, accursed wretch, that have despised my counsels;
and rejected all the remedies, I have used for thy salvation; go with this thy
black guardian, and now eternally thy sad companion: and lastly the said
devils laying hold on her, impetuously throw her into the pit of hell, for
ever and ever. But if the sentence be of life, then the Judge with an amiable,
countenance, inuiteth her to the everlasting joys of his Kingdom; the devil
flies away conquered and confoun^ ded: the good Angel takes her by the hand,
and accompanied with many more leads her to the palace of eternal bliss;
or at least, with comfort depositateth her in Purgatory for a time, till the
divine justice be satisfied.

Conclude with this prayer of S. Augustine: o Lord my God, chastize me now,
while this life dureth, with all the rigor, thou please; torment me in all
my senses and members; burn me, quarter and cut me, what way thou vvilt; in
my health, in my honor and fame, in my goods and in whatsoever else; on
condition that at the day of judgment thou pronounce sentence in my favor,

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER, Of the universal judgment at the last day.
THree reasons are commonly assigned for this universal judgment at the end
of the world: first, that the bodies also, as well as the souls of the good
and bad may have their just reward: Secondly, that the just may receive a
public honor, and the bad a public confusion: Thirdly that our Savior
Christ may be judge of all, for the unjust sentence he received here of men.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of the signs and wonders that shall forerunne the last
day.
1. COnsider first, what the terror of that day will be, by what the old
Prophets have said of it: and first, harken to Isaias c. 13. Vlulate quia prope
est dies Domini; crudelis and indignationis plenus, and irae, furorisque ad
ponendam terram in solitudinem; and peccatores eius conterendos de ea. Hovvle
ye, because the day of our Lord is nere; cruel, and full of indignation, and of
wrath, and fury to bring the land to a wilderness, and to destroy the
sinners thereof out of it. Next Joel cries our, as vvanting a tongue to
express his fear: A, A, A, dixi, quia prope est dies Domini: vlulate in monte
sancto meo, quia venit dies Damini, quia prope est dies tenebrarum and
caliginis, dies nubis and turbinis: ante faciem eius ignis vorans, and post eum
exurens flamma, a facie eius contremuit terra, motisunt caelt, sol and luna
obtenebrati sunt, and stellae retraxerunt splendorem suum, and quis sustinebit
eum? A, A, A, because the day of our lord is at hand: hovvle in my holy mount,
because the day of our Lord comes; because the day of darkness, and of mist
is nere, the day of cloud, and vvhirlevvind; before the face thereof a
devouring fire, and after it a burning flame; at his presence the earth has
trembled, the heavens are moved, the sun and moon are darkened, and the
stars have vvithdravvne their shining; and who shall sustain it? Neither
does Sophonias speak in a lovver strain: Iuxta est dies Domini magnus, vox
diei Domini amara, dies irae, dies illa, dies tribulationis and angustiae etc.
The great day of our Lord is nere; the voice of the day of our Lord is bitter;
that day, a day of wrath, a day of tribulation and distress etc. And note,
that all call it diem Domini, the day of our Lord; for till then all are the
days of men, to do and say what they please; and our Lord is silent and
seems not to take notice of any thing: but when his day comes, then
Loquetur vt parturiens, dissipabit and absorbehit simul. He will speak as a
travailing woman, he will dissipate and swallow up together.

Conclude with these holy Prophets, with S. Hierome, and other Saints to get
and conserve in, thy breast a wholesome fear, of that terrible day which may
on all occasions serve thee, as a bridle from finne.

2. Consider secondly the terrible signs, miseries and disasters, which
forerunne and prepare for the day of judgment. First great tumults, and
wars, nations against nations, and Kingdoms against Kingdoms: then earth
quakes, plagues and famines: next, the persecution of Anti Christ, which our
Savior says, shall be the greatest tribulation, that ever was. After this the
heavens shall tremble, the Sun grow dark, the moon be covered with blood;
inflamed comets, like flakes or balls of fire, shall sall from the sky. The
air in a horrid confusion, rumbling with winds, tempests, thunders,
lightnings and fire-bolts. The sea roaring with hideous storms, swelling
amain above the earth, as ready to swallow all at once? and then as fearfully
falling back into the abyss of the Ocean. The wild beasts leaving for terror
the woods and deserts, and with lamentable cries and howlings flying to houses,
villages and towns for shelter. And what does poor man do all this while,
for whom all this feast is made. Arescentibus hominibus prae timore, men
vvithering for fear: quoth Christ, wann, pale, and dried up for fear,
terror, and anguish not knowing which way to turn or help themselves.

Conclude to follow the counsel of the Ecclesiastes: Memento Creatoris tui in
diebus iuuentutis tuae, antequam veniant dies, in quibus dicas, non placent:
antequam tenebrescat sol, and luna, and stella. Remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth, before the days come, in which thou may say they please
not; before the sun and moon, and stars be dark.

3. Consider thirdly the reasons of this general suffering of all creatures.
The first, that as, when man the lesser world, is to be dissolved, he
suffers those cruel fits and conuulsions of his whole body and soul; so
this greater world or universe drawing to its last and fatal period, cannot
but feel the same shakings: her eyes, that is, the Sun and moon must needs
grow dark: her breast, that is, the earth and sea must heave and swell; and her
arms and legs, that is, heaven and earth cannot but tremble with thunder and
earthquakes. The second, for that the loss and damnation of men created to
glory and redeemed with the blood of Jesus Christ, is a thing so worthy of
pity and sorrow, that the Deity it self were it subject to such passions,
would grieve and lament their disaster, and therefore his will is, that all
creatures lament and mourn for them. The third, for that all creatures both of
heaven and earth which now serve and attend, by Gods commandment man's profit
and pleasure, must then stand up, and fight for their God against his sinful
and ungrateful creatures, according to that. Et pugnabit cum illo orbis
terrarum contra insensatos. And the round world shall fight with him against
the senseless:

Conclude two things, the first, a feeling fear and sorrow for the ruin of so
many noble souls? the second, a horror to think that God himself with all
his creatures shall one day revenge the wrongs, he now patiently bears, and
forbeares from the hands of sinners.

Consider fourtly, what the end will be, where such terrors fore run: at
last there shall come an universal deluge of fire, so great, so violent, that
it shall carry and destroy all before it, without rub or resistance: then
shall be turned into ashes all the vast buildings and Palaces of the world;
then shall all the rocky bullwarkes, and marble pillars fall to dust: then
shall all the riches, gold, silver, diamonds, and precious stones vanish into
smoke and air: then shall dye all men and beasts of the earth, air and sea:
then finally shall cease, and be at a stand all the motion of the heavens, of
Sun, moon and stars, and whatsoever on them depends. Behold, this is the
final end, the fatal period of this so much beloved, so much adored world;
thus fades all its glory, pomp, riches, pleasures; and forfaketh its
courtiers, when they have most need of help, o glittering shadow! o painted
bubble!

Conclude out of all, to follow our Saviors counsel upon this very matter
Luc. 21. Attendite vobis, ne forte grauentur corda vestra in erapula and
ebrietate and curis huius vitae; and superueniat in vos repentina dies illa;
tauquam laqueus enim superueniet in omnes, qui sedent super faciem omnis
terrae. Uigilate itaque omni tempore orantes, vt digni habeamini fugere ista
omnia quae futura sunt, and stare ante filium hominis Look well to your
selves, lest perhaps your hearts be ouercharged with surfeiting, and
drunkenness, and cares of this life; and that day come upon you suddenly; for
as a snare shall it come upon all that sit upon the face of all the earth.
VVatch therefore, praying at all times, that you may be accounted vvorthie to
escape all these things that are to come, and to stand before the son of man.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the general Resurrestion and coming of the Judge.
1. COnsider first, how the world being finished and reduced into the four
first elements; an Archangell shall sound the trumpet, and raise his voice with
a Surgite mortui, and venite ad iudicium: rise you dead and come to judgment. A
voice so shrill, that it shall be heard over the whole world, nay pierce the
highest heavens and the deepest hell: and so powerful also, that all the
souls, that ever were created, shall suddenly, without delay, obey the call;
and uniting themselves every one to her own proper and individual body, shall
all meet in the Uale of Iosaphat. O the omnipotent power of our great God!
which is able to raise such a multitude of bodies, so many ways, so many ages
ago consumed and turned into a thousand changes; so that not the least bone,
nerve, or sinew shall be wanting to any one. And what an admiration will it
cause in the sons of Adam, to see such a multitude together, all of the same
and equal condition, without any difference of poor or rich, master or
servant, king or subject; except only that of the good and bad, which shall be
wonderful and eternal?

Conclude to obey now with prompt diligence another like summon of S. Paul the
trumpet of the holy Ghost: Surge qui dormis and exurge a mortuis, and
illuminabit te Christus: rise, thou that sleep, and arise from the dead: and
Christ will illuminate thee. Rise from sin and sensuality to a virtuous and
spiritual life, which is the first resurrection, that so the second may be to
thy comfort and joy.

2. Consider secondly the happy condition of the good and pious souls in this
resurrection and reunion with their bodies, which shall arise most glorious,
immortal, impassible, more beautiful then the stars, more resplendent then
the Sun. O with what joy and content will the happy soul enter into such a
body? what embraces, what congratulations will there pass between so sweet a
couple? blessed be thou my body, will the soul say, for helping me to gain
this glory, by submitting thy self to mortifications, fastings, disciplines,
and other acts of penance; most just it is, that thou partake of my glory and
happiness. Behold the bodies of Martyrs, rent, torn, burnt, devoured by wild
beasts etc. now more shining, then any oriental pearl, more flourishing and
glittering then any Rubie; more solid and impassible, then any diamond. See
also those of Confessors, Virgins, Doctors, so beautiful, so glorious, that
no tongue is able to express it. O happy penances, austerities, afflictions,
which have deserved so great glory and immortality!

3. Consider thirdly the altogether contrary condition of the damned: their
bodies immortal, it is true, but only that they may suffer immortal torments:
foul, black, filthy, heavy as lead, rotten and stinking, as when half
corrupted in the grave: so that it is none of the leastpaines for the soul to
enter and be shut up for ever in so loathsome and horrid a dungeon. What
desperation, what curses and execrations will pass betwixt these two
unfortunate and wretched companions? Accursed body, quoth the soul, that to
feed, pamper and pleasure thee, have cast both my self and thee into these
everlasting torments: nay rather thou accursed soul, quoth the body, that
having the rule and power over me in thy hand and knowing my natural and prone
inclination to sensuality, did not govern and subject me as thou ought to
the rule of reason and piety. These and such like are to be their morning and
evening salutations for all Eternity.

Conclude which of these two states and conditions thou do like best; for now
free leave is given thee to choose either: I think no man will consult much
upon the choice: wherefore resolve to rule, mortify, and subject the passions
and appetites of thy body in this life, that in the next they may be a comfort
and bliss, one to the other: and whenever the body shall offer to rebel,
check it with representing the two states of the next world.

4. Consider fourthly the terror and majesty of our. B Savior, coming to
judgment: first shall appear in the air the standard of the holy cross, to
the comfort of the good, and terror of the wicked: next shall come all the
nine Quires of Angels in their orders, and all the Patriarchs, Apostles and
Saints both of the Old and New Testament; last with most infinite splendor and
majesty shall appear the Son of man Christ Jesus, like an other Solomon with
his blessed Mother seated on his right hand; not then to beg for sinners, as
now she does, but jointly to condemn those, who would not make use of her
intercession. O what a joyful fight will this be to the just, and those that
are already secured of their salvation? but how terrible to the wicked? the
flames of hell are more sufferable, then the inflamed countenance of the angry
judge: then would they, if they could, hide themselves in rocks and caves, in
the center of the earth, in hell it self, rather then abide this encounter:
then will they cry to the mountains and rocks; Cadite super nos, and
abscondite nos a facie sedentis super thronum, and ab ira Agni, quoniam venit
dies magnus irae ipsorum. Fall upon us, and hide us from the face of him that
sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb, because the great
day of their wrath is come.

Conclude seriously to embrace the virtue of of humility; for this it was,
that raised our Savior to this dignity of judging: beg of him this virtue,
and that he will have mercy on thee at that day.

5. Consider fifthly, how at command of the Judge, the holy Angels pass
through all that vast multitude, choose and pick out the good and just from
among the bad; and place them on the right hand of the judge, leaving the rest
on the left; never to meet or live together any more for all Eternity. O what
fury, what confusion and envy will possess and torture the souls of the
wicked, especially those of Princes, Potentates, and rich persons in this
world, to see themselves so contemned, and the poor and simple so exalted?
then will they groan and cry out: Hi sunt, quos habuimus aliquando in derisum
and in similits. dinem improperij: nos insensati, vitam illorum aestimabamus
insaniam and finem illorum sine honor: ecce quomodo computati sunt inter
filios Dei, and inter Sanctos sors illorum est? ergo errauimus a via veritatis
etc. These are they whom we had sometime in derision, and in a parable of
reproach: we senseless esteemed their life madness, and their end without
honor behold how they are counted amongst the children of God, and their lot
is amongst the saints? we therefore have erred from the way of truth etc. On
the contrary, what joy and content will the good have, to see themselves so
honored by God and his Angels, in the sight of the whole world, that is
heaven, earth and hell.

Conclude to bend all thy endeauours in this world, that thou may deserve to
be placed on the right hand, at that great meeting: nothing will so enrich
thee then, as voluntary poverty now; nothing so exalt thee then, as humility,
Nam qui se humiliat, exaltabitur: becauso every one that humbles himself
shall be exalted: learn therefore poverty and humility.

6. Consider sixthly, how presently will be opened the book of consciences,
wherein shall appear to all, that are present, that is, to all the Angels
and men both good and bad, that ever have been created, the thoughts, words,
and deeds of every one in particular; so clearly and distinctly as if all were
written in their foreheads, or in the beams of the Sun. What glory and
honor will it be to the just, to have all their good works come now to
light, which in this world they labored to hide, and conceal in humble
silence: and although their sins shall be exposed to view, yet they shall be
so adorned and accompanied with holy ^penance, that it will rather turn to
their honor, then any sort of shame or confusion. But not so will the sins
of the wicked, but ugly, deformed, and in their own shape: o what confusion,
especially for those, who lived here in sacred dignities, or in esteem and
repute of holy and virtuous, to see then laid open all their hipocrisies,
deceits, and other enormous crimes?

Conclude to have a great care, what thou writest here in this said book, for
even so shall it there appear, if gold, gold; if ink, ink; and be sure of
our Saviors saying, Nihil absconditum, quod non manifestabitur: there is
nothing hid, which shall not be made manifest. It is therefore more wisdom
to refrain altogether from what thou would not have known, then by doing
it, to expose thy self to a certain confusion and shame.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of the form of Judgment and the sentence that
follvveth.
1. COnsider first, how the account here to be made, and the examination to be
taken will not be done in gross, and in general terms only, as some may
imagine; summing up the great sins and leaving out the lesser: but it will be
most exact and in particular of every thought, word, and deed, as it shall
appear in the book of consciences, and more in the great Register of God and
book of life. This our Savior forewarneth in the 12. of S. Matthew: Dico autem
vobis, quoniam omne verbum ociosum, quod locuti fuerint homines, reddent
racionem de eo in die iudicij. But I say unto you that every idle word that
men shall speak, they shall render an account for it in the day of judgment.
This made holy Job ever tremble at the thought of this day, Quid faciam cum
surrexerit ad iudicandum Deus? and cum quaesierit, quid respondebo illi? non
enim potero ei respondere vnum pro mill: what shall I do, when God shall
rise to judge? and when he shall ask; what shall I answer him? for I can
not answer him one for a thousand: and again; Si fortitudo quaeritur;
robustissimus est; si aequitas iudicij, nemo audet pro me testimonium dicere:
if strength be demauned, he is most strong: if equity of judgment, noe man
dare give testimony for me: So that his final resolution^s, Si habuero
quicquam iustum, non respondebo, sed meum iudicem deprecabor. All though I have
any just thing, I will not answer, but will beseech my judge.

Conclude thou to do the same, and to make now a rigorous and exact examen of
all thy actions, and this In amaritudiue animae tuae: in the bitterness of thy
soul, for this only prevention is able to save thee; for as S. Paul says,
Si nos met ipsos di judicaremus, non vtique iudicaremur; if we did judge our
selves, we should not he judged, To our shame, viz: or hurt. This holy David
observed, and then prayed unto God; Feci iudicium and iustitiam, nou tradas me
calumniantibus me. J have dove judgment and justice, deliver me not to them
that calumniate me.

2. Consider secondly; that the first question and interrogatory will be, how
we have employed our soul, with all her powers created to Gods image, and
redeemed with the blood of his only Son: and how our body with all its
members, given to execute the external acts of virtue. The second, what, use
and profit we have made of all the gifts of God, both natural and
supernatural; of the life, health, strength, and understanding, he has given
us: of all the favors and graces bestowed on us; of all the illuminations:
inspirations and mouings to good: of all his benefits, and Sacraments, where
with he ever fed us; and finally of the precious blood of his dearest Son,
with which he redeemed us. The third, how we have complied with the
obligation of the state, he has placed every one in, as that of a scholar, of
a Religious man, of a Priest, of a Prelat etc. Now think what a large and
heavy charge will be laid to every one, and how many will be able to clear
themselves.

Conclude, how necessary it is to have our eyes open, and to observe well,
what we say, do, and think: and daily to beseech our Judge, to have then
mercy on us; for now he will hear us for then, but then he will be
inexorable.

3. Consider thirdly how the examinations taken, and the process concluded;
the judge comes to give the last and definitive sentence, which without
appeal shall stand for Eternity: and first turning himself toward the just
with a most amiable countenance, inuiteth them with: Uenite benedicti Patris
mei, possidete paratum vobis regnum a constitutione mundi. Come ye blessed of
my father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world. O what comfort, what joy, what glory will this be to the just, to
see themselves now settled and secured in the Eternal bliss and fruition of
God? and again what confusion, and raging envy to the wicked, to see their
old acquaintance, friends and Kindred so exalted, and honored with the
company of God and his Angels, and themselves rejected, contemned, cast out?
Against whom the Judge with sire in his eyes, and terror in his countenance,
thundereth out this horrid doom: Discedite a me maledicti in ignem aternum,
qui paratus est diabolo and Angelis eius. Get ye away from me you cursed into
sire everlasting, which was prepared for the devil, and his Angels. O good
God, whether shall they go, when they go from thee, their God, their
Creator, their Redeemer, their last end and Su^num bonum? there chief good,
and final happiness.

Conclud with a twofold resolution; the one, to spare no labor now, nor yield
to any difficulties, for the securing and gaining to thy self the happy
sentence of the just: the other, never to separate thy self here from Christ
by mortal sin, least then he do the like to thee for ever.

4. Consider fourthly, how the sentence is no sooner given, but put in
execution; for the earth will suddenly open, and swallow up at once all that
confused mass of damned men and devils; Et clausa est ianua, and the gate is
shut, never more to be opened for Eternity. What do we think, will those a
thousand-times unhappy creatures do, finding themselves shut up body and soul
in the darksome dungeons of hell, without ever hoping for any ease redress or
remedy, as long, as God shall be God? then will they rent and tear themselves,
out of despair and madness: then will they curse their father and mother,
kindred and whole world: then will they blaspheme God and all his Saints: then
shall they cry for death, but find no other then this neuerdying. O swetest
Jesus, who did hang on the cross for me; chastise me here, as thou please,
but free me then from such a damnation. On the other side, the earth leueled
into a Paradise, and the Sun, moon and stars set in order, shall Christ
mount the skies, rounded with all that blessed company: where sorrow never
enters, nor joys cease.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER, Of the painos of Hell and Purgatory.
NOtwistanding the common saying; Odere peccare mali formidine paenae; the ill
hate sin for fear of punishment: many holy Saints, as S. Hierome, and
others, have used the consideration of the pains of hell, to stir themselves
up to the detestation of sin, and to the works of penance and austerity:
whereas therefore love and fear are the two spurs, we must use to encourage
our heavy nature, and fear the first for beginners, let us ponder the chief
object of fear, which is pain.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of the pains of Hell in common.
1. COnsider first, that as it is said of the joys of heaven. Nec oculus
vidit, nec auris audiuit, nec in cor hominis ascendit, quod praeparauit Deus
diligentibus se; neither the eye has seen nor ear has heard, neither has
it ascended in to the heart of man, what God has prepared for them that love
him. So of the pains of hell it may be as truly said, that neither the eyes
nor heart of man can conceive or imagine them. Some risen from death, and
others in visions have seen them, who affirm that all the tortures and
torments imaginable in this world, are but toys and trifles in respect of the
least of those, and that they had rather suffer all these together till the day
of judgment, then the least in hell for a day. Divines define beatitude a
perfect, and neuer-ending state of all that is good, without the least mixture
of ill, or contrariety: if damnation therefore be the opposite state and
condition, it must needs be an everlasting deluge of all that is ill, without
the least glimpse of good, ease or comfort; a chaos of all misery, and a
total privation of good. The afflictions of this world, come but one by one,
and after a time end, at least with death, but the pains of hell come all
together, and endure for eternity.

Conclude and conceive a wholesome fear of hell, which may withdraw thee from
sin, which only can bring thee thither: and wonder at the blind security of
worldlings, fearing the sting of a gnat and laughing at the fire of hell.

2. Consider secondly, a poor sick man burning with a pestilent fever,
together with an universal pain through out his whole body; his breast on
fire, his head rent a sunder, his eyes ready to fly out. his teeth raging, his
sides pierced with stitches, as with swords or knives; his feet, and joints
racked with the gout; and finally his heart even bursting with anguish: and he
crying out for one drop of water to cool his tongue: what heart would not
relent and melt with compassion of such a sight? And yet this poor creature
might have some mixture of ease and comfort; as a bed to lie in, a friend to
comfort him, and grieve for him; a good conscience to ease him, and a will
resigned to God: finally, that these torments would once end, at least with
death. But in hell are millions of torments together without the least fancy
of comfort: for his bed a fiery cauldron of lead and brimstone; for his
companions, tormenting devils; his soul racked with sin, his will in a
perpetual hatred of God: and finally without all hope that ever his pains
shall end, or relent.

Conclude seriously, to do for the avoiding of these torments, what thou or
any prudent man would, to free himself from the sad condition of our sick
man: which if thou do, thou may be confident and secure.

3. Consider thirdly, that God in all his attributes is infinite, and as we
may say, every way a God; as in wisdom, in power, in goodness, in mercy, in
justice: he is a God as well in hell, as in heaven; as well in chastising
the obstinate, as in revvarding the penitent: noe vvonder then if S. Paul said,
Horrendum est incidere in manus Dei viuentis; it is horrible to fall into the
hands of the living God. Who only has power and skill to punish the
foulness of sin, as it deserves. By the works of his mercy here, we
may measure, what will be the effects of his justice then: by his mercy we
see his only Son become man, exposed to torments and death for us; by his
mercy he pardons the greatest sins, for the least act of true sorrovv; by
mercy he expects, and re-expecteth the conversion of a sinner to the last
gasp, never leaving to inspire and inuit him thereunto: what now can we
think his justice, his anger, and wrath will be toward the obstinate and
impenitent? certainly to revenge his Sons death, and his own contempt,
most grievous and terrible.

Conclude a timely repentance out of these words of S. Paul; An diuitias
bonitatis eius, and patientiae, and longanimitatis contemnis? ignoras, quoniam
benignitas Dei ad paenitentiam te adducit? secundum autem duritiem tuam and
impaenitens cor thesaurizas tibi iram in die ira, etc. do thou conte^ne the
riches of his goodness, and patience; and longanimitie, not knovving that the
benignity of God brings thee to penance? but according to thy hardness, and
impenitent heart, thou heapest to thy self wrath in the day of wrath etc.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the exterior pains of hell.
1. COnsider first, the description of hell out of holy Job: Terra tenebrosa,
and operta mortis caligine; terra miseriae, and tenebrurum, vbi vmbra mortis,
and nullus ordo, sed sempiternus horror inhabitat. The dark land, that is
covered with the mist of death: the land of miseri^ and darkness, where is
the shadovv of death, and noe order but everlasting horror inhabiteth. A vast,
dark and hideous cave, below in the bowels or center of the earth, so shutt
upon all sides, that no beam of light, or breath of air has ever entered
there: all filled with a thick and most stinking flame of brimstone, like a
furnace of burning glass, Iron, or other such metal: a pond or lake of fire,
as the Scripture calls it, which by divine power tormenteth even spirits and
souls. A cave full of horror, stench and darkness; for that fire lights no
further, then to torment the sight with ugly shapes and figures: nothing is
there to be heard, but the insulting clamours of the tormentours, and the
shrikes, cries, howlings, gnashing of teeth, curses and blasphemies of the
poor tormented prisoners, smothered and crowded up in those eternally
tormenting flames.

Conclude to live always in fear of this dungeon; and at the assault of
sin, assuage the rebellion of thy passions with this demand of Isaias: Quis
poterit habitare cum igne deuorante? quis habitabit cum ardoribus sempiternis?
who can dvvell with devouring fire? who shall dwell with everlasting heats?
and resolve, never to adventure the fire of hell till thou can suffer thy
finger in the flame of a candle.

2. Consider secondly, how every sense shall have its particular torment and
pain: the eye shall see nothing but the shapes of Devils, and other horrid
spectacles, fleeting up and down in those shady and darksome flames. The ear
shall ever resound with cries, groans, howlings, gnashing of teeth, cursing of
one an other, and blaspheming of their Creator. The taste shall be tormented
with an unspeakable hunger and thirst: neither has the rich glutton obtained
yet that drop of water to cool his tongue, which he has so long begged of
his father Abraham. Besides this, the Scripture says; they shall be drenched
with the bitterness of wormwood and the gall of dragons. The smell shall be
always filled with most noisome stenches and pestilent smells. But the touch,
that last and general sense, shall be continually tossed betwixt the two
extremes of heat and cold, fire and ice; a torment not to be conceived: next
the bitings of serpents and adders, the scorpion-stripes and lashes of the
devils, and the heavy and pressing load of chains and shackles, shall never
cease, nor give one minute of respite.

Conclude to attend a little, and give ear to the confused lamentations of
those wretches; o accursed tongues, that shall never utter but blasphemies! o
miserable ears, that shall never hear but groans and howlings! o eyes, o
body, that shall never see, never feel, but eternal miseries for so short
pleasures etc!

3. Consider thirdly, that as good company is a great comfort to men in
affliction, so nothing is more miserable, then odious, insulting and hateful
companions. See then, how thou can pass eternity in company of Devils,
inueterate enemies to mankind; revenging and wreaking on him the hatred they
bear to God; and upon the damned at their full and pleasure, having them under
sure hold, as gally-slaues. Moreover the hatred, that the damned there bear
one the other is unspeakable; no respect there of persons, blood, kindred or
acquaintance; all blaspheme God and his Saints, and curse, rent, and tear one
another; subjects their Princes, children their parents, wives their husbands:
and especially those, that have sinned here together, and been the occasion of
their mutual damnation; o what rancour, what bitterness, what gall will they
spit at one the other? and yet must needs be fellows and companions for
eternity: o misery, that shall never see the face of a friend to pity him!

Conclude to be a lover and procurer of peace to thy uttermost endeavor; Sic
enim filius Det vocaberis: for so theu shall be called the son of God. And
be sure to contract no friend ships at all, but grounded on true and fincere,
virtue and love of God; for that all other are in themselves both fickle and
unconstant, and in the end turn to iealousies, discontents and hatred: let us
therefore love now, that we may love ever.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of the interior pains of the soul.
1. COnsider first, that the interior anguish and torment of a soul in hell,
is without comparison greater, then all those of the body; though but few can
imagine it so. First therefore, the understanding will be employed in nothing
but in false and erroneous judgments of God and his justice, condemning him of
partiality in damning them and saving others; of cruelty in punishing them so
grievously for so small and light sins; of hatred also and ill will, in not
giving them grace to repent, as easily he might; and a thousand other
blasphemous judgments, without rest or ease. Next the memory represents
ever, and compares the passed pleasures with the present torments; the
breuity of those, with the eternal durance of these. Hence proceeds that
Vermis conscientiae, qui nunquam moritur: the worm and remorse of conscience
which never dies: which is a despitefull and raging despair, a repentance and
sorrow without truit; a fad and sullen melancholy, considering what they have
lost, and for what they have lost it; and the oportunities, they had not to
lose it, but to have gained and secured all with little pains; seeing on the
other side, that others of their friends and companions have made use of Gods
favors, and gained what they have lost: hence they burst out into an envy
against their companions, rage and fury with themselves, and curses against
all they know.

Conclude to lay hold on time, and Gods grace, while thou may have it; and
ask god pardon for thy negligence hitherto, in losing so much.

2. Confider secondly, how the will is obdurate and obstinate in the affection
of sin; tossed with a thousand desires, not able to accomplish any one,
hating and bitterly cursing her God and Creator, whom she was made to love
and bless; envying him and his Saints their beatitude and glory: and vvishing
nothing more, then that she could pull God down from his throne of majesty:
but seeing herself inferior to such a revenge, all her rage and fury falls
on her own head. The inferior and sensitive appetite is miserably rent
asunder with whole troops of most violent, and withal contrary passions, as
of fears and frights, sadness, hatred, fury; envy, longings, and heavy
despaires of obtaining any thing. The fancy and imagination are perpetually
posessed with a thousand horrid spectacles, monstrous shapes, and ugly shadows
of wild beasts, dragons, lions, etc. so that, the whole soul is a hell to her
self, and by these interior disorders her own cruel executioner.

Conclude, for the avoiding of these miseries, to employ thy will here in the
love of thy God; to bridle thy appetites and subdue them to reason; and to
accustom thy imagination to pious and holy objects: for as we do here
habituate them, so shall they do or suffer in the next world.

3. Consider thirdly, that all the torments hitherto mentioned, are nothing in
comparison of the Paena damni, that is an eternal privation of our last end,
for which we are created, and to which our nature carries us, like a stone to
the center: a perpetual banishment from the face of God, the essential object
of beatitude; from the court of heaven and the company of the blessed Angels
and Saints. O if we could apprehend aright, what it is never to see God, our
universal and infinite good, the aim and butt of all our desires: and whose
want consequently, must needs be an infinite evil, a privation of all, that
can be imagined good: and if this be such a pain for all in general, what
will it be for Christians, who by faith have had a greater knowledge of this
good, and by hope have been nigher unto it? and how far greater for Prelates,
Priests and Religious men, who by their sacred functions and vows have, as it
were, rasted somewhat of this sweet, and whose hands Quasi contrectaueru^t de
verbo vitae? have as it were even handled of the word of life, a thousand
hells, according to saint Chrysostom, joined in one, cannot parallel this
only separation from the sight of God.

Conclude therefore to lose all, and to be deprived of all, rather then of God:
pray that all the miseries of this world and torments of the next, may come
upon thee, so thou may escape this one; Fac me, Domine, tuis semper inhaerere
mandatis and a te numquam separari parmittas. Amen. Make me, o Lord, always
to abide in thy commandments, and never permit me to be separated from thee,
Amen.

4. Consider fourrhly, that how grievous soever the torments are, yet some
small comfort would it be, if either there were any respite, or discontinuance
of them; or at least, that once they would have an end: but alas! neither is in
hell to be expected; any truce, or cessation of torments, no nor change but to
a greater torment: neither does here, as in other things, use and custom any
way assuage the smart, or obdurate the senses against the pains; but after ten
hundred thousand years of suffering, the feeling will be as fresh and sharp,
as it was the first day or hour. But, which is most fearful of all to think
on, the durance of them shall be for ever and eternal without end; as long as
God shall be God, shall these pains endure in their full vigor and strength;
this shall the damned know and never cease to think on. O fearful Eternity,
who can comprehend thee? who can look beyond thee? count ten millions of
years for every star in the sky, for every moat in the Sun, for every
sand in the sea; and shall these tormenrs then come to an end and expire? o
nothing less: they shall then begin afresh and run over the said millions
a million of times for ever.

Conclude to imprint well in thy memory this eternity, it will arm thy
patience in the way of virtue, and against the short pleasures of sin.

5. Consider fifthly, or rather conclude out of what has hitherto been
considered; first a strong resolution to prepare for this day of eternity,
that never has night: first by purging thy soul from all mortal sin by
true penance and confession; for hell can swallow nothing, but what is infected
with mortal sin: this done, and all secured for what is past; then carefully
provide for the future by mortification and the practice of a virtuous life;
having always before thy eyes, the eternity of pains on the one side; and
this will strengthen the against the labors and difficulties of virtue; and on
the other fide, how few there are, that escape them; Multi vocati, pauci
electi: many are called, fevv dect. This will work in thee a watchful fear:
were there but one in ten thousand to be lost, how should I fear, lest I
should be that man? Secondly, wonder and admire the stupid negligence of most
Christians, who believing that every mortal sin carries to hell, yet commit
them with that facility as they do; and live nevertheless securely without
fear!

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. Of the pains of Purgatory.
1. COnsider first, that as the place of Purgatory is next door to hell, so
all the exterior and sensible torments are wholly the same, excepting the
durance of them: so that the greatest tortures of this world are nothing in
comparison of those. And although the interior powers are all settled, and well
ordered; the understanding settled in the light of faith; the will inflamed with
the love of god: the imagination and the rest all quieted: yet the present
restraint and banishment from the fight of God, and the company of his Angels
and Saints correspondeth, and (setting apart Eternity) in some sort afflicts
more intensely, then the Paena damni the privation of our last end, does those
in hell: first, because these holy souls, having by faith a clear
apprehension of Gods perfections, and by charity a most intense love of his
Goodness; and by consequence a most longing desire to be with him, and enjoy
him, do from hence suffer an unspeakable anguish and pain, to be so detained
from him: secondly, because they know not certainly, how long this will
endure; it may be for a hundred years, it may be till the day of judgment.

Conclude to frame a different judgment of the pains of Purgatory, them
worldlings do? who think, if they escape hell, that the rest is but a
fleabite: endeavor also to avoid venial finnes, and to labor to satisfy for
all here, at a far eafier rate, then it can be done there.

2. Consider secondly, the rigor of Gods justice, in chastising so terribly
sins so light, so venial, as we esteem them; and this in the damned of
hell, would be no such wonder; for they are his enemies, and obstinate in their
hatred against him; but these poor and holy souls are his friends and
faithful servants, resigned in all things to his blessed will; nay with a
wonderful resignation actually thanking him, as much for this his justice and
heavy hand upon them, as for the glory and bliss he will shortly give them:
and yet such is his hatred to all sort of sin, that for no former services
done him, for no respects of present or future amity, will he abate the least
puntillo of his justice, Sed soluent vsque ad vltimum quadrantem. But they
shall repay the last farthing. Verily, setting apart the passion of our
Savior, in no other thing does appear so much, either the severity of Gods
justice, or the enormity of sin, as in the torments. these poor souls
endure in Purgatory.

Conclude chiefly two things; the first, a right apprehension of finne, how
light so ever it seem; with a resolution to avoid all, as much as thou can,
and to satisfy here for them; for believe it, a penny here will go further,
then a pound in Purgatory. The second is, to assist and satisfy for the holy
souls by prayer and good works, what thou can; for it is most grateful to
God, most profitable to thy self, and comfortable to them, who always cry;
Miseremini mei, miseremini mei, saltem vos amici mei. Have mercy upon me, have
mercy upon me, at the least you my friends.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER, Of the glory of heaven.
THE common bait of man kind is gain, interest, and reward; and as the fear
of punishment deterreth from ill, so the hope of reward allureth to pains and
labor: see then the wonderful providence of our good God, who as he deterreth
us from sin by the fear of Hell and Purgatory, so he does encourage us to
virtue by the unspeakable joys of heaven.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of the glory of heaven in common.
1. COnsider first, how it is in vain for us to hope, that we can frame here a
true conceit of the joys of heaven: for the Scipture tells us, Quod oculus
non vidit, nec auris audiuit, nec in cor hominis ascendit, quae praeparauit
Deus ijs, qui diligunt illum: that neither the eye has not seen, nor ear has
heard, neither has it ascended in to the heart of man, what things God has
prepared for them that love him. If we cannot fully apprehend the least pain
of hell or Purgatory, being borne, bred and inured so to miseries; how shall
we fancy the joys and glories of heaven, having so little a smacke of them
here? yet let us see, what by discourse we can reach unto. God almighty is
infinite in all his astributes, in Majesty, in justice, in power; but his
mercy, goodness, leberality, and bounty ouerswell, as it were, the banks, and
exceed the rest; Misericordia eius super omnia opera eius; his mercy is above
all his works. If then his justice has ordained such torments for his
enemies; what banquetts, do we think, will he make for his friends, where the
Father, Son and holy Ghost concur to honor them? that is, where goodness
gives, wisdom ordains, and omnipotency puts in execution? again if by
the cost and price of a thing, we guess at its worth; what shall we think
heaven to be, which has cost the life and blood of the only Son of god? and
which also must cost such pains for men to obtain it?

Conclude to raise up thy desires and endeauours that way, and let heaven be
the But of thy labors.

2. Consider secondly, the definition of Beatitude, viz. Status omnium bonorum
congregatione perfectus: A perfect state replenished with all good. A
permanent and consistent being for ever, and ever, furnished and replenished
with, all that can be imagined good or delightful; without the least mixture
or blemish of ill, fear, or discontent; a general and universal good,
filling brimfull the vast capacity of our affections and desires, and securing
from all want, or fear of change. The dignities, honors, and delights of
this world, we imagine them great and eminent, until we have them; but we
lay no sooner hand on them, but I know not how, all the former esteem of them
suddenly vanishes, and and the soul remains hungry and unquiet as before;
S. Austin gives the reason: Fecisti nos Domine ad Te, and inquietum est cor
nostrum, donec requiescat in te: thou have made us naturally tend to thee, and
our heart is never quiet until it rest in thee: which is only obtained in the
state of beatitude; where as the Psalmist says, Inebriabuntur ab vbertate
domus tuae, and torrente voluptatis tuae potabis eos: quoniam apud te est fon^
vita etc. They shall be inchriated with the plenty of thy house, and with
the torrent of thy pleasure thou shall make them drink: because with. thee is
the fountain of life. etc.

Conclude with most humble thanks and gratitude to our good God, who before
we were borne, has prepared for us such gloryes and delights; and let our
humble prayer ever be. Vt non perdat iniquitas nostra, quod pro nobis fecit
bonitas sua: that our iniquity may not frustrate, what his goodness has
performed for us and remember, that who will reserve himself for the
pleasures of heaven, must not cloy himself with these here below, for they are
inconsistent.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the essential Glory of the Soul.
1. COnsider first, that the essential beatitude of the soul consists in a
most perfect, pure, and amiable union with God; that is, in a clear vision of
his essence, attributes, and perfections, by which the soul is transformed
into God, deified, or made God by participation; Scimus quoth S. John, quoniam
cum apparuerit similes ei erimus, quoniam videbimus eum sicuti est. We know
that when he shall appear, we shall be like to him, because we shall see him
as he is. Have you seen glass or iron in the furnace, so penetrated and
incorporated with the fire, that in heat, in splendor, in color, and all
other qualities, it seems no more it self, but all flame and fire: so the
soul by this spiritual and intellectual union with god, is thoroughly
penetrated with the splendours of the divine essence, no more now herself, but
a second Demi God. Hence it is that the soul rests so full, so satisfied and
securely contented, having within and without her the wellhead, or Ocean of
universal good and bliss, never more to want, never more to fear.

Conclude with wonder and admiration of Gods infinite bounty and liberality, to
raise a poor and frail creature, whose origin was nothing, whose being a
blast, to that height, and dignity, that the omnipotency of God himself,
cannot mount her to a higher state or degree.

2. Consider secondly the happy functions of the three powers of the soul; the
understanding, will, and memory: the understanding sees most clearly the
divine Essence, and nature with all its attributes and perfections, of
Infinity, Eternity, Immensity, Omnipotency etc. Next is laid open to her view
that most hidden mystery of the B. Trinity; how one God subsisteth in three
Persons; how the Son is from eternity begotten of his Father; and how the
holy Ghost without generation proceeds from both: then the mystery of the
Incarnation is discovered, how one person can subsist in two natures etc.
Finally all the secrets of our faith; all the wondrous works of God, both of
nature and grace; all his now hidden judgments of providence, predestination
etc. shall be then with infinite delight known and penetrated. Hence the will
of necessity is inflamed and set on fire with a most ardent and feruorous love
of God, as of her father, benefactour, friend, espouse, and what so ever other
title she can invent. Now the memory is drowned in God: as in an Ocean of
delights; neither can she think of any thing, but of God: looking backward,
she sees all the benefits, he has done for her; and how she has escaped,
where others have perished; and that by his grace only: looking forward, she
sees nothing but eternal continuance of felicity: o happy soul!

Conclude to employ here, as much as thou ^anst, these three powers in the like
acts by faith, love, and contemplation; so to begin a heaven in this world,
and continue it in the next: Videre and amare, amare and laudare, laudare and
laetariin saecula saeculorum. To see and to love, to love and to praise, to
praise and to rejoice for ever.

3. Consider thirdly the excessive bounty of our good God, who gives his
servants in reward of their loyalty, as much as he is able to give; that is,
himself fully and clearly, as he is in him self; that is, Bonum infinitum,
vltra quod, nec est, nec dari potest aliquid. An immence ocean of goodness,
surpassing all Imaginary limitts. Blessed be all his creatures be his
goodness; which would not have our felicity bounded within the compass of any
thing, under himself. What shall we here say or think? the Angels of heaven,
those so noble powers, so celestial princes, have no other object of their
bliss, then this: nay, what do I speak of Angels? God himself, the B.
Trinity, Father, Son and holy Ghost, have no other joy or bliss, but in
themselves; and the very same essentially and substantially have we: and can
we doubt but what suffices to make God, and his Angels blessed, will also
suffice to make men happy? verily a silent astonishment will speak more in
this place, then can all the tongues of heaven and earth together. Finally note
out of S. Thomas, how our dearest God is wholly ours: Se nascens dedit socium,
conuescens in edulium, se moriens in pretium, se regnans dat in praemium. In
his hirth making himself our companion, in his last supper our food, in his
death our Redeemer, in heaven our revvard. And shall not we be altogether his,
in life and death, In tempore and aeternitate? In time and eternity.

Conclude with an humble oblation of thy self, to be ever his; and conceive an
ardent desire, to see and enjoy that sovereign beauty of his divine Essence;
to which nothing does more nearly dispose, then purity of heart; Beati mundo
cord, quoniam ipsi Deum videbunt. Blessed are the clean of heart, for they
shall see God.

4. Consider fourthly two conditions more of this felicity, which make it
perfect and complete; viz: that it is to endure for all Eternity, as long as
God shall be God; and never to grow tedious or wearysome, as the pleasures of
this world do; but is always new, always fresh. O what a secure and settled
joy does it cause, to think and know, that this happy state shall never have
an end? after millions and millions of years, I am as far of from the period
of my joys, as at the first hour, I entered into them: those that cannot
conceive, what this is, let them reflect, what a cooling blast it is to the
greatest Monarchs of the world, in the height of their glory, to think that
all this must be left, God knows how soon; but by death infallibly; and what
would they give for the security of a hundred years? o beati qui habitant in
domo tua Domine, in saecula saeculorum laudabunt te: o hlessed are they, that
dwell in thy house, o lord, for ever and ever they shall praise thee. Again,
the divine Essence is so infinite in beauty and delights; that the more, and
the longer the soul does behold it, the greater content she receives, and the
more does she desire to behold it; so that there is, Sitis absque paena:
thirst without pain, because the thirst is ever satisfied; and again,
Saturitas sine fastidio; abundance without cloying; because that does anew
whet and refresh the appetite.

Conclude with a manly resolution, to scorn the frail and muddy delights of
this world, which are no sooner had, but both leave us, and cloy us: too base
for so noble a soul, capable of a joy, that shall never end; and yet ever
content and fill her to the brim.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of the glory of the Body.
1. COnsider first, the wonderful liberality God uses toward his servants:
for not content to raise the soul to so great a degree of glory, as she is
capable of, and has deserved; he does also for her sake and respect, glorify
her body too, which did rather hinder and decline the poor soul from heaven,
by her gross inclinations and sensualityes, then any way advance her thither.
This was, that he promised to Abraham, to wit, that he would not only bliss
his son Isaac, his true and legitimate heir, but also he would have an
especial care of Ismael, begotten on a slave; because he was a thing belonging
to him. So because the body belonged to his servant, as well as the soul, he
does also raise it out of the dirt, and place it amongst the Princes of glory:
o what power is this that can cleanse and purge so stinking a puddle, as our
body is, and bring it to such splendor and brightness, as those great Courtiers
and Grandees of heaven disdain not, to admit it to their company, and give it
a seat amidst their Thrones. This is, what the Proverb says: Omnes domestici
eius vestiti sunt duplicibus; all his houshoulds are clothed with duble. All
his servants have double Robes of glory, one of the soul, another of the body.

Conclude to get here the full mastery and dominion over thy body; and
especially endeavor to purge it, Ab omni gula and luxuria; from all gluttony
and luxerie. for nothing is more odious in the sight of Angels, then these two
swinish vices; and consequently nothing more defiling the soul, and making it
incapable of their company; and nothing more grateful, then temperance and
chastity.

2. Consider secondly the four dotes, or gifts bestowed on the body, to wit,
Clarity, Subtility, Agility and Impassibility. Clarity consists in a beauty
and splendor, far surpassing that of the stars or Sun; more bright then
pearl, more transparent then any crystal or diamond; so that the whole
anatomy and frame of the body, as veins, joints and arteries, appear and
reflect most glorious to the eye. Subtility makes the body seem more like a
spirit, then body, more subtle, then the air, or beam of the Sun; so that
it can penetrate any stone or metal, never so gross and hard, without
rupture or division. Agility or swiftnes is so great, that no eagle, no arrow,
no not the Sun can come near it; rather like the cast of an eye, or glance
of a thought, it flies at the beck of the soul, millions and millions of
leagues in a moment, without stop or wearynes: by this, though heaven be never
so wide, the Blessed converse one with an other, as in the same room.
Impasfibility is an immortality, free from death, and infirmityes, from pain
and toil hunger and cold etc. ever vigorous, healthy and sound: and all these
for all eternity. Pardon blessed Angels and flaming Cherubins, that such
carcasses may stand amongst you without shame and confusion.

Conclude with infinite thanks to our good God for such surpassing
privileges: and resolve to suffer and bear whatsoever shall befall thee,
patiently and courageously, knowing. Quod non sint condignae passiones huius
temporis ad futuram gloriam. That the passions of this time, are not condign
to the glory to come.

3. Consider thirdly that the delight of the five corporal senses shall not be
there wanting, as some may fear; but shall be in a far higher degree: for
what a joyful and glorious object shall the fight have in the beauty of those
heavenly Palaces, whose twelve gates are so many precious stones, whose walls
and pauement are of burnishd and pellucid gold? then the glorious bodies
beautified with the four radiant qualities, as before, and above all the
humanity of our Savior Jesus Christ, what gracious splendours, what
delightful Rubyes from those wounds will it display on all sides? Expect not
for the like in this gross and foggy climate below. Now for the ear, those
sweet conuersations one with an other, that perpetual music and narmony of
the divine praises, ever resounding and redoubling in the Empyriall regions,
none can conceive them, or who is in possession of them. The smell shall ever
be refreshed with most sweet and fragant odours proceeding both from the
place, and more from the glorious bodies: neither shall the senses of tasting
and touching, how gross and base so ever they are, want their proper
delight; heavenly dewes shall steep them all in pleasures according to their
nature.

Conclude to mortify here thy senses, that there they may the more freely
drink. De fluminis illius impetu qui laetificat ciuitatem Dei. Of the violence
of that river which makes the titie of God joyful.

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. Of the glory of the heavenly Palaces, and of the
company, or inhabitants there.
1. COnsider first, that because we cannot conceive the excellencies, and
beauties of the heavenly Jerusalem, as it is in it self, and as the blessed
find it; therefore the holy Scripture and Fathers, to whet and sharpen our dull
apprehension, do describe it unto us by the similitude of those things, we
have here in most esteem and admiration; as rivers, meadows, trees, groves,
flowers, gold, precious stones and the like. So S. John recounteth, how God
showed him a most-glorious City, whose walls were most high and large, all of
precious stone, consisting of twelve deep foundations ingraued with the names
of the twelve Apostle^; and as many gates, every one of a distinct precious
stone; with an Angel at every one for Porter. The streets were paued with most
pure and transparent gold, like-crystall: no need there of Sun or moon, Quia
claritas Dei illuminat eam, and lucerna eius-est Agnus: for the glory of God
does illuminate it, and the lamb is the lamp thereof. From whose seat
streameth forth a large crystal river; on whose each bank are planted stately
trees of life, bearing each month new fruit; Et folia ligni ad sanitatem
gentium. And the leaves of the tree for the curing of the Gentiles. A thousand
fountains of fragant balsame, and springs of sweetest honey; no winter, nor
summer, but a perpetual spring and autumn conjoined; etc. what so ever thy
fancy can imagine.

Conclude to direct thy voyage to the finding out of this so rich a City:
behold a little the industry and toil used in the voyages to the Indies, both
east and west; and be ashamed to see Christians so eager for the Indies, and so
slow for heaven, being yet more sure by faith of these riches, then of those.

2, Consider secondly the glorious inhabitants and company of this heavenly
City: first the Angels are Millia millium, and decies centena millia
Thousands of thousands, and ten hundred thousand. That is innumerable, all
contained in three Hierarchies, and divided into nine quires, differing each
from other, as in nature, so also in degree of glory. Secondly the number of
men, S. John confesses, cannot be told; Vidi multitudinem magnam, qua numerari
non potest; I savv a great multitude which can not be numbered. these are
intermingled among the Angels in higher or lower degrees, according to their
merits: and the B. Virgin mother of God seated above all the Angels, as
highest in her merits and prerogatives. All these, as well men, as Angels, are
most noble, most illustrious; all of the blood Royal; all sons and heirs of
the most high God; and consequently all Kings, with crowns of gold on their
heads: all most wise, most holy, most prudent, and vvithall most affable,
loving and courteous. But above all the love and charity they, from the highest
to the lowest, bear one another, is most admirable, most unfeigned, most
constant, as though they had all but one heart, one will, one soul: hence the
joy and content of each one is increased and redoubled as manyfold, as he has
friends; that is, as there are blessed souls or Angels in heaven; for
according to S. Austin, every one rejoices as much at the glory of an others
as at his own; calculate this, if thou can.

Conclude, if thou desire to dwell with such friends, to imitate their
virtues? first their union and conformity to the will of God: next their love
and charity one to an-other; obeying our Superiors, loving our equals,
rejoicing at the good of all, as our own; content with our own lot and place,
without envying of others etc.

3. Consider thirdly, or rather conclude out of what has been said, to
forsake utterly the dross of earthly pleasures, and to reserve thy appetite
for that heavenly and eternal banquet. O soul of mine, what do thou?
whether do thou wander thorough the land of Egypt, picking stravves, and
drinking of puddle-vvater; with so great toil and sweat of thy brows?
what do thou stand scraping of dunghills for old rags, which cannot cover
thy nakedness? lift up thy head, and look to heauen-vvards; there lies that
hidden treasure, thou so gapest after. Does thy heart defire pleasures? there
only do they flow in full measure: does long life, does health please thee?
there only is life immortal, and health impassible: does beauty allure thee,
or abundance, or melody, or friendship, or noble and good company? seek them
where they are, In terra viuentium; in the land of living. not in this desert,
Et valle morientium. And veil of fading mortals. Does honor, glory or
riches most provoke thy appetite? all there are Princes and Kings, and tread
upon gold and precious stones. Finally vvilt thou be free from pains, quit of
fears, and secure from wants? only immortality can arm thee to proof
against all. Quare insidientur Daemones, quoah S. Austin, frangant corpus
ieiunia, premant carnes vestimenta; labores grauent, vigiliae exiccent, clamet
in me iste, inquietet me ille vel ille, frigus incuruet, conscientia murmuret,
calor vrat, caput doleat, pestus ardeat, infletur stomachus, pallescat vultus,
infirmer totus; deficiat in dolor vita mea and anni mei in gemitibus,
ingrediatur putredo in ossibus meis and subter me scateat; vt requiescam in die
tribulationis and ascendam ad populum accinstum nostrum. Wherefore let the
deceits of devils molest me, the rigor of fasts weaken my body, the
austeritie of hearclothes pinch my flesh the tiresomenesse of labors grieve
it, the continuance of watching dry up its natural moisture; let this or
that man trouble me with invectiue clamours, let the violence of cold bend my
limbs, let my conscience murmur, let the heat scorch me, let my head ache, my
breast burn, my stomach, be inflamed, my face wax pale, let me all be infirm,
let my life decay for sorrovv, and my years for gronings, let rottenesse enter
in my bones and swarm under me, that I may rest in the day of tribulation,
and ascend to our girded people.

The Conclusion of the Purgative way.
1. COnsider first, and recapitulate what thou art according to thy body;
earth and clay in thy beginning, misery and Infirmity in thy life time, and
after death dust and corruption. Next according to thy soul, thy origin is
nothing; thy being spiritual, noble and immortal, it is true; but here
imprisoned in a corruptable body, tossed with the waves of a thousand
passions, and at last to pass hence into an unknown Region, doubtful of thy
future condition of eternal bliss or curse. Lastly thy spiritual and
supernatural being by grace, is a pure grace and gift indeed; totally
depending on the liberality and goodness of God, without the least disposition
or seed thereof in nature: so that by this sole grace we are what we are,
that is the sons of God, and heirs of heaven; as also what we are not,
that is free from all the sins, we have not committed, and from the
punishment of those we have committed.

Conclude hence two firm and principal resolutions, most necessary for thy
spiritual progress. The first is to purge thy self of all pride or self
conceit, for what thou art, or what thou have; knovving now, that all is
from Gods mere goodness, both in the giving and in the conseruing: and this is
so general that the highest Angel is no whit exempted, nor the Mother of God
nor the humanity of our Savior: and hereon may thou ground a true and
everlasting humility. The second is ever to love. reverence and thank God for
all the gifts and graces bestovved, as well on others, as on thy self,
rejoicing in thy own nothing, that so all may be ascribed to God alone, to
his greater honor and glory, Amen.

2. Consider seconly, that if our nature and being do give us such ground of
true humility; what fear, what abiection, what tremblings will the
consideration of our own vvilfull sins, or death, Judgment, and hell being
upon us? by sin we have most stubbornely rebelled against souueraigne
Majesty, and most vugratefully provoked goodness it self to wrath; hence
follovveth the terror of death, Terribilium omuium terribilissimum, of
dreadful things the most terrible. Were not yet the Judgment follovving more
terrible, both in it self, for that sentence is final for eternity, as also
if it come out against us, no less then the endless pains of hellfire, and
as long a banishment from the face of bliss, is to be our lot and doom. O
poor caytife! with what face can thou look to heaven? how can thou
entertain a thought of pride, or presumption? how can thou despise the
least worm, that cravvleth on the earth? who have so debased thy sslfe by
finne, and so often stood guilty of eternal damnation; and how thou stand
yet, God only kuovveth; Culpae certissimus, veniae autem incertus. Certain of
thy sins committed but uncertain of their pardone.

Conclude finally a new and lovver degree of humility; that whereas hitherto
by nature thou have been as good, or no worse, than thy fellows, which
only infers humility toward God, but not absolutely one to an other; thy
sins now have made thee so base, that all creatures are above thee, and
therefore now no shame, but virtue to submit to all, and abject thy self
beneath all for God.

These follovving Meditations are to begin to be read on the fifth of December
at night.

THE SECOND PART, MEDITATIONS FOR Proficients, or for the Illuminatiue way.
THE garden of our soul being cleansed, and the weeds of sin cast out; the
next step is to furnish and plant it with all sorts of flovvers and svveet
herbs; that is all sort of virtues, which have relation to God, our
neighbor, or our self. To this purpose shall serve at present the holy
mysteries of our B. Saviors Incarnation, life and passion; in whom are found
all sorts of virtues possible, not in their speculatine definitions, but as
they are to us useful and profitable; that is, in their practical source and
cause: for our Saviors life and passion was not only Redemptio ab omni malo,
a redemption from all evil; but also, Exemplum ad omne bonum, and lumen
oculerum nostrorum, an example to all good and a light for our spiritual eyes
to guide us in the way of virtue.

THE FIRST CHAPTER, Of the Incarnation of our Savior Jesus Christ.
THis mystery of the Jncarnation he only can understand, who is the author
and worker of it; yet S. Augustine, S. Thomas and other Saints have studied to
find out the reasons and conueniences, we are capable of; for our comfort,
gratitude and spiritual progress.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of the conueniences of the Incarnation.
1. COnsider first, that the mystery of the holy Incarnation was most
convenient for the honor and glory of God himself; first because most
conform and agreeable to his nature; which being Summa bonitas, most
surpassing goodness, is also, Sui sum communicatua, most free in
communicating it self, and in this mystery uniting man's nature to the diuiue
person, he has in a manner communicated himself to all creatures, Nam homo
quoad aliquid est omnis creatura. For man in something participates of every
creature. Secondly the sin of man was infinite, because against infinite
Majesty; and so the satisfaction was also to be infinite; but how should this
be done? God was infinite, but being the person offended, could not satisfy;
man had offended, and so was to satisfy, but being finite and limited,
couldnot do it sufficiently, that is infinitely: here the divine wisdom
making one of God and man, sound out a way, that man might satisfy, and God
give to the satisfaction infinite vvorth. Thirdly, by this Mystery all the
divine attributes and perfections have appeared more, then by all the creatures
besides: but most of all, his mercy and justice have here met in one; for what
greater justice, then that the son of God should pay with his blood and life
for the sins of men? and what greater mercy, then that men should enjoy and
offer to God this price as their own, and satisfy him there with?

Conclude with admiration of his wisdom, and love of that goodness, which
has been so bountiful toward thee: and here at the beginning offer thy
self wholy and sincerely to his will and service.

2. Consider secondly, how much this Mystery has conduced to the honor and
profit of mankind; for what greater honor, then that a man should be truly
and substantially God, adored and served of all creatures? that all other men
should be truly brothers of God? that men and Angels making up one church, and
one quire, the Prince and head of both should be, not an Angel, but a man?
that the Creator, Redeemer and Judge of all things, should be a true and real
man? ponder this seriously, not as a fancy or conceit, but as a real and solid
truth. Now the profits and vtilities, that have hence acrued unto mankind, what
memory can sum them up? or what tongue can utter them? in a word, man by
this mystery has been redeemed from the slavery and subjection of the devil,
and all miseries temporal and eternal following thereof; and is adopted the
son of God, heir of heaven etc. Secondly we have, in God made man, a present
remedy and cure for all our passions and distempers: for what can better cure
our pride, than his humility? our bravery and covetousness, than his poverty?
our fury, than his patience? our rebellion, than his obedience? finally, our
coldness, and hardness of heart, than his so tender and inflamed love of us etc.

Conclude with this sentence of S. Leo: Agnosce, o Christian, dignitatem tuam,
and diuinae consors factus naturae, noli in veterem vilitatem degeneri
conuersatione redire. Acknovvledge, o Christian, thy dignity, and being now
made a companion in christ of the divine nature scorn through a degenerous
conversation to debase thy dignity, and through sin to return to thy former
vileness. Have a horror to defile thy nature with sin, which God has so
honored and united to himself.

3. Consider thirdly, that when two parties have been long and old enemies, to
bring them into a true settled peace and amity, such a Mediator must be found
out, as is most powerful with both sides, and also most trusty and faithful
to both; without suspicion of inclining more to one than the other, God
almighty and mankind had been at long variance and enmity, ever since the sin
of Adam; and a Mediator could no where be found; God was the offended, man the
offender; the Angels had little acquaintance with men, and depended totally of
God; and so might have delivered man wholly over to Gods wrath and justice:
when behold beyond expectation steppeth forth Christ Jesus, true God, and true
man, and consequently a Mediator without exception; for who more powerful,
more faithful and careful of the honor of God, then the only son of God?
and who more trusty in the cause of men, then he who is man himself, and
Filius hominis? the son of man. Surely if any may be without suspicion
trusted in his own proper cause, Christ must needs be so; for consisting
himself of both natures, the business on both sides must needs be his own
proper cause.

Conclude with gratitude to the divine wisdom and goodness, for inuenting a
way and mean so equal and honorable for both sides, though so costly to our
dearest Mediator: and and resolve from hence forvvard not to rule and square
thy actions according to thy own ease and commodity, but only as it shall
appear conducing to Gods glory and honor, how contrary soever is prove to
thy self.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the Annuntiation made to the Virgin Mary.
1. COnsider first, the miserable and sad condition of the world at that time;
all but the little corner of Jury, was totally possessed and swayed by the
Devil; all Europe, Asia, Africa, and the most vast America knew nothing but
Idolatry, and adoration of stocks, stones and devils, slaughtering and
sacrificing unto them one an other; nay men forsooth would be also adored for
Gods? as for other sins and enormities, they were so in fashon amongst all,
that even amongst the Romans, the more civil and politic people of all, there
was hardly a vice, but authorized by some godhead or other. Now in Jury where
only the true God was adored, it is lamentble to read in Josephus, how it was
oppressed by the Romans; rent asunder by Herod and by sectaries, by hypocrisy,
covetousness, pride, ambition; and what not? Behold even then, when noe man
sought, or thought of their remedy and salvation, but rather studied how to
offend God more and more; even then I say, was our most good God commiserating
from heaven our miseries, and providing in that highest Consistory of the B.
Trinity for a speedy remedy; which was, that the Eternal Word should become
man: blessed be ever his goodness.

Conclude with most humble thanks to his divine Majesty, first in general
for this his mercy to mankind; and then in particular for thy self; calling to
mind, how often when thou have been plunging thy self into all sort of sin,
even then has his goodness been protecting thee from further evil, and
procuring means for thy salvation.

2. Consider secondly, how forthwith the Angel Gabriel was dispatched from the
highest heavens to carry the decreed embassages: but to whom? to the Empress,
think you, of Rome, to some great Queen, Princess, or Lady, noble in blood,
and famous for riches and pomp? nothing less: harken to the Gospel: Missus
est Gabriel Angelus a Deo, in ciuitatem Galileae, cui nomen Nazareth; ad
Virginem desponsatam viro, cui nomen Joseph, de domo David, and nomen Virginis,
Maria. The Angel Gabriel was sent of God into, a city of Galilee, called
Nazareth, to a virgin despoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house
of David, and the virgins nam was Marie. To a low and humble Maid, espoused to
a tradesman, living in the poor village of Nazareth; preferred in the eyes of
God before all, for her purity, humility, and virtue. To this Uirgin therefore
being at midnight in her devotions, appears this glorious Angel, and with
low reverence saluteth her with these three titles of honor: hail full of
grace, our Lord is with thee, and blessed art thou amongst women: at which
the Uirgin being troubled kept her self in silence and expectation, of what
would follow: her trouble was not the sight of an Angel, for that was not
unusual to her; but the high titles she heard given her; Cogitabat qualis
esset ista salutatio, she thought what manner of salutation this should be.
Far above her most humble thoughts,

Conclude to enrich thy self with virtues, which only can make thee noble
in the sight of God: but chiefly to imitate the B. Virgins humility, which
will cause a trouble in us, not a tickling, when we are praised.

3. Consider thirdly: the wonderful esteem and tender care, the B. Virgin had
of her purity and chastity, vowed and offered to God Almighty: for having
understood by the Angel, that she was chosen to be the Mother of God, and
that she was to conceive and bring forth the only son of God; at what do
we think, did she demurr? at the Angels promise, or at Gods omnipotency?
nothing less: but, with a Quomodo fiet istud quoniam virum non eognosco? how
shall this be done; because I know not man. She only desired to know, how her
virginity might be secured; how she could jointly be a Mother and a Uirgin:
showing her self readier to forgo the dignity of being Mother of God, then
the least way to blast, or taint her purest flower of chastity. A rare pattern
for all those, that live under the banner of Virginity or chastity. Wherefore
being secured and satisfied by the Angel, that the holy Ghost would
ouershadow and protect her from all heat of sensuality: she presently falling
upon her knees, and bowing down her head, gave her humble consent in these
words: Ecce ancilla Domini, fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum. Behold the hand
maid of our Lord, be it done to me according to thy word.

Conclude with humble and hearty thanks to the B. Virgin for this her happy
consent, on which depended the Redemption of man: beg of her also, that she
will obtain for thee of God her son, a pure and clean heart, a zeal and
care of chastity, like that of hers; and be ashamed, that so small and light
occasions can overthrow thy constancy, as usually they do.

4. Consider fourthly the most heroike virtues of the B, Uirgin in this
passage: her faith of this most high mystery, and that she should remain
jointly both a Mother and a Uirgin: her hope and confidence of Gods promises:
her ardent love of God, and charity toward man kind her perfect obedience and
resignation to the Divine will in all things, with a Fiat mihi seeundum verbum
tuum. Be it done to me according to thy word. But above all her most admirable
humility; that after the great titles and respects given her by an Arch-angell;
after she saw herself exalted to the greatest dignity that Gods omnipotency
could raise a creature unto, to wit to be true and natural mother of God, she
was yet so far from being puffed up with pride and self conceit, that
prostrating her self below all creatures, she assumed no other title then.
Ancilla Domini, the hand maid of our lord. The hand maid and slave of our Lord;
which, as holy Fathers affirm, she ever used in all her life, and no other.

Conclude to imitate to thy uttermost these her virtues, both Theological and
Moral; and of all the moral, chiefly that of her humility, which she had in
most esteem; as also her son Jesus Christ. Let thy heart and mouth ever use
this saying: Seruus tuus sum ego Domine, and filius aucillae tuae: I am thy
servant, o lord, and the son of thy hand maid: let this be ever thy Antidote
against all assaults of pride or vain glory. Learn therefore the conditions
of being a true and loyal slave: first he is to be totally his Lords, all his
labors, all his gains, all his endeauours are for his Lord, nothing for
himself: secondly he serves not only his Lords person, but all his children,
servants, and family, a slave, a drudge to all, beaten and contemned of all:
and yet if loyal, he bears all with patience and cheerfullnes. Till thou
comply with this, thou art not truly Seruns Domini tui; the servant of thy
lord.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. How the Son of God was made man in the womb of the
Uirgin Mary.
1. COnsider first, that no sooner had the Virgin Mary given her full consent
with, Fiat mihi fecundum verbum tuum; be it done to me according to thy word;
when the holy Ghost framed of her most pure and virginal blood, a man's body,
though in quantity small and little, as others use to be; yet in quality most
perfect, that is, with all its members, and senses as complete and exact, as
afterward he had: then created he in it a most excellent soul, and withal
took this humanity consisting of a body and soul, and united it to the
eternal Word hypostatically and personally: whence results this Catholic
verity: God is truly man, and the Virgin Mary is truly Mother of God. And
thus was celebrated in the womb of the Virgin Mother, that wonderful union
and matrimony betwixt the son of God and humane nature, a knot so strong and
indissoluble, that death it self could never loose or cut it a sunder; Quod
enim semel assumpsit nunquam deposuit. For what he once assumed, he never
deposed. What understanding can here conceive, or tongue express the acts,
affections, and raptures, which possessed and transported the soul of the B.
Virgin in this passage? The Divines hold for most probable, that with a
singular privilege she saw clearly the divine Essence, and the mysteries
wrought in her, as the Angels and Saints now do in heaven; and so no doubt
she excelled them all in knowledge and love.

Conclude with the affections of admiration, love and thanksgiving: salute
the B. Uirgin with the parabien of her new dignity of Mother of God: and offer
thy self for her perpetual servant hence forward: and be sure the best
service, thou can do her, is to imitate her virtues, especially those three
of charity, purity and humility, the chief gemmes of her diadem.

2 Consider secondly, how the humanity of our B. Savior at the very instant of
his conception and union with the Word, was in the highest degree endowed with
all the gifts of nature, grace, and glory: his soul in clear vision and
fruition of the divine essence, his body, though little, yet every way perfect,
both in natural and subernaturall gifts, except those of immortality and
impassibility, both most due unto it, as well for the dignity of his person, as
also for the glory of his soul, which should have redounded to the body: but
he would have it both mor: tall and passible, that he might suffer and die for
man. This is the head of Angels and men, Ex cuius plenitudine omnes accepimus.
Of whose fullness allvve have received. This is the King and Emperor of all
that is without God; into whose hands the Father has delivered all power, to
dispose at his pleasure of heaven, earth and hell; Data est mihi omnis potestas
in calo and in terra. All power is given to me in heaven and earth. That is
the high Judge and searcher of hearts Qui iudicaturus est viuos and mortuos.
Who is to judge both the living and the dead. This is the end or Finis. of all
Creation and Predestination; for whose sake all things are made; for whose
honourall the elect are predestined; Omnia vestra sunt, quoth S. Paul, vos
autem Christi: Christus autem Dei. All are yours, and you are Christ's and
Christ is Gods. This finally is the high Priest and Mediator betwixt God and
man; Deus homo, compendium omnium mirabilium Dei. God and man, the compendium
of all gods wonders.

Conclude with all the affections, thy heart can find, without fear or scruple
of attributing to much unto him. Adore him with all the Angels of heaven: give
his humanity the parabien of this new dignity of union with the Deity: and
offer thy self as his most humble slave, to wate upon him, and serve him, as
long as he shall live upon earth.

3. Consider thirdly, how that most noble and glorious soul of thy Redeemer,
at the instant of her creation and union with the Word, casting the eye of her
understanding round about, found her self enclosed and steeped in the
Divinity, as in an Ocean of bliss: for her object of beatitude she has the
Godhead clearly seen, and securely possessed; for her being or subsistence she
has no less, then the Divine personality; for her companion, in the same
being, no less then the Divine nature: for her Father the first person, the
second for her spouse, the third for her love and joy: Intus, feris, sursum,
deorsum, vndique and vndique Deus. Within and without, beneath, and above,
and every where God. Who can conceive those her adorations, humiliations,
thanks giving to God, for drawing her so graciously from one extreme of
nothing, to the other of the highest Being possible? what love of God? and
thence what hatred to sin? what love of man? and what compassion for his
loss? and knowing it to be his Fathers will, what ready offerings of himself?
what large promises to do, to suffer and die for man's salvation? and this out
of pure gratitude to God for his favors, love and pity to man, so beloved of
God: and hatred to sin and hell, enemies to God: so that from the beginning
to the ending all is God in Christ.

Conclude to join with thy Savior in thanksgiving to God, for all the
prerogatives and favors bestowed on him, and by him on thee Offer thy self
freely and really to his service; Paratum cor meum, Deus, paratum cor mium, vt
faciam voluntatem tuam. My heart is ready, o God, my heart is ready to do thy
will.

4. Consider fourthly, how soon our sweetest Savior began to comply with his
Fathers command, and his own promise, to suffer for mankind: being shut up for
nine months in the dark womb of his mother, not able to move or stir
himself, bound hand and foot; unable to see, hear or use any other sense:
which in other infants is no pain; because they want the use both of sense and
reason; but in our Savior, who had most persectly the use of reason, it must
needs be a great pain and affliction of mind, as it would be to any other
perfect man. O how truly is it verified in him, Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus
sansti grace? the grace of the holy Ghost knovvs noe delays in its works,
he alone could think himself able to suffer, ere he was able to be borne: to
teach us a good lesson, not to shuffle and drive of from day to day the
co^plying with our obligations, and good purposes, as commonly we do. Behold
again and conceive, if thou can, how this great Giant, whom the heavens
cannot contain, in respect of whose greatness the whole created machine is but
as a moat in the Sun, is himself shrunck up into this little point of a
child, a moat, an atome; thus is Immensity become a point, and the
circumference a center.

Conclude two principal things, the one to mortify and cut short thy
appetites and libertyes betime, making all other pretenses give place to Gods
service: the second, the higher thou art in place or dignity, to hum^le thy
self so much the more; according to the counsel of the Wise man, Quanto
magnus es, humilin te in omnibus and coram Deo inuenies gratiam. The greater
thou art, humble thy self in all things, and thou shall find grace before God.

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. How the Mystery of the Incarnation was revealed unto
S. Joseph.
1. COnsider first, how some months being passed, it could no longer be
concealed from S. Joseph, but that his Spouse was with child: Who can conceive
the grief and perplexity, which oppressed the pious soul of this holy man? on
the one side, the signs grew day lie more and more so evident, that at last
they could bear no excuse, on the other side, he was so secured and satisfied
of her sanctity, chastity and other rare virtues, that he could not force
himself to censure her innocence: what should he do? accuse her he durst not
live with her he could not, being against the law: Cum esset iustus, being a
good and just man, he resolved to leave her, and seek his living in the wide
world: a rare resolution, to take upon himself the punishment, rather then
dishonor or disquiet his neighbor: a rare meecknes, to fall into no
expostulation or hard terms with her: in a case that so highly touched his
honor. The B. Virgin could not but perceive his grief by his looks and
sighs; and knew very well the reason of it, and how just it was on his side
which you may be sure grieved her to the heart, honoring and loving him so
tenderly, as she did: yet she would not disclose any thing of the divine
secrets, but remitted all to Gods goodness and providence.

Conclude with great compassion of this holy couple; and wish thou could
afford them any comfort; resolve to imitate this rare virtue, of not judging or
speaking against the honor of thy neighbor, presuming upon evidence, which
God knows, how seldom we have: lastly not to disquietthy neighbor for thy
own commodity.

2. Consider secondly, how true that saying of the Psalm is; Multae
tribulationes iustorum, sed de omnibus his liberabit eos Dominus: Many are the
tribulations of the just, and out of all these our lord will deliver them, God
almighty does use to send great afflictions to his best and most beloved
servants; and when all seems to be lost and past remedy, then comes he in,
and in a trice clears up all storms, and reduces the sun of comfort. So
it happened with holy Joseph; for Haec eo cogitante, as he was thus thinking,
and finding no way to solue and quiet so conuincing doubts, an Angel was sent
unto him, to reveal unto him the Mystery of the Incarnation; to testifiie the
innocence of his Spouse, Noli timere accipere Mariam Coniugem tuam; Fear not
to take Mary thy wife. And to constitute him chief Tutour, nay foster-Father
of the only Son of God: a charge of greatest confidence and dignity under
heaven. What amazements possessed the holy man, at such wonders and mysteries?
what joys enlightened and ouerflowed his heart, to find so great innocence,
where he most desired it? what gratitude and thanks to God, for so great a
dignity? how with confusion in his heart, shame in his countenance, and
tears in his eyes, did he go to the B. Uirgin, and ask her forgiveness for
the suspicions and iealousies, he had conceived of her etc. where these two
Seraphins of the earth fell into new thanks and praises of the Divine
providence and goodness.

Conclude to receive adversities, which way so ever they come, as from the
hand of God, and as special pledges of his love toward thee; and recurre
unto him with humility and confidence for the redress of them. Congratulate
with this holy couple for the joy and comfort which God has sent them; and
offer thy self most ready to their service.

THE FIFTH MEDITATION. Of the rare sanctity of the B. Virgin, and Saint Joseph
her Spouse.
1. COnsider first, that if it be true, as it is most true. that according to
the charge, office and place. to which God Alinighty raises a man, he does
proportionably bestovv upon him his gifts and graces, fit for the executing and
complying with the said dignity: it must follow most certainly, that no
creature of this world has or shall over attain to the perfection and
sanctity of the B. Virgin and S. Joseph: for none have, or ever shall come nigh
the dignity of their place and calling. For first the Virgin Mary, was ever
jointly a Virgin and Mother: (Priuilegium Mariae quod nulli dabitur) A
Privilege of Marie, which shall be given to no other. And Mother of the true
and living God, conceiving him really in her womb, bringing him forth,
feeding him at her breast, treating him as her child, her Son; and he again
ever calling her Mother, obeying and respecting her for such. O cui aliquando
Angelorum distum est, Matter men es tu? To whom of the Angels was it ever
said, thou art my mother. S. Joseph also has two wonderful titles; true and
real Spouse and husband of the Virgin Mother of God, and consequently her head
and Superior, and so reverenced and honored by her: next the chosen Tutour
and Nutricius, the foster father, of the Son of God, and his esteemed Father;
so called by the Evangelist and the Uirgin Mother her self; and no doubt but
Christ also commonly called him Father, respecting and serving him no less,
then if he had been so really and naturally.

Conclude to frame and settle in thy mind a true opinion and esteem of these
two Seraphins of the earth; and never doubt to attribute unto them, whatsoever
is not Essential to God, but may be communicated to creatures: offer thy self
for their devout servant and praise and thank God for their sanctity and
dignity.

2. Consider secondly the happiness S. Joseph had to be the first man, that saw
the Son of God incarnated and borne in the shape of man; who took and lulled
him in his arms; who led and carried him in his bosom many a time; and as often
kissed that divine face, In quem desiderant Angeli prospicere: on whom the
Angels desire to look. who has earned bread for the Son of God and for his
B. Mother, with the labor of his hands, and sweat of his brovv. Finally
taught him to speak, who is Verbum Patris; the word of God the father.
Taught him the trade and art of a Carpenter, who is Artifex and fabricator
mundi; the artificer and maker of the whole world. Governed, ruled and bred
him, as his Father, Master, and Tutour. On the other side he was obeyed,
followed and vvayted on by our Savior, no less, then we see other pious
children do their parents. Behold if thou can Joseph sitting at the head of
the table, as Lord and Master of the house, with the Virgin Mother by his
side, and the Son of God waiting at table, bringing and carrying of, what
was necessary etc. to the infinite confusion of his parents, and the
astonishment of Angels. Now who can conceive the inward gifts and virtues,
which this Divine child instilled into the bosom of this his father, at all
times and occasions? what illustrations? what raptures? what ardours?
doubtless no virtue was vvanting, where the source and first spring of all
virtues was an Attendant and scholar.

Conclude te imitate this holy Patriarch as thy special patron in two things;
the one is, to serve and do for the servants of Christ, whatsoever shall lie
in thy power at all occasions; remembering his words, Quod vni ex minimis meis
fecistis, mihi fecistis. What you did to any one of my least you did to me.
The second, to have a wonderful zeal and care of purity both of mind and
body: for believe it, hell is not so foul and displeasing to the company of
Jesus, Maria, Joseph, as is the least taint of unchastity.

3. Consider thirdly, the innumerable and unspeakable graces, privileges, and
prerogatives of the B. Virgin Mary. First her natural complexion of body was
most beautiful and rare, and the composition of her mind most settled and
perfect; so that she struck modesty and reverence into any that be held her.
Next for her supernatural gifts; she was conceived without the spot of
original sin, which all the children of Adam are subject to: hence followed
that she was free from Foam peccati, all in ward motions, and inclinations to
sin. And that inward war, which we all feel and groan under; so that
her inferior parts was ever at the beck of her will and reason. Then was
her soul filled brim-full with grace, charity, and all the virtues and gifts
of the holy Ghost: nay so singularly confirmed was she in grace and sanctity
that she never committed the least venial sin in all her life: a rare
vvonder, that a humane creature in a frail and mortal body, should in so many
incident occasions never err, never offend in the least word, thought, deed or
motion interior or exterior; but all ruled with reason, and leuelled to the
will of God. Again no soouer conceived, but endowed with the perfect use of
reason, actually to know and love God, and these acts she never intermitted in
the whole course of her life, but whether waking or sleeping, she was in a
perpetual act of the knowledge and love of God: and hence followed an augment
and increase beyond imagination, of grace, charity and sanctity in her soul;
far surpassing the sanctity of all the Saints and Angels together, as
Divines do hold: see how vvorthilie the Angel saluted her Plenam gratiae,
full of grace, above all other creatures.

Conclude with admiration, thanksgiving, and what else thy devotion to the
B. Uirgin Mary does afford.

4. Consider fourthly, that besides all the titles and prerogatives of the B.
Uirgin, these two are most singular and proper unto her: the first, that all
the gifts of grace and glory, which come from God, come to us all Mediante
Maria, by her incercession: Totius boni plenitudinem, quoth S. Bernard, posuit
Deus in Maria, vt proinde si quid spei in nobis est, si quid gaatiae, si quid
salutis, ab illa nouerimus redundare. God has placed in Marie the abundance of
all what is good, that thereby if we find in our selves the least either of
hope grace, or spiritual health, we might acknovvledge her as from whom they
all proceed. So that as God the Father will have all our prayers and petitions
sealed or signed with the name of his only Son Per Dominum nostrum Iesum
Christum; through our Lord Jesus Christ So God the Son will have all our
petitions to him presented and disparched by his Mother: hence S. Anselme was
not afraid to say, Velocior nonnunquam est salus inuocato nomine Maria quam
iuuocato nomine Jesus; non quod illa potentior sit (nam per illum ipsa potens
est) sed quia matrem vult filius sic honorare. That we some times find a
readier grant of our demands asked in the name of Marie, then of Jesus, not
that she is more powerful then him who is the source, of all her abilities
but that the son would by this prerogative honor his mother. The second,
that a great sign of ones predestination or reprobation, is his devotion or
neglect of the Virgin Mary, S. Anselme; Sicut omnis, o beatissima, a te
auersus, and a te despectus, necesse est vt intereat; ita omnis ad te
conuersus, and a te respectus impossible est vt pereat: as it is necessary, o
blessed Virgin that he who loses thy favor, should with it loose his
eternal salvation, so it is impossible that any in thy favor should perish.
And S. Bonauenture; Qui digne coluerit illam, iustificabitur, and qui
neglexerit illam, morietur in peccatis suis: the grace of God will sanctify
that heart, which vvorthilie serves thee, and he that neglected thee shall die
in his sins as a punishment of so dangerous a neglect. And then concludes
thus; Non solum in te peccant, o Domina, qui tibi iniuriam irrogant, sed etiam
qui te non rogant. It is a sin against thee, o lady, not only to abuse thy
dignity in derogating, but likewise not to use it in demanding.

Conclude, as thou hopest for the favors of God, and as thou tenderest thine
own salvation, to settle in thy soul a constant and solid devotion toward
the B. Virgin Mary; not a verbal and outward show only of devotion, as many
use, but a true and solid one, which consists in an unfeigned imitation of
her virtues; especially of her burning charity to God and man, her putest
chastity in mind and body, and her lowest humility: imitate these and then
confide in her, as in a most loving Mother; for she has two breasts, the one
of favors and graces for the just, the other of pity and mercy for sinners.

THE SECOND CHAPTER, Of the Nativity of our B. Savior Christ Jesus.
OF all the mysteryes of our B. Savior, this of his Nativity is the sweetest,
and of most delight to a devout soul: for of this day the Prophets sing,
Montes stillabunt dulcedinem, and colles fluent lac and mel: The mountains
shall distill sweetness and the hills shall flow with milk and honey. This
day the Angels begin, Gloria in excelsis, glory in the highest etc: and the
holy Church; Melliflui facti sunt Caeli etc. Out of the heavens honey flovveth
etc. Here shall we find all the motives of love and compassion, with rare
examples of all virtues.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. How our Savior was borne in Bethlem?
1. COnsider first, how God having promised by his Prophets, that his Son,
the Messiah, should be borne in Bethlem, he moved now the Roman Emperor, by
his edict to command all forthwith to repair unto the City or place of their
origin or offspring, and there to register or enroll themselves, as his
subjects and vassals, paying also a piece of money for tribute: hence S. Joseph
and the B. Uirgin being both of the Royal stock of David, repaired forthwith
to Bethlem the ancient place of David's birth: so sweetly does the divine
providence order things, that what he has so firmly determined, yet seems
to succeed by chance. See the humility of the Savior of the world; who, yet
unborn, disdaineth not to offer tribute as vassal to a terrene King: see the
obedience of Joseph and Mary, that is the Father and Mother of the Son of
God, without delay or excuses (how many so ever they might lavvfully have
made) taking this long and troublesome journey; to teach us humility and
obedience to our Superiors, how bad and unworthy so ever they be. See these
holy travelers, what toil and discommodities they endure, being so poor as
they were; our Lady great with child; the journey long, of four days
travel; the time rigorous, being the depth of vvinter and cold; the vvayes
full of people; lodgings hard to be found etc.

Conclude to imitate on all occasions these virtues of humility and obedience,
without fear of dishonouring, forfooth, thy person or dignity: then
compassionate these poor pilgrims, and offer thy self up, their servant, that
is, ready to travel or labor in any thing which shall be to Gods honor, and
theirs: in the interim offer all the actions and labors of thy present place,
office, or condition.

2. Consider secondly, how coming to Bethlem, weary, wet, and benigted; and
seeking for a lodging, all the town could or would afford them none: alas
the King and Queen of heaven are poor, without money and attendance; and so
are at every door freely and regardlessely cast of, and bad, Be gone;
whereas the gallants of the world, and amongst them most horrid sinners, are
before their face inuired and conducted in with cap and torch. How ad
literans literallie, is it now verified, In propria venit and sui eum non
receperunt? he came into his own, and his own received him not. How many
of his lineage and nighe kindred were the first, that cast him of? what shall
they do? or whether shall they go to shelter themselves from the rigor and
violence of a winter night? But stay; holy Joseph after long search, has found
out a cave, a stable, or stall, on the outside of the towne-wall; a very
commodious lodging, you may be sure; for as yet in all that throng of people,
noe man had taken it up for their horse or ass. O divine Savior; how does
thy voluntary poverty and want of all things confound our ease, intemperance,
and excess in our apparel, diet and bed? at home in Nazareth, thy mother,
though poor, yet could not want some accommodation, of a fire, a bed, a
stool: but here thou will find nothing but a manger.

Conclude with shame and sorrow for thy own ease, indulgence and pampering of
thy self: if thy meat or drink be not just to thy palate, all the house shall
hear of it; if thy bed be not well made, or thy sleep disturbed, what
grumblings the next morning? o Christian soul, for shame look upon thy
Savior, and his Mother in the stable of Bethlem. Ask also humble pardon for
the thousand of times, that he has knocked at thy heart for entrance, and thou
have rejected him, and entertained sin and vanity.

3. Consider thirdly, how the B. Virgin entering into the stable, and knowing
how nigh her time was at hand; presently conceived, that that was the place,
which the Eternal Wisdom had chosen for his entrance into this world, the
stable his palace, and the manger his Salamons bed or couch: wherefore
cleansing it, as well as they could, they sat them down to a short rest. When
behold after a while the Uirgin Mother, finding in her soul new and sudden
joys, and a heavenly sweetness in her heart, so great and ouerswelling, that
knowing her hour was come, at the point of midnight she cast herself upon
her knees, with eyes, heart, and hands lifted up to heaven, raised above her:
self in divine contemplation, and being altogether in burning flames of love,
behold she sees lying be fore her on the ground a child, naked and trembling
with cold; more clear than the stars, more bright than the Sun; falling
from her womb, like ripe fruit from the bough, without touch or spot of her
Virginal integrity; as the ray of the Sun passes the glass without hurt,
and with new luster. She quickly takes him into her arms, with a most
feeling affection, both of respect and love; respect, as to her God and
Creator; and so kisseth his seet; of love, as to her true and natural child
and Son, and so lays him between her breasts, cherishes his cold face
with her own, wrappeth him in the poor clouts, she has etc. awake o my
soul, awake, and consider these things, as thou can, for all words fall
short of expression.

Conclude with all the affections of thy heart together, for here are motives
for all; of joy, for thy Redeemer is borne; of compassion, for he weepeth; of
contrition, for thy sins are the chief cause of his tears; of well comes to
him, and congratulations to the Virgin Mother, Virgo ante, in, and post partum.
A Virgin before, in, an after her bringing forth. Offer thy self a fresh to
Jesus, Maria, Joseph; for now they may have need of thee, if thy carriage make
thee not unworthy.

4. Consider fourthly, and behold him laid in the manger, upon a little hay or
straw, betwixt an ox and an ass; terd and swadled up in poor and course
bindings, yet so strongly, that he can stir neither hand nor foot, without
his mothers help: o who has tied up this mighty Giant? who has contracted
this vast immensitie beyond heaven and earth, into the narrow compass of a
manger? is not this the Sapientia Dei, quae extendit se a fine ad finem? the
incomprehensible wisdom of God, which reaches from end to end? the
Aeternum and coaequale verhum Patris? vnde ergo adeo extenuatum, ade^
abbreuiatum? the coeternall, and coequall word of the father? how therefore
becomes it so contracted, so extenuated? is not this as man, the Emperor of
the world, the commander of life and death? and who feeds the birds of the
air? how then so poor, so abject, so in want of sustenance? is not this he,
who is so high, as none can be above him? and now again so low, as no man
beneath him? what force or art has brought together these two ends, so
extreme and distant? truly nothing but the force of goodness, and the art of
love: Quid violentius? quoth S. Bernard; triumphat de Deo amor: quid tamen tam
non violentum? amor est. What more violent then love? it triumphs over God:
and yet what less violent? since it is love. The love of thee and the desire
of thy salvation have wrought these wonders: and yet (o blind ingratitude!)
more there are that will not believe them, then the belieuers, that render due
thanks or gratitude for them.

Conclude to be most grateful to the divine goodness, Non verbo, sed opere, not
in word only but in deed. By imitating thy Saviors lowliness, humility and
poverty: remember, that his bands and restraint pay for thy liberties and
wanderings: thank him for it, and give him no further occasion for the like.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the Angels and shepherds joy at our Saviors birth.
1. COnsider first, how true that saying of our B. Savior is, Omnis qui se
humiliat, exaltabitur; every one that humbles himself shall be exalted. For
the supreme and Eternal Father, being wonderfully pleased at this his Sons
extreme humility, caused presently all the Citizens of heaven to honor and
solemnize this birth day of his only Son and Heir, Sicut in ortu
primogeniti Regis: As in the birth of a first-begotten of a King. And as S.
Paul says, commanded all his Courtiers and Grandies to adore him for their
Lord and Master: which they all most promptly and humbly performed, descending
inuisibly with all their Hierarchies and Quires unto the stable and manger of
Bethlem; where this great Infant-Prince lay; where bowing full lovv their
tall heads with singular humility, reverence, and love, they acknowledge,
swear, and adore him for their highest God of glory, and sole Monarch of the
created universe: o how the eagle-sighted Cherubins shrink up, confessing
their ignorance in respect of his wisdom and knowledge? how the Seraphins
flaming in the love of God, esteem themselves ycie and frozen in respect of
his charity? how do the Thrones stoop; the Powers tremble etc. and all begin
here with Celestial melody their Christmas Caroll of Gloria in Altissimis Deo
etc. Glory in the highest to God etc.

Conclude and enter in after all the Angels and Princes of glory; yet with
leave of the Uirgin Mother thy Lady; and prostrating thy self at the feet of
thy young Lord, acknowledge him, for thy Lord, thy God, thy Savior; and thy
self for his creature, his vassal, his servant: thank and bless both him
and his Father for his nativity, so humble, so poor; and lastly say Amen. to
all the Angels praises: remembering that he is not borne for them, Sed propter
nos homines and propter nostram salutem. But for us men and for our safety.

2. Consider secondly, how the holy Angels going from the stable, where they
found and adored their God become man, began thence forward to treat more
familiarly with mankind, as their friends, and companions, which formerly they
seldom or never did; but always in thunder, terror and majesty: and with
good reason, seeing our nature is now nigher allied to the Godhead then theirs.
But stay; to whom are they hasting so at midnight to give these joyful
tidings? to the Kings or Potentates of the world? o no; they give noe audience
at that time of night? noe entrance, but to their pleasures, ease and sleep:
to the great clerks and politicians? nothing less: they are all too busy in
their plots, wiles and circumuentions: and generally all full of pride,
presumption, wantonness and ease; and so most unworthy both of the message, and
the Messengers. They go to poor, simple, innocent shepherds, watching and
guarding their flocks with labor and diligence; and so most fit and prompt to
receive the comfort of this heavenly message, and to find out the Savior of
the world in a cottage, stable and manager, places and terms well known to
their vocation.

Conclude two things, if thou desire the visitation of Angels and heavenly
tidings or inspirations: the first, to empty thy heart from the affections of
honors, riches, and pleasures; and to weane thy body from over much sleep,
ease and gluttouy, which quitte choke up the plants of virtue: the second, to
be ever careful and vvatchfull over the charge, which God has put thee in, be
it great or small: and then never doubt but God will inspire thee, and his
Angels assist thee in all thy endeauours.

3. Consider thirdly, how these poor and devout shepherds had no sooner heard
the good tidings of the Savior of the world borne in Bethlem, and laid in a
manger; but presently cutting of all delays and excuses, that very night hied
themselves thither: Et venerunt festinantes, and inuenerunt Mariam and Joseph
and infantem positum in praesepio. And they came with speed, and they found
Marie, and Joseph, and the infant laid in the manger. Where giving first
account to S. Joseph and the B. Virgin how they were sent thither by an
Angels voice, to adore their little God, and newborn Savior; with leave
they crept to the manger, and were the first that in this world beheld that
divine face, In quam desiderant Augeli prospicere: on which the Angels desire
to look. O with what humility did they kiss his feet? with what
heartinesse did they thank him for his coming, to redeem the lost world?
with what devotion did they offer him their poor and small gifts, a cheese,
a loaf of bread, or a dozen of eggs? with what feeling did they pity his
hard, needy and poor estate? and finally with what diligence did they labor
to help and comfort him, fetching vvood, making a fire, stopping up some
breaches against the vveather etc. o how grateful was this their service to
the divine child? how was he pleased? how thankful for it? how did he
reward and send them away with their hearts brim-full of joy and heavenly
light? Et reuersi sunt Pastores glorificantes and laudantes Deum. And the
shepherds returned, glortfying and praising God.

Conclude to follow Gods inspirations and callings with promptness, shaking
of all sloth and tergiuersation: and what thou do do or give for God
almighty his sake, though never so small, though a cup of water, do it with
a ready heart and sincere intention.

4. Consider fourthly, these last words of the Euanhelist; Maria conseruabat
omnia verba haec, conferens in cord suo. Marie kept all these words,
conferring them in her heart. The most Sacred Virgin joined hence forward in one
both the parts and exercises of Martha and Mary: as Martha, that is a true and
loving mother, she was most careful and watchful over her little son,
swaddling and vnswadling of him, giving him the breast, lulling him a sleep,
etc. o with what reverence, humility, and love did she perform these things?
she never took him in her arms, but first falling on her knees, she adored
him as her God; she never gave him suck, but on her knees; she never
vvrapped him up, but kissed his feet. Neither did all these functions any way
hinder, but rather increase the contemplations of Mary: when the divine child
was sleeping or sucking, then was she Conferens in cerde suo, comferring
them in her heart, comparing the two extremes, which encountered in these
mysteries: as first, the immensity and majesty of her Son with his present
litlenes and weakness: his celestial Palace, and throne with the stable and
manger: the reverence the Angels did him, with that of the poor shepherds
presently following: what the Prophets had said of him, to what she now saw:
these with others unspeakable, were her hourly conferences.

Conclude to imitate the B. Virgin and her spouse S. Joseph, in both these
vvayes; so that thy function or charge hinder not thy contemplation and
meditation, but let both run together. reflect and be ashamed, upon what
light occasions and pretenses, the first thing left off or omitted are thy
meditations; the least toy is sure to be preserred before them: o for love,
shame, or our own good, let us amend this sloth: let God be first served, and
our soul first fed.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of the Circumcision of our Savior.
1. Consider first, how our Savior though every way free from the law of
Circumcision, yet he would undergo it, out of the desire he had to suffer
for man; and to give him example, how he ought to obey, and comply with Gods
law; and not, as we use to do, seek all excuses, cases, and escapes we can
to avoid it. Behold S. Joseph with the knife in his hand, trembling to give
such a blow: the B. Virgin her heart pierced with grief, her eyes swimming in
tears, yet with invincible courage offering her naked Son to the knife: and
the infant himself, well knowing the bitterness of the stroke, feared it
wonderfully, and yet jointly would have them give it. Which no sooner done, and
his most pure and precious blood running all about him; as on the one side he
cried out bitterly, with tears and sobs, as other infants use to do, so on
the other side he manfully bore it and offered it to his Eternal Father, as a
pledge, that one day he would pay in the same coin the last drop in all his
body. Who can conceive here the tears and compassion of his parents? how his
mother wrapped him in her arms, laid him to her breast and bosom? o my Son,
quoth she, my Lord, my God, my Spouse; suffer quietly, what thou have
voluntarily undergone; Nam vere sponsus sanguinism it is mibi es etc. For thou
ar^ a blouddie spouse to me etc. as thy devotion shall serve.

Conclude two things; the first, willingly to suffer soem what for thy own
sins; seeing thy Savior begins so soon to shed his blood for them: the
second, to obey most promptly the divine law without tergiuersation or excuse;
as also to comply with all the obligations of thy state and condition,
whatsoever it cost thee; seeing it has cost Christ his blood to do it.

2. Consider secondly, the admirable charity and most profound humility of our
B. Savior in this act of Circumcision: his charity both in shedding his
precious blood at eight days old, whereas the promise and contract, as J may
say, with his Eternal Father, was only to do it at thirty three upon the
Cross: as also in taking on himself the smart, pain, and shame of
circumcision, to free his Church and faithful people from so heavy a yoke; and
that holy Baptism so sweet, so easy, should succeed in its place; so that,
like the Pelican, he wounds himself to feed us; and as a loving nurse takes
the purge to cure the child: blessed be ever such love, such charity. Now his
humility far exceeds here, that of being whipped, crowned and nailed to the
Cross; for all those with whatsoever else, may happen to innocent men; but
circumcision is the badge, the Sanbenite of a Jew, that is, a sinner,
instituted by God himself to that end; and to that only end used and plied by
that his people: so that our most pure and innocent Savior by this act of
Circumcision in fact acknowledged himself like other infants In similitudinem
peccati, or like a sinner: a thing point blanke opposite both to his divinity
and also humanity, as united to that person. In his Incarnation he became man;
in his nativity a poor man; but in the Circumcision he put on the linery of a
sinful and wicked man: Obstupescite Cali super hoc. Be astonished o ye heave
us upon this.

Conclude with shame in thy face, and tears in thy eyes, to condemn thy
wonted pride and hypocrisy, that is, to be a sinner in thy life and actions,
and yet to scorn and swell, if any man call or esteem thee so: turn to thy
Savior with humility, desiring at least not to be esteemed better then thou
art; and with love in labourlng to give him content in all things, what so ever
it cost thee; and in having a most tender care and zeal of his honor in all
occasions.

3. Consider thirdly, that although our B. Savior freed us, and ended in
himself the ceremonial and carnal circumcision: yet he would have us imitate
him, and practice in our selves the spiritual one, which is called Circumcisia
corais. The circumcision of the heart. He shed his blood for us seven several
times; in his circumcision; in the garden, where he sweat blood; when scourged
at the pillar; when crowned with thorns; when stripped on mount Caluary, where
all his wounds bled a fresh; when he was nailed on the Cross with four
nails: and lastly when his side was opened with a lance, when his last
blood came forth mixed with water. These are the Septem host^a: the seven
well heads, whence the 7, Sacraments and all other graces flow into the lap
of the Church. These are the seven Circumcisions, he would have us imitate;
the first in our exterior senses; the second in the interior, especially in
those two of Anger and Concupiscence; the third in our proper and self; will;
the fourth in the stubbornness of our understanding; the fifth in our
temporal abundance, to help our neighbor; the sixth in all our vanities,
riots, and superfluities: the last in the very middle of our heart lancing and
opening a passage for all gross and noxious humors to run out at and thus
pure and holy, to enter our selves amongst the family and true children of our
B. God and Savior.

Conclude to circumcise and purge thy self two ways; first by thy own hand,
in mortyfying and bridling all thy passions, appetites, and disordinate
affections; secondly, in bearing with patience, what crosses so ever shall
fall upon thee by others, with what intention so ever they do it, good or
bad.

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. Of the most holy name of Jesus.
1. Consider first, how true it is, Qui se humiliat, exaltabitur; he that
humbles himself shall be, exalted. For whereas the Son of God did cast and
abase himself so low in the act of circumcision, as to suffer the mark or
brand of a sinner to be imprinted on his virginal body: presently his Eternal
Father would honor and exalt him with the name of Jesus, that is the Savor
or Redeemer of sinners; to give all the world to know, how far his most
innocent son was from being a sinner himself; so far; that he only was
able to pay and satisfy for all the sins of the world. And again this name
of Jesus would he have preferred before all his other names and titles; and so
authorized, esteemed and reverenced of all, both men and Angels; Vt in nomine
Jesus omne genu flectatur, terrestrium, caelestium and infernorum; that in the
name of Jesus every knee bow of the celestials, terrestrials and infernals.
Men and Angels with love and reverence; the devils with fear and trembling.
O with what joy and spiritual sweetness did Joseph and the Virgin mother
pronounce first this most delicious name; saying. Jesus is his name; as well
knowing in the excellencies and grandezas included therein: and the Angels, no
doubt, present made lovv reverence and obeisance at the first sound thereof.
But above all the holy Infant accepted this name with greatest joy and
content, thanking and promising his ^ternall Father, to comply entirely with
the obligations it brought upon him, what labor and pains so ever it should
cost-him.

Conclude ever to worship and reverence this holy name of Jesus with all thy
heart, tongue and knee: thank the Eternal Father for all the honor he has
done his Son by this name; and beg of him, thou may ever feel the
sweetness and virtue of it in thy heart.

2. Consider secondly, how derectly our B. Savior complied with the
obligations of this name of Jesus; for his whole life and death was ordained
to nothing else, but to our good and sulation; well may he be compared to the
Lignum vitae, the tree of life specified in the Apocalypse; Per menses singulos
reddens fructum suum, and folia ligni in sanitatem gentium; rendering his fruit
every month, and the leaves of the tree for the curing of the Gentiles. Where
we find the trunk, the fruit, the leaves: The Tree or trunk was of life;
for in his life he taught us, by his death he redeemed us, with his
resurrection he received us, in his ascension and sitting at his Fathers right
hand, he pleads and secureth our salvation, and is our Jesus: The fruit came
every month, that is continually through the whole year; for he never ceased
day nor night, sleeping nor waking, to contriue and perfect our salvation; for
this he fasted, watched, prayed, traveled, rounded incessantly sea and land,
poor, needy, barefoot, and every where persecuted, slandered, calumniated;
and all this to show and prove himself our Jesus. The leaves were Salus
gentium, the health of nations: for how many thousands did he heal, both
corporally and spiritually, wheresoever he went? his words raised the dead to
life, a glance of his eye turned sinners to Saints; the touch of his hand cured
all infirmityes; the spittle of his tongue cured the blind; the hem of his
garment slopped the flux, in fine; Virtus de illo exibat, and sanabat omnes;
Virtue went forth from him, and healed all. his sacred humanity had not a
leaf, a thought, a motion, but was to us health and Jesus; though to himself
pain, sweat and blood.

Conclude with humble, yet hearty thanks unto this thy Jesus for all: confide
in him in all thy adversities and say; Ecce Deus Saluator meus, fiducialiter
agam and non timebo: Behold God is my savior, I will do confidentlie, and
will not fear. Let health, life and all fail me; Ego tamen in Domino gaudebo
and exultabo in Deo Jesus meo: Yet will I be glad in my lord, and rejoice in
Jesus my God. Resolve also to comply with the obligations of the names thou
bear, of Christian, Scholar, Priest, Superior, or subject etc.

3. Consider thirdly, that this name of Jesus, Est nomen super omne nomen: it
is a name above all names. Infinite are the titles and names of our Savior,
both as God, and as Man; as God, the Lord God of Sabbath, the God of hosts,
Iehoua, omnipotent, most fearful, most terrible: as man, Christ, Emanuel,
admirabilis, Consiliarius, fortis, Princeps pacis etc. Emanuel, that is God
with us marvelous, counseler, strong, Prince of peace etc. But forgetting, as
it were, all his other titles, he has exalted this of Jesus above all; in this
does he glory, this he received at the first shedding of his blood: this did he
fix over his Cross, when he triumphed over death: this does he keep now in
heaven: and this shall come thundering before him at the day of judgment: to
this alone does he command all heads to incline, all knees to bow; with the
sound of Jesus does he comfort the hearts of his faithful in their
adversities, and most at the hour of death; with this does he raise the dead;
that is, sinners to pardon and grace; with this does he rout and dispell all
the foul legions of hell and his enemies; finally, Non est aliud nomen sub
caelo datum hominibus, in quo oporteat nos saluos fieri. There is noe other
name under heaven given to men; vvherin we must be saved. The reasons why our
Savior does himself glory so much in this name, and will have us to reverence
it so much, may be two, the first is his love to men, for Jesus signifying the
Savior of men, keeps us in memory of his infinite charity toward us: the
second, because it is not a name descending to him from his Ancesters, or given
him by chance, but achieved by his own valor, and the cost of his blood, and
so he triumphs by it over his enemies.

Conclude to glory, rejoice and conside always in this most sweet and
delightful name of Jesus; have it ever in thy heart with love, in thy mouth
with respect, in thy knee with reverence.

4. Consider fourthly, that as Christ, that is, the Son of God, become man,
contains in himself as in storehouse all the perfections both of God and
all his creatures: so does this name of Jesus as a compendium or epitome
include all the other names both of his godhead and manhood: for Jesus
signifies the Savior of men; now to be such a Savior, first he must be true
God, that is Eternal, Omnipotent, Infinite, Immense etc. all these therefore
does the name of Jesus contain: again that he might merit and suffer for us,
he was to be also true man; and not only that, but a man also most wise, most
holy, most innocent, just, humble, patient; and above all most sweet and
loving: and as a man to have perfect health, he must be sound in every lim and
member of his body; so to be a perfect Savior, as ours was, he must be
endewed with all saving qualityes and perfections: he must be therefore our
Father, our Pastor, Master, King, Priest, Espouse, Friend etc. and all these
does this sweet name of Jesus import: so that, who names Jesus, names God and
Man, that is, all perfections, all excellencies created and increated.

Conclude, to settle in thy heart a singular devotion to the name of Jesus
with S. Paul, who names it in his Epistles above five hundred times, and his
head being cut of, yet kept the name of Jesus in his mouth; with S. Ignatius in
whose heart it was found written in letters of gold; and with all, that ever
have been devout and holy souls: secondly do all to the honor and glory of
this holy name: Omne quod facitis, quoth S. Paul, in verbo, aut in opere, omnia
in nomine Domini Jesus Christi. All what soever you do in word or in works
all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thirdly confide above all
things in this name Quodeumque petierilis Patrem in nomine meo, dabit vobis:
what soever you ask the father in my name, he will give it you. in all
occasions, in all necessities say with S. Anselme: O bone Jesus, propter honorem
nominis tui, esto mihi Jesus, and salua me. O good Jesus for the honor of thy
name be to me a Jesus, and save me.

THE FIFTH MEDITATION. Of the adoration of the three Kings.
1. COnsider first, the great love and care, that our good God has of us: the
Savior of the world was no sooner borne in the stable of Bethlem, but
presently he sent out his messengers to call unto his knowledge and service all
sorts of people; an Angel to the Jews, a star to the Gentiles: but who gave
ear to this message? who followed this calling? o how fearful is that
sentence, Multisunt vocati, pauci vero electi: many are called, but fevv elect.
But three poor shepherds from Jury, and but three Wise men from the East: and
yet the star was seen and wondered at by many more; and the shepherds also
told many more in Jury, that the Messiah was borne. See the speed, zeal, and
resolution of these devout Princes; in thirteen days, and those short and
troublesome, in the midst of winter to post over so long and vast a journey: to
enter into foreign Dominions without license, and without fear to proclaim
a new King borne to the Jews, in the midst of Jerusalem, in the very court and
face of Herod, the bloudiest Tyrant, that ever lived, and ever quaking at the
sound of a successor; and who afterward for fear of one, killed his own
Son: then to make, no stay in the viewing of that most ancient and famous
City, but hied them presently to Bethlem, as they were directed.

Conclude to imitate these holy Kings, as well in following readily Gods
callings and inspirations, vvithoutregard of worldly respects or difficulties;
least thou prove one of the Vocati sed non electi: one of the called, but not
one of the elect: as also having once embraced the way of virtue, to follow it
with all diligence, zeal, and feruor, until thou find thy Christ: o who can
tell me what we lose sometimes by our sloth, and tepidity in our prayers,
meditations, and communions?

2. Consider secondly how departing from Jerusalem toward Bethlem, the star
re-appeared, and led them to the stable of Bethlem; where casting forth
greater light, new rays, and splendor, gave them to understand, that they
were at their iourneys end; Et grauisi sunt gaudio magno valde: and they
rejoiced with exceeding great joy: but as their joy was great, so no doubt
their vvonder and astonishment was nothing less, to see how far otherwise
things outwardly appeared, then they had hitherto imagined; they thought to
have found a newborn King, most powerful, most rich; sumptuous in his
palaces, courtiers and servants; and therefore they went first to Jerusalem
the regal City, with Vbi est qui natus est Rex Iudaeorum? where is he that is
borne King of the Jews? but here what do they find? Intrantes domum (which
was a stable) inuenerunt puerum cum Maria matre eius, entering into the house
they found the child with Marie his mother, a young maid which a child in her
arms; for it is not mentioned that S. Joseph was there: o what would humane
judgment, what would the great Sages and Politians of the world have
thought here? marry have turned their backs, and thought them selves deceived:
but not so these holy and truly Wise men; they gave more credit to the divine
calling, then to humane reason; and so entering saluted most humbly the Uirgin
Mother; gave her account of their calling, and all that had passed at
Jerusalem, and by the way; begged leave of her, that they might adore that her
little Infant, whom they acknowledged for their God and Creator etc.

Conclude to thank God daily for calling thee to the Catholic faith, by the
star of his holy grace and inspirations: next take heed of curiosity in
matters of faith; for believe it, they follow not the rule of shallow reason or
policy, but a more hidden and higher strain; so that, Qui serutator est
maiestatis, opprimetur a gloria. He that is a searcher of the majesty shall be
oppressed of the giorie.

3. Consider thirdly how these devout Princes, and the first pllgrimes of the
holy land, having obtained license to make their adoration; presently opened
their coffers and rich treasures, which they had provided; and prostrating
themselves at the Infant Jesus his feet, acknowledged him for the true and
living God; for the sovereign King of the whole universe; and for a true
mortal and passible man; and therefore offered themselves unto him, as
creatures unto their Creator, as slaves and vassalls to their Sovereign; and
as servant to wait and assist him in his necessities: which also they signified
by the gifts they offered; for the Incense signified their adoration of him as
God; the Gold, their tribute, as to a King: the Myrrh to comfort and
strengthen him as a mortal man: Aurum, thus, myrrham, Regique hominiqueue
Deoqueue dona ferunt. Gold, incense, and myrrh they present to a King man, and
God. The divine Jnfant spoke not unto them with outward voice, but in his
countenance he showed his joy and content; and in their hearts he spoke a new
language unto them, filling them full with the three spiritual gifts
correspondent to theirs; to wit faith, hope, and charity: by faith; as in a
cloud of incense, they saw the whole, mystery of the Incarnation with the
rest of our holy faith: by hope; as in the bitterness of myrrh, their expected
man's redemption by his death and passion: and by the purest gold of charity
their souls were inflamed and united unto him.

Conclude to make after them thy adoration in like sort; and with gifts of thy
heart, not unlike, offer him the incense of faith and religion; the gold of
love and piety; the myrrh of penance and mortification: and if thou do this
feelingly, and sincerely, thou vvilt find him Largum remuneratorem. A large
revvarder.

4. Consider fourthly the unspeakable joy and content, which the divine Infant
Jesus conceived in his soul, to see so timely fruits of his Incarnation and
Nativity: for in these three men was principiated the calling of the Gentiles
to salvation; the conversion of the whole world; the confusion and
dispossessing of the Devil of that universal tyranny, he had so long borne
over poor man; thence the infinite glory of God, conquering the devil and
world in his Saints and Martyrs of all sorts: no man can express this his
joy, but himself, who only knows the true value of souls, and the love his
Eternal Father bears them. The B. Virgin also and S. Joseph bore a great
share in this his joy: o with what Jubilees of her heart, what inflamed
thoughts, what watery eyes, did she bless, thank and praise the Eternal
Father, for that now the clouds of iufidelity began to disperse, and the light
of Gods knowledge to extend it self beyond Judea, over the face of the whole
earth: that now began the Reign and Kingdom of her Son, so long since
foretold by the Prophets, and lately promised her by the Angel.

Conclude and join thy self with Jesus Maria Joseph, and add one hearty
Amen, to all their praises, and thanks given to God: and know that this is the
Christ-masse day of us Gentiles; wherein Christ began to leave the blind
Jews, and pass over to us: receive him with an humble heart, vvelcome him
with all love and gratitude: and take heed of losing him again, as the Jews
did; and as many Christians alse do of all estates; for noe state can secure
any man.

5. Consider fifthly, how these holy Kings having performed their homage and
offerings, and taking leave of the B. Uirgin and S. Joseph, with great
humility and reverence, leaving their hearts behind them in the stable, began
their return and journey homeward: when it was revealed unto them, that they
should not return by Jerusalem to Herod, as he had requested them for his own
wicked ends, and they had promised, but take an other way, as they did: and
being returned home, took also an other way and course of life: forsook
their crowns and estates to practice and imitate the better the humility and
poverty, they had seen in their newborn Savior; and so went up and down
those vast countries, preaching and communicating to those blind, and barbarous
people the great and heavenly mysteries, they had seen; until at length for
the said truth, they lost their lives, and received the glorious and
neuer-fading crowns of martyrs. In all which we may plainly see the
vvonderfull providence, care, and love, that God has of those, who totally
cast themselves into his hands, seeking only to serve and please him; Vere in
manibus suis portabit eos, ne vnquam offendant ad lapidem pedem suum; he will
truly bear them in his hands, least perhaps they knoch their feet against a
stone; as he did these holy men, who sincerely aod devoutly sought him.

Conclude to cast thy self, and all that thou have into the hands of his
divine goodness; and be confident he will neither fail, nor forsake thee, if
thou first forsake not him and his commands: resolve also now to walk an
other way then formerly, since Christ has been pleased to call and place thee
so night about him; take heed of returning to thy old vomit, lest he cast thee
off, and quite forsake thee.

THE SIXTH MEDITATION. Of the Purification of the B. Virgin Mary.
1. COnsider first, how forty days being expired, the law commanded the woman
to repair unto the Temple in Jerusalem, there to be purified, and to offer her
first borne Son upon the Altar, as a tribute and duty to God Almighty: but
what was this law to the B. Virgin or her Son? was either she defiled in
the childbirth, or he borne a slave? see and imitate this obedience and
humility of the B. Uirgin: her dearest Son would be circumcised, and so take
on him the badge of a sinner, who came to redeem all from sin: his Virgin
Mother would now be purified, as other women, by which she lost in the
world the opinion and esteem of a Virgin; and was held no better then other
married women: and yet she was the first that set up the banner of Uirginity,
she that demurred upon this point only of the Angels message, she that was
more ready to leave to be the mother of God, then to endanger the least stain
of her purity: she finally, whose singular title was to be, Virgo ante partum,
in partu, and post partum: a Uirgine before in, and after her bringing forth.
Who can now, but her self, conceive the profoundnes of this humility, that not
vvithstanding all these respects, she had to her virginity, and no obligation
at all to this law of purification; yet she would obey it, and so lose with
the world the reputation of a Virgin? o how like her Son Sine peccato, sed
non sine similitudine peccati? Without sin, but not without the likeness
of sin? but we, how unlike to either? Qui cum peccatores esse volumus,
tales haberi aut apparere non volumus? who will be sinners, and yet will not
that we appear so?

Conclude to accompany them in spirit up to Jerusalem: embrace the virtue of
humility; be not as hamed to be esteemed, at least what thou art; if thou
can not yet overcome thy self further; resolve also to comply with the law
of God, and those of thy obligation, with a free, large and frank heart,
scorning as unworthy of a noble soul, this shuffling and hackling upon every
toy, as afraid to over do.

2. Consider secondly, how leaving the stable of Bethlem, a rich store house
for all that should devoutly visit it; they took their way to Jerusalem: who
can express what passed in the breast of the divine Infant Jesus, when he
came within view of that ever rebellious City? what contradictions, affronts,
persecutions he was to suffer of that ungrateful people? now he saw himself
enter into it in the pious arms of his Mother; but then dragged and haled by
the fury of his enemies: certainly we may piously think, that he began now
to weep over thet miserable place, as afterward we read he did. Coming
thither, and entering into the Temple, there met them old Simeon, a just and
holy man, sent thither by the instinct of the holy Ghost; who had promised
him, that he should see the Savior of the world, ere he died: here he met
him, adored him for his Sovereign and God; with the Virgin Mothers leave
took him in his arms; and full thereby with new light in his understanding,
new heat in his breast, lifting his aged face to heaven, full of devotion, joy,
and raptures, like the dying swan, celebrated his own funerals with a, Nunc
dimittis seruum tuum Domine; now thou do dimisse thy servant, o Lord;
vvalking on in this procession with Jesus in his arms, till he came to the
holy Altar. This is that procession, yearly represented by the Church on
Candle-masse-day; and the most solemn that ever was made on earth, if you
consider the persons in it.

Conclude with a new devotion to this holy Mystery, and to the parties therein
specified: be confident, as old Simeon was, of Gods promises, but so, as thou
also be ever a loyal and faithful obseruer of his commandments: finally,
whenever thou entrest the Church, to meet thy Savior, do it with the
faith, devotion and zeal of this good old man.

Consider thirdly how coming before the Altar, the B. Virgin received of old
Simeon her beloved Son, and falling on her knees offered him upon the Altar
unto his Eternal Father, due unto him by both the titles of his and her
Primogenitus; first borne son; and vvithall drawing forth a pair of turtles
or pigeons, gave them unto the Priest, according to the law, to signify unto
us, that although Christ offered on the Cross, or on the Altar in sacrifice,
be an offering of infinite value; yet it will little a veil us, unless we
join thereunto our own good works and satisfactions. But who can here
express unto me the spirit and devotion, either of the Mother o^ the Son in
this passage? the Mother laying him on the altar, quitted and gave up her right
she had in him, unto the Eternal Father, well knowing the ^^ue, and vvorth of
what she offered; yet begging notwithstanding with all humility and
submission, to return him unto her, if it were his pleasure; that the might
both serve him, as his true handmaid, and nurse him as his mother. The Son,
how willingly and contentedly did he lie on the Altar? as the first grateful
sacrifice, that ever was offered to Fis Father, and as a figure of the Altar
of the Cross, whereon he was to be offered In holocaustum vespertinum: as an
evening holocaust: here is fulfilled that of the Psalm, Holocaustum and pro
peccato non postulasti, tunc dixi, ecce venio. Holocaust and for sins thou
aidst not require, then said I behold I come.

Conclude, whenever thou see thy Savior offered upon the Altar, to offer
thy self also with him; thy heart, thy affections, thy good works; that
thorough his worth, and value of his merits, thou also may be an acceptable
oblation in the sight of God: join also with the B. Virgin in her prayers and
devotions; that so her Son Jesus may the sooner hear and grant thy desires.

4. Consider fourthly, how here is verified the saying of the Psalm:
Suscopimus Deus misericordiam tuam in medio templi tui: we have received thy
mereie, o God, in the mids of thy temple: for God the Father by the Priest,
his public Minister delivered us again his only Son from of the Altar of
the Temple; where the Virgin Mother as our procuratresse received him in our
name before vvitnesses old Simeon, Joseph, and the holy vvidow Anna; so that
the act was public, solemn, and every way authentical, and an act not of
pure gift and donation only, as fomerly in the Incarnation it was, when was
verified that, Sic Deus dilexit mundum vt filium suum vnigenitum daret; So God
loved the world, ^ that he gave his ouly begotten son; but an act also of
sale or buying; for the B. Uirgin ere she could recover him of the Priest, gave
him in his hand five sicles, that is ten shillings, for him; otherwise he had
remained there a sacrifice to his Father. Blessed for ever be the goodness, the
sweetness, the love of our Jesus; that gives us leave to talk in this sort of
him, and yet with truth: that has ginen himself wholy over to be ours, for
our good, our salvation, our bliss; so that when we offer any things of his
unto his father, we offer nothing, but what goodness has made ours. Rejoice o
my soul, and take possessionf of so great treasures; Intra in thesauros Domini
tui. Enter into the treasures of thy Lord.

Conclude with most humble thanks to all the parties, that concurred in this
sale and delivery of thy dearest Savior; and especially to the Lamb, that
was bought and sold, Quia voluit. Because he would. The surest way to enjoy
him, is the union and exchange of hearts with him; deliver whatsoever thou art
unto him, and thou art secured of whatsoever he is, or can do for thee: then
may thou say, Dilectus meus mihi, and Ego illi. My beloved to me, and I to
him.

5. Consider fifthly how the solemnity being ended, and the B. Virgin full of
joy and heavenly comfort, ready to return with holy Joseph and her little
Jesus, to dwell in her own home at Nazareth; behold old Simeon inspired by the
holy Ghost, began to declare unto her the contradictions, persecutions, and
roproches, which that divine child was to suffer in the world, and especially
in that ungrateful City: Sed and tuam ipsius animam pertransibit gladius; and
thine own soul shall a sword pearce; the sword to wit of compassion, grief
and sorrow for his so vnde served sufferings. O divine wisdom! Quam
inscrutabilia iudicia tua and inuestigabiles vitae tuae? how in comprehensible
are thy judgments, and thy ways unspeakable? what necessity was there, that
these objects of grief should be foretold to thy most innocent Mother so long
before hand? was it not sufficient, that then, when they were to happen, her
sorrows should ^^ell according to the measure of her love, that is, beyond all
measure? but that she should live always with this corrosiue of her heart;
with this bitter worm wood in her palate; to infect and blast the joys and
delights she must needs enjoy in thy heavenly presence and company? can either
her loyalty toward thee ever fail, that she may deserve a check: or thy love
toward her slacken, that she need merit it ever anew by her anguishes for
thee? o nothing less; both were grounded upon a surer foundation, then to
fail: it was nothing but the effect of his love toward her; and therefore he
would liken her in all things to himself: that is, as he passed not a minute
without a most fresh and piercing memory of his future passion so she also
should never look on his divine face, which rejoices both heaven and earth;
but presently she should see there his afflictions and her own griefs and
fears.

Conclude to contemn all the prosperities, and iollities of this life, and to
embrace adversities, which way soever they come, as special gifts and
pledges of Gods love toward thee and remember, that in this thou shall liken,
thy self to thy B. Savior, and his Virgin Morher, the Lady and Mistres of thy
heart.

THE THIRD CHAPTER, Of our Saviors childhood and education till his Baptism.
THe holy Evangelists have left little, or nothing to us of our Saviors
actions till his age of thirty years, when he began to teach and preach,
except his flight in to Egypt, and return from thence; his losing himself in
Jerusalem, and his sinding in the Temple; and lastly his return to Nazareth,
his living in obedience under his parents, with his increase in age and grace
before God and men.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of our Saviors flight in Egypt.
1. COnsider first, how truly it is said of our Savior Christ, In laboribus a
iuuentu^e mea: in labors from my youth. You have feen the poverty and
nakedness, in which he was borne; witness the cold and ruinous stable of
Bethlem: but now they are come home to Nazareth little also and poor, yet
better, because at home; and welcomed by their friends and kindred: S. Joseph
falls to his trade, to earne bread for his household, the Son and Mother of
God; the B. Virgin settleth and accommodateth with in door, a poor household
stuff for a quiet life at least, how sparing so ever. When behold a sudden and
fearful voice of an Angel, at midnight, rouseth Joseph out of his sleep,
with a Surge and accipe puerum and matrem eius, and fuge: arise, and take the
child, and his mother and flee: but vvhither; o Lord? to Bethlem again? noe,
you were there amongst your kindred and well used. To Jerusalem the royal
City? no, Qui in domibus Regem sunt, mollibus vestiuntur. They that are in
Kings houses are clothed in soft garments. To the furthest countries of the
East, to the late three Kings. nothing less; but Fuge in Aegyptum; flee into
Egypt. that barbarous nation, that oppressed you so long, and made you slaves
a nation, that ever hated a lew, and used him cruelly; thither must be your
banishment, till you hear further from me. O who can express the fright of
pore Joseph? the affliction of the B. Uirgin, when she saw him come half
distracted with fear to tell her of it? and yet the sudden resignation of
both to the will and command of God?

Conclude to understand at length and embrace willingly and promptly the vvayes
and exercises, wherewith God does use to train up his best servants; not
suffering them to fasten a foot in the ease and commodities of this world; but
raise their hopes ever upward to himself: remember what Christ has told thee;
Non est seruus mayor Domino suo; si me persecuti sunt and vos persequentur. The
servant is not greater then his master; if they hane persecuted me, you also
will they persecute.

Consider secondly, with what have they depart away before day, without
taking leave of their neighbors and kindred; without making any provision for
their long journey; without leaving order about their house or furniture,
forcibly left behind; all which would have cost other gossips a fornights
time: but this holy couple take care for nothing, but to save their best
jewel, that is, Jesus Christ from the hands of his enemies; for the rest they
remitted all to Gods providence; Execunt de domo sua and de cognatione sua,
they go forth out of their house, and out of their kindred. And take a long
journey of twenty days, at least, ere they enter into Egypt, going the nighest
way; but far longer, traveling as they did, (as it is thought) tound about,
thorough the same desert, by which the Israelites had anciently passed; for
fear, lest going, through peopled places, they should be descryed and stopped.
Ponder now who can, the toil, wants and discommodityes incident to such a
way, so long, so barren; and to such travelers so poor, so unprovided, so
hastened with fear. O my soul compassionate at least, the B. Virgin with her
Son in her arms so often in the day tired, vvearied and siting down; S.
Joseph's care also and anguish for a bit of bread in the day, and a poor
lodging in the night. O potent Infant, Lord of heaven and earth; could not
thou with one of thy millions of miracles for the freedom of others, have now
freed thy parents from all these miseries?

Conclude with a most tender compassion of these holy pilgrims; vvishing from
thy heart thou could do them any the least service: learn of them to break
through all natural affections, obligations and commodities, when any thing
of the service and will of God comes in thy way: and having once received thy
Christ into thy breast, fly rather into a thousand Egypts and slaueries, then
hazard to lose or be robbed of him.

3. Consider thirdly; how being at length arrived in Egypt, we may well say,
that though their journey were at an end, yet their labors and discommodities
began a fresh: for if in Bethlem amongst their own nation and kindred they
found no better entertainment than a stable for their lodging: what comfort,
may we imagine, could they find in a nation barbarous, infidel, and a
peculiar enemy to that of the Hebrews? o my soul, open thine eyes and thou
thalt see great and large matter of pity and commiseration, in the space of
seven or eight years, which, as it is thought, this their banishment endured
S. Joseph getting some small cottage or roof to cover his head in, fell
presently to his trade of carpenter, to earne daily food for the Son and
Mother of God: neither was the B. Virgin idle, but with her heavenly modesty,
humility and gracious be hauiour, gaining favor with the grauest matrons of
the place, got of them some work to spin, sow, or the like; vvherwith she
help to feed and cloth her little Jesus; who, as he increased in age,
doubtless increased also their joy and comfort with his blessed company: and
gained amongst the neighbors more love and esteem by his more then Angelical
sweetness and demeanor.

Conclude to accompany in spirit and devotion this divine family of Jesus,
Maria, Joseph; offering and wishing thou could stead them in any thing: and
learn of them such humility, modesty and mildnes of carriage that thou may
live with, nay gain upon the fiercest and most untamed dispositions, and way
vvardnes that, can be.

4. Consider fourthly, how the bloody Herod with never heard of cruelty and
rage, having massacred all the Infants of Bethlem, and the places round about;
nay, to be sure, his own Son also; and yet missing of his intent, which
was amongst so many, to kill Christ, fell afterward into infinite miseries
and diseases so that with despair he killed himself, and died everlastingly.
When the Angel returning to Joseph, bad him take the child and his mother and
return home into the land of Jsrael; Defuncti sunt enim, qui quaerebant animam
pueri: for they are dead, that sought the life of the child. Joyful tidings
for all, and for little Jesus himself, when his parents told him of it. See
how they go to take leave of their neighbors, and those to whom they had been
any way beholding: thanking them for the courtesies received of them, and
humbly asking pardon, if they had any way offended or molested them: o what
heart so frozen, as would not be inflamed? what eyes so stony, as would not
melt into tears; at the thanks and farevvell of such Saints? no doubt but
many were heartily grieved to lose their company; many conducted them to the
tuwnes end, many gave them some alms, to help them on their way: and was
there none, think you, that kissed little Jesus with melting souls and
filled his apron or pockets, with some small knekes or plummes? surely I
cannot believe, but that he had in so long time won unto him the hearts and
souls of many.

Conclude to leave Egypt, that is thy vicious and inordinate affections and
passions; that thou may go with thy Christ, thy Jesus, into the land of
promise, take heed thou be not left behind. Fly ambition, nothing will bring
thee sooner to ruin; Deus enim superbis resistit, humilibus autem dat gratiam.
For God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. How our Savior was left in Jerusalem, and found in
the Temple.
1. COnsider first, how the B. Virgin and S. Joseph returning from the feast of
Easter; for which they usually went up to Jerusalem every year; our B.
Savior, being now some twelve years old, remained behind; who, the one
supposing him to be in the company of the other, missed him not, till they came
to their first nights lodging; where finding him not, nor amongst their
kindred and acquaintauce; how, do you think, did these two Cherubins, set to
cover and guard the Ark of God, look one upon the other? what amazement,
what anguish, what desolation oppressed their hearts? and if according to the
quantity of love, be also the measure of grief, who can explicate or imagine
the sad plight of his sacred Mother? sure that she had lost her dearest
Jewel, but why, where, and how, most uncertain: o how did she (and S.
Joseph also) pass that night in prayers, tears, and sighs for her beloved?
and before day how did she say, Surgam and quaeram quem diligit anima mea; I
will rise, and I will seek him, whom my soul loves. but alas! Quaesiuit
and non inuenit, he has sought him, and has not found, through all the
vvayes, lodgings and streets of the vast City of Jerusalem. Now she feared,
Simeons prophecy was come upon her; and that this was that svvord of grief,
should pass her thorough. one while she feared some secret enemy had carried
him away; an other while, that he had absented himself for some
misdemeanour, fault, or vnvvorthines of hers etc.

Conclude with a most tender compassion of this distressed couple: pity the
poor Uirgin, now tired, and not able to dravv her legs after her; without
meat, drink, or sleep, for two days and nights, together; and yet hourly
with less and less hope of finding him, than at the beginning: vvish from
thy heart^, thou could give her any good tidings of her son, and learn of
her to bear with patience and resignation all afflictious and discomforts,
which God shall give thee.

2. Consider secondly, how our B. Savior foresaw very well the great grief,
his absence would cause in the tender heart of his mother, and felt in
himself no doubt, a most filial compassion and pity for her: yet with divine
magnanimity and courage, he would both leave her for a while in all those
anguishes of a comfortles mother, and also break himself of the natural
affection and duty of a Son; to leave us a perfect example, that flesh and
blood is not to be respected, when the honor of God, and the spiritual profit
of our neighbor calls an other way. O my soul, stay now in Jerusalem, in
the temple with thy Savior, follow him close, and lose him not for a world:
see what he does these three days, where he eats, where he sleeps
Behold him all the day upon his knees in the Temple in prayer and supplications
to his Father; far short was Salomons solemnity, and dedication to this, Quia
plus quam Solomon hic: Because more then Solomon here: at the evening he goes
about begging a piece of bread for his supper: o at how many doors might he
suffer a repulse, or a cold, God help thee? At night, he either retireth
himself into some hospital for lodging, or lies, it may be, within the
Churchporch upon some bench or stall: and yet he it is, who feeds and
clotheth the beasts of the field, and the birds of the air; Panis hominum and
Angelorum. the bread of men and Angles.

Conclude to imitate thy sweetest Savior, in his poverty, humility, and
feruency of prayer: offer to his Eternal Father, whatsoever he has done, or
suffered for thee, in satisfaction and accomplishment of whatsoever thou
come short in: let nothing take place in thy heart of Gods service and the
good of thy neighbor.

3. Consider thirdly, how the third day the Scribes and Doctors of the law
meeting together in the Temple to confer upon points of the holy Scripture;
our B. Savior came amongst the rest of thy young people, and children, to
hear and learn. Here he began to ask questions, and reply upon the Doctors
answers, with such vigor, prudence, and wisdom, and yet with such medesty
and humility; that as by the one he astonished the greatest Clerks, so by the
other he ravished the hearts of all that were present. And what may we
imagine was his dispute with them? it is not specified; but we may well
presume, that it was to open their eyes to see and acknowledge the true
Messiah: let us therefore suppose he asked them; when the Messiah so long
promised would come, for the computation of Daniels weeks was now ended;
and the Kingdoms scepter was passed from the tribe of Judah: who were to be
his parents, poor or rich what kind of Kingdom was his to be: in temporal
riches, power and luster; or in spiritual gifes, poverty, meeknes and
humility: what were those Kings, that some years past came from the East,
and enquired for the King of the Jews newly borne; and what was become of
that King? finally whatsoever they answered, he shevved them: clearly out of
the Scriptures and prophecies, that the Messiah was already come, would they
have seen it.

Conclude with joy and comfort of heart to see thy young Master begin to
display the rays of his heavenly light and truth: beg of him, that he never
leave thee in darkness, as he left those Doctors and Scribes.

4. Consider fourtly, how the distressed, and now hopeless Uirgin, having in
vain vvandered for two days and a half in the search of her most beloved;
she came at length into thee Temple, to make her prayers and devout complaints
both to him and his father: where casting up her eyes, she savv him in the
midst of the Doctors, arguing and disputing with them. O my soul never
think to couceiue the joy, comfort, and new life, that suddenly revived and
dilated the heart of this ever glorious Virgin: for as far off as thou art
from the degree of love she bare him, so far vvilt thou ever come short,
either of the sorrow she suffered in his absence, or the joy she felt in his
presence: yea some will prefer this before that which she had at his
resurrection, because of that she had a certain hope and confidence, but at
present she knew not, what to hope or think. Behold how she embraces and
huggeth him; Inueni quem diligit anima mea, tenebo and non dimittam. I have
found whom my soul loves I will hold him, and will not let him go. Harken
to her sweet and amorous complaint: Fili, quid fecisti nobis sic? ecce Pater
tuus and Ego dolentes quaerebaonus Te. Son, why have thou so done to us?
behold thy father and I sorrvving did seek thee. Tell us dearest Lady, how
comes S. Joseph to be his father, and yet thou a Virgin Mother? noe humility
but thine, could ever stoop so low, as to honor thy dearest spowse with the
obscuring of thy purest virginity in the opinion of men.

Conclude to imitate in every point this search of the B, Virgin, whenever
thy Savior shall seem to absent himself from thee: that is, first to see and
be sorry, for what thou may have offended him in; then let thy search be
with humility and perseverance: thirdly complain unto him with a lowly
confidence; Vt quid Domine posuisti me contrarium tibi? factus sum mihimetipsi
grauis etc. why have thou set me contrary to thee? I am become burdenous to
my self etc. lastly seek him in the Temple, In domo orationis, in the house
of prayer. And thou shall soon find him, In medio cordis tui. In the midds of
thy heart.

5. Consider fifthly our Saviors answer unto the complaint of his parents:
Quid est, quod me quaerebatis? nesciebatis quia in his, quae Patris mei sunt,
oportet me esse. What is it that you sought me^ did you not know, that I must
be about those things which are my fathers? Which although those great
Doctors understood not, supposing none other to be his father, but Joseph, as
the B, Uirgin had styled him; yet he gave hereby plainly to understand, that
his true and natural Father was he in heaven; whose service therefore was
to be preserred before all respects of carnal parents, self ease, and
content, or any corporal commodities whatsoever. O if we could once learn
this lesson perfectly of our Savior; to do in all things his will, as he did
his Fathers, and not our own, how happily and contentedly should we live,
even in this world? Having said thus with a divine majesty, and a sweet
frown, he presently yields himself unto his Mother, and with prompt
obedience and humility goes home with her: and by the way recounteth, no
doubt, unto her, the reason of with drawing himself from them in that sort:
the dispute he had with the Doctors in the Temple; and how he had passed
those three days and nights; promising her with an all-rauishing grace and
sweetness, never more to leave her in the like manner: and how vvarilly did this
chance and her love force her to look unto him ever after, well knowing the
treasure she had, or lost in him?

Conclude with two resolutions; the one to direct thy aim and intention,
according to the vocation, God has placed thee in, really and sincerely to
comply with his will and pleasure; and prefer this ever before all other
respects: the other; that having by Gods mercy recovered once his grace, which
thy sins had lost thee, look to it more warily for the future; such
treasures are not so easily recovered.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of our Saviors education at Nazareth until his
Baptism.
1. COnsider first, how we find nothing written of our Savior from his age
of twelve to thirty. but only that he went to Nazareth with his parents, and
was subject and obedient to them; Et proficiebat sapientia, and gratia, and
aetute apud Deum and homines. And he proceeded in wisdom, and grace, and age
with God and men. So that in preaching and teaching the whole Evangelical
law and doctrine, he spent but three years, and thirty in the practice of
humility and obedience; to teach by a most efficacious example all those, that
pretend to be preachers and teachers, to lay first in themselves the deep and
sure foundation of true obedience and humility; without which no other virtues
are secure; and all science and eloquence but a blast of vvind. Nay S. Paul
seems to reduce all the merits of Christ, unto these two only virtues:
Humiliauit semetipsum, and factus est obediens vsque ad mortem, propter quod
and Deus exaltauit eum etc. He humbled himself, and was obedient unto death,
for the which thing God also has exalted him etc. For his obedience and
subjection: o how different is the present proctice of the world? how many
skip into the pulpit, and leap into the chair, before they know the A. B. C.
of these, or other virtues? how many are there, who for thirty years of
prelacy or command, can count three of true humility or subjection to their
superiors? and yet Christ being the Creator of all things, and monarch of the
world, obeyed for thirty years a poor Virgin and a simple tradesman; and
would be a Master, and governor but three.

Conclude with confusion in thy heart to see, how promptly thy Savior has
obeyed his inferiors and creatures, and how scantly and imperfectly thou do
the same to thy Superiors and Prelates: resolve at length seriously to ground
thy self in true obedience and humility, Omni humanae creaturae propter Deum,
to every humane creature for God, ere thou venture to be a Prelat or Teacher:
purposing from hence forward in things indifferent, to do rather the will of
others then thy own.

2. Consider secondly, how great and wonderful was the humility of our B.
Savior; who being a person of that dignity, as he was; whose knowledge
comprehended all, that was in heaven and earth and penetrated the secret of
all hearts; whose wisdom and prudence exceeded that of men and angels,
whose power was over life and death, without control, in fine, whose gifts
and graces were all in the highest degree: yet he could and would hide and
cover all these talents, for so many years together, without ever opening his
mouth or stretching out his hand to preach, teach or correct any one: but in
all his conuersations behaved himself like an honest simple young man, as
others of his age and vocation; and was esteemed no otherwise of his kindred
and neighbors: nay some, who had heard the wonders of his birth and infancy,
and had thence conceived great hopes of him; now as far slighted and
contemned him, seeing him not incline himself to any sort of learning or
higher strain of conversation, than the trade of a Carpenter and poor
Mechanic. Scholars, I doubt not, will easily conceive, how great humility
and mortification this was: for who of us all, J pray, that is entered the
alphabet of any science, or pretends any other quality of esteem, can upon
the least occasion hold his tongue or conceal it? neither think that our
Savior vvanted occasions to show himself, where he daily saw so much
ignorance of men, and sins against God.

Conclude and learn this sort of humility chose rather to be a hearer then a
talker, a scholar then a teacher, as far as thy state permits: at least
give place to thy betters and equals to speak before thee: try this a while,
and then tell me, if it be a mortification or no.

3. Consider thirdly, the daily exercise and ocupation of our Savior, from
his child hood upward to the estate of a man; and thou vvilt find a most large
and delicious field of spiritual sweetness and devotion. His parents were
poor, and without any servant; see then what fell to his lot to do, and
doubt not, but he did most diligently all whatsoever could be expected from a
most obedient and humble child: as, to cover the table, to sweep the house,
make the fire, wait on his parents, go on errands, and the like; which thou
need not be ashamed to consider in particular, as he was not ashamed to
practice them for thee; and to that end inspired and willed his parents to
command and treat him, as others use to do. Being now grown bigger, he takes
the harchet and saw in hand, and works as a prentice to Joseph, not for
recteation or complement, but with full iourneys, and daily toil, to help
his parents to earne their bread; and S. Joseph being dead, then was he to
work harder to maintain his mother. Stand o my soul, and with all the
Angels and Powers of heaven, behold with amazement this great and Primus
fabricator mundi, the chief maker of the world, swearing now to make a house,
a stool, a form: this great Pastor who feeds the birds of the air, subject
himself to Adams curse, Comedens panem suum in sudore vultus sui. Eating his
bread in the sweat of his face.

Conclude with shame of thy own pride, who being a poor worm, and for thy
sins worthy of no higher place then the bottom of hell, expectest nothing
less, then to be waited on, and treated with all respect and esteem;
scorning to put thy hand to any thing, that may any way disparage thy blood
forsooth, breeding or authority: o for shame at least, shake of such
presumption, look upon thy Savior, and sure thou vvilt never bristle thy
feathers, as thou do.

4. Consider fourthly, how our Savior increased in age, wisdom and grace
before God and men: in age he truly and really increased, by the same degrees
as others do; but of wisdom and grace he was ever full, and so could not
increase in them; yet he went daily shevving them more and more in his
carriage, conversation and outward exercises: as the Sun is ever the same in
greatness and luster, in himself, yet be gives more heat, and shows more
light at noone, than in the morning or evening. Ovvho can consider his sweet
conuersations in the day time? and those rays of divinity, which at times fell
from him, and ravished the hearts of all? or his prayers and contemplations in
the night? and all to teach his children, that is, all true Christians to
labor always to increase and go forward in the way of piety and virtue; De
virtute in vircutem vsque ad domum Dei: from virtue to virtue unto the house of
God, for, Iustorum semita quasi lux splendens, procedit and crescit vsque ad
persectam diem. The path of the just. as shyning light, proceeds even to
perfect day. To go back in our spiritual exercises, is a most dangerous case
and hardly to be recovered; as greater is the fall from a high place, than from
a plain: again it is well known, that it is impossible here to stand still;
Recedit enim, qui non proca. iit, and qui non pretendit melior fieri, desinit
esse bonus. For he goes back who does not proceed, and who does not pretend
to be better, leaves of to be good. If therefore we can neither stand still
without going back; not go back without danger of utter ruin, what
remains, but that all, who hope for salvation, strive ever forward?

Conclude to do so seriously, both to imitate thy Savior, and to secure thy
own salvation, but see thou do so, Tam coram Deo quam hominibus; as well
before God as men; that is, both inwardly in thy conscience, and out vvardly in
thy actions, and good-example: pray most heartily to thy Savior, that he will
give thee his grace to do so

5. Consider fifthly these words; Et matter eius conseruabat omnia verha haec
in cord suo: and his mother kept all these words in her heart: for the most
wise and prudent Uirgin observed most diligently all the actions, words, and
passages of her Son, well knovving from whom, and to what end they
proceeded; and laid them up in her heart, to dispense them afterward to the
Apostles, and the Church, as it should be necessary. Who can consider almost
any thing, what passed betwixt her and her Son for the space of thirty
years, living and conuersing ever together, both day and night, under the same
roof, and at the same table? how often did she pass whole nights by his beds
side in contemplation, to see him sleep, whose eye ever watches over the
whole world? how often did she sit at table in a dumb suspense, to see him
feed of her dish, whose sight iustaines the Angels? how many hours did she
pass with him in most sweet and familiar discourse? asking him a thousand
questions and receiving from him as many instructions of the highest mysteries
and secrets of heaven: what continual admiration did she sieve in, to see
always before he eyes these two, extremes join and meet in so sweet a
harmony, the dignity, to wit, of his person, with so lowly and humble
carriage and be hauiour etc.

Conclude to live ever in the company of ihy Savior and his B. Mother, that is
in contemplation of their actions and virtues, jointly with imitation; and shou
shall be sure of a thousand illuminations and comforts. Study also to lay up in
thy heart and memory, whatsoever thou shall hear, read, or see good, and for
thy spiritual profit; and then in time of need thou art sure to find a store.

6. Consider sixthly, how our Savior being now toward twenty nine yares of
age, he communicated unto his parents, how the time of his preaching, teaching
and redeeming the world was nigh at hand; and this with more particularities
to old S. Joseph, now about seauenty years of age; because he was not to live
to see and be a party in his sufferings, as the B. Virgin was; but to pass
over and rest with his fore fathers in Abraham's bosom. O with what feeling
and tears did the good old man hear these things? what pangs did he feel to
part with his sweetest Jesus and Mary? and yet with what conformity to the
will of God? how did he ask them both forgiveness and pardon for the offenses
he might have done them, and the small service he had performed for them? o my
soul think and discourse a little, what might pass betwixt three hearts so
inflamed and vvounded with mutual love and tenderness; and I know thou can
not, but by he thine eyes in tears of compassion. The old man dravving to his
end, with hands and eyes sixed on his present Savior, and begging of him his
last benediction and plenary indulgence, gave up most sweetly his happy soul
into his hands: which he receiving sent it presently by the hands of many
Angels into the resting place of the old fathers: and with his his own hands
and the help of the Virgin Mother, shrouded the holy and virginal body, and
with the accustomed rites and mournings laid it in it is grave etc.

Conclude with the best affections thy devotion can afford thee: beg of all
three, that they will be by thee at the hour of thy death: and receive thy
poor soul into their protection; conceive a special devotion to S. Joseph
for doubtless it cannot but much avail and profit thee.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER, Of our Saviors Baptism and preaching until his Passion.
HITHERTO we have seen our Sauiour's childhood and private life, and those
rare virtues he left us to practice; hence forwards he begins to show
himself, and the end for which he came; let us also follow him this stage
with meditation and imitation.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of the Baptism of our Savior Christ.
1. COnsider first, how the time being at length come when this sun of
justice, so long hidden and eclipsed, was to disclose himself and send out
his rays to onlihhten and vvarme the dark and frozen world; before his
departing from Nazareth, he gave an account of all to his B. Mother; thanked
her for his education and pains taken with him, asked her leave and license
to leave her for a while; and no doubt, but as a loyal son, asked her
motherly blessing, and as her Lord and Creator, gave her a thousand of his,
with as many embraces and mutual farevvells, full of tender love and dewy
eyes on both sides. O my soul, take thou also leave of the B. Virgin and
follow thy Savior; and never fear of her very good leave. See thy Lord go
forth poor, pennilesse and barefoot (for in that sort he used to preach) a
long journey of four days, to the river Jordan; where his Precursor S. John
was preaching penance and baptising all sorts of sinners: and being come
thither, he adioynes himself, as one of them, to publicanes, soldiers,
murderers, thieves and such like gentlmen; harkens, to S. John's preaching, and
is ready, like a true conuertite, to do public penance, and then be vvashed
by him from all his sins. Heavens! what has so humbled that Eternal
Majesty? what has defiled that spotles sanctity? thy sins, o my soul,
amongst the rest.

Conclude to follow thy Savior one step higher in imitation of his virtue: but
be sure to begin as he does, with one step lower of humility, and bear
thankfully if thou be slandered, or accused of any thing, being in thy self
innocent; for thy Savior will now be esteemed an actual and vvilfull sinner;
one step more then original.

2. Consider secondly, how our Saviors turn being come, he vuclothes
himself, enters into the river of Jordan, asks of S. John to be baptized and
washed from all his sins, promising to do penance for all, how many and
grievous foeuer. O most innocent lamb? how strange is this thy language? and
yet how true? strange, for how can sin be thine, which is so opposite to
thy nature, and displeasing to thy person? and yet most true; for all the
sins of the world are laid on thy shoulders, and are thine, to bear, to
vvash, to satisfy: vvash him therefore, o Baptist, from head to feet, or rather
us in him: But he by, divine instinct knovving who he was, all amazed and
astonished, cried out, Tu venis ad me baptizari? thou come to me to be
Baptized? thou, the Son of the living God Savior of mankind? most innocent
lamb, Qui tollis peccata mundi? who takes away the sins of the world?
thou, who did sanctify me in the womb, and who art to institute a
baptism of the holy Ghost? to me a poor creature, thy slave, Et filius
ancillae tuae, and the Son of thy handmaid, conceived in sin and subject
to it? shall I be esteemed a Prophet, and thou a sinner? or shall I lay my hand
upon that head, In quo reconditi sunt thesauri sapientia Dei? in whom all the
treasures of God the father his wisdom and knowledge are hid? never will
I do such a thing: neither would he ever have done it, had not our B. Savior
commanded him to it: Sine modo, sic enim-decet nos implere omnem iustitiam:
suffer me for this time; for so it becomes us to fulfill all justice. And
what? but, I must Implere omnem gradum humilitatis, fulfill the utmost degree
of humility, and thou omnem obedientiam. all obedience.

Conclude to learn this holy justice; that is, imitate thy Saviors humility,
in acknovvledging and doing penance for thy sins: practice S. John's
obedience, in submitting thy judgment without dispute, thy will without
reluctance, to what soever Christ by him self or Ministers shall command thee.

3. Consider thirdly, how our Savior coming out of the river, and falling to
prayer, presently the heavens open, the holy Ghost comes down like a dove;
and sits over him; and his Eternal Fathers voice was heard, Hic est filius
meus dilectus, in quo mihi complacui: this is, my beloved son, in whom I am
well pleased. In which passage are figured unto us the vvonderfull effects of
our holy Baptism; in which are inuoked and concur all the three persons of
the B. Trinity; the holy Ghost comes down, Et diffunditur in cordibus
nostris; and is povvred into our hearts. And of God the Son it is said, Hic
est qui baptizat in Spiritu Sancto: he it is that baptizeth in the holy Ghost.
By this the heavens are first opened, and men made heir to bliss. See
moreover the effects of holy prayer: it is that Penetrat and rumpit caelos;
penetrateth and pearseth the heavens. Prayer calls down the holy Ghost into
our souls, opens our ears to the voices and inspirations of God the Father,
and raises us to be worthy children of God, In quibus sibi complaceat. In
which he may be pleased. See finally, how God does never fail to exalt the
humble and lowly: Christ when he was borne in a stable, was reverenced by
Angels, and adored by Kings: when circumcised, had the name given him. Quod
est super omne nomen: which is above all names. When crucified betwixt
thieves, had both earth and heaven to mourn for him: and now when baptized
like a sinner, was honored with the presence of his Father and the holy
Ghost.

Conclude again to humble thy self in this world Omni creaturae propter
Deum, to every creature for God, that he may afterward exalt thee In die illa:
in that day: resolve also to follow the exercise of prayer, and especially
mental prayer; bend all thy forces to profit therein, as thou hopest for
heavenly comfort, and the visitation of the holy Ghost.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the Fast and Temptation of our Savior.
1. COnsider first, how our B. Savior no sooner baptized, but he enters into
the penance, he had promised to do; and so betakes himself into a vast and
barren desert, where amongst will beasts and birds of the air, he passed
forty whole days without ever eating or drinking, in perpetual prayer and
mortification: if thou ask why, since neither his virginal body could
deserve such rigor, nor company any way hinder his contemplation and
recollection? the reason is now giueu in his Baptism, both to satisfy in
himself for thy sins, and by example to move thee to do also somevvhat for
thy self. O happy desert wheresoever thou art, sanctified by so divine an
Hermit. holy cave, the bed chamber of our heavenly Solomon, rude and cold in
thy self, but mollified now and warmed by the ardent sighs of his inflamed
breast Blessed ground, which served for his bed and couch, and thrice happy
stone on vvhuch his sacred head reclined weary and heavy; full often vvast thou
bedewed with the salt tears that so often came trickling down his cheeks. O
soul of mine, more barren than that desert, more hard than those stones, if
thou can not afford one pious tear to vvarme his naked and frozen feet; if
thou can not breathout one sigh for his sake, who does both vveep and sigh
so much for thee.

Conclude to enter into the desert of penance with thy Savior; help him to
satisfy for thee, that is, help thy self by like mortification to join his
unto thee, and make them fruitful: but first be baptized, that is, vvashed and
cleansed from thy sins. Scimus enim quod peccatores Deus non exaudit; we
know that sinners God does not hear, that done, make no dilations, for
present satisfaction is more pleasing and secure.

2. Consider secondly, how our B. Savior seeing himself so much honored by
the voice of his Father, and appearing of the holy Ghost flies presently into
the desert, both to avoid the flatteries and acclamations of the people, as
also with the increase of Gods favors, not to neglect and slack, but rather
increase also the rigor and austeritie of a virtuous life; and this not for
himself, Sed vt nobis relinquat exemplum, vt sequamur vestigia eius. But that
he might leave us an example that we may follow his steps. So this most
humble and meek lamb of God conuersing and living amongst the vvild beasts of
the vvoods; and certainly with more quiet and content would he have passed
for all his life, then living amongst men, to see and bear with their
bestiall vices and abominable sins and blasphemies; had not his presence,
doctrine and example been necessary for our amendment and salvation. Blessed
be this his sweetness and gentleness to suffer and converse with sinners: and
Blessed be his charity and goodness, in preferring always our salvation before
his own content; in sparing no labor, or toil how difficult so ever, whence
might result any good of ours. O my soul, if we could vice versa again but
do and say as much for him, his honor and content.

Conclude two things, first to fly withal the strength of thy heart, all
praise and flattery of men; and be sorry at least, that thou can not feel in
thy self this dislike: Magnam, quoth Thomas of Kempis, habet cordis
tranquillitatem, qui lauds nec curat, nec vituperat. He enioyes a great
tranquillity of mind, who neither cares for nor discommends but is indifferent
to humane praises. The second, to imitate thy Saviors meeknes and gentleness in
words and carriage, that thou may live with the fiercest and wildest men
that are.

Consider thirdly, how our Savior to teach us in himself, the way to a
virtuous and celestial life, makes his first entrance by fasting and prayer:
for fasting keeps down the body, and prayer raises up the mind. His fast
was most rigorous, for in forty days and nights he tasted not a bitt of bread
nor drop of water; yet his prayer was so ardent, and his mind so raised in
continual contemplation, as both holy fathers, and Divines do think, that in
all the said time, he felt not the hunger and want that his body suffered; Sed
postea esuriit, but afterward he felt both hunger, feeblenes and weakness of
body. So do these two virtues of fasting and prayer concur to the advancing
one the other, for fasting lifts up prayer to her full pitch, and prayer
makes fasting easy and insensible, as it has been verified in many thousand
of Saints: bel^eue it, o Christian; this is the way to virtue and life
everlasting; for both a like labor in vain, as well he who hops to overcome
his other vices and bad inclinations without mastering his Gula, his gluttonous
desire, and appetite by fasting; as who thinks to make his fasting fraitfull
or tolerable without diligent prayer and meditation; Nam spiritus viri
sustentat imbecillitatem suam: for the spirit of a man sustaines his
weakness: and take courage, for though never so vveake of our selves, yet
Omnia possumus in Deo qui nos cenfortat^ We can do all things in God who
comfort us.

Conclude, as thou ever hopest to attain to a virtuous and spiritual life, to
seek no other inventions nor bypath, but to follow this high and beaten way
that Christ and his Saints have trodden before thee, of fasting and prayer; let
us be ashamed, that the eldest of us, is yet so far from either; from
fasting, as that we murmr at every displeasing bit; from prayer, as that
every toy can easily carry us from it; if not mere floth it self.

4. Consider fourthly these words of the E^angelist. Accedens ad eum tentator
dixit ei: the tempter approaching, said to him, this Tentator or tempter is the
devil, per antonomasiam; by excellency, as one may say, having hesides the
long experience of thousands of years, four principal qualities, that make
him Master in this black art: the first, is the exquisite skill and knowledge
he has, of our natural dispositions, inclinations and desires; the second,
his vvonderfull, power, to which all the power of this world is not
comparable: the third, his inueterate malice against mankind, the fourth, his
neuer-vvearied sedulity, diligence and sagacity to work his own ends, to
apply his snares in due time, and on fit occasions, and never to be wearied
with repulses, nor tired out with durance of time: This Tentator or tempter
therefore having many years vvatched about our Savior, now at length catches
hold of his hunger, Dic, vt lapides isti panes fiant, command that these
stones be made bread. Seek thy food by some mordinate and unusual way: but
being repulsed by the confidence we are to have in Gods providence; he
presently tries him with presumption, bidding him throw himself down from
the steeple, with trust that God would preserve him: but rejected again, and
seeing him to be a man not of ordinary valor and vvorth, to be catched with
small baits; behold he offers him the Empire of the whole world, for one
bend of his knee unto him: and note how at first he offered nothing but stones,
but finding resistance, an empire was too little; so does he proportion his
baits according to the waters he fisheth in.

Conclude to live in great fear of this so powerful, so cunning and malicious
an enemy; never think thy self secure, take heed of giving him any the least
occasion; and fly ever under the vving of thy Savior for his succor and
defense.

5. Consider fifthly, and note these three or four points upon this matter:
the first is, that the devil never te^mpted our Savior, until he entered into
the desert to live a hard and austere life; and then he urged him to turn
stones into bread: so does he with us; as long as we live at our ease and
pleasure, he troubles us not, but lets us sail on with a pleasant gale;
but if we once turn about, and look toward heaven, presently he sets
upon us, and persuadeth us to turn stones into bread, that is our hard and
austere beginnings into our former ease and delight. The second; he tempted not
our Savior, till he savv him with hunger and desire of meat; so it is, were
it not for our appetites and desires, the devil could hardly find a way open
to enter upon us; Unusquisque tentatur a concupiscentia sua ahstractus and
illectus: every one is tempted of his own concupiscence, abstracted and
allured: see therefore, how much it behooves us to bear all our affections
free and above terrene objects. The third, the devil tempted our Savior to
precipitate him self from the highest pinnacle, and to prostrate himself
before him: so does he treat with us, that we throw ourselves head long from
the highest top of grace, and Gods favor to the bottom of hell and despair;
adore him or other creatures in stead of our Creator; for in every mortal
sin so it really passes; and to obtain his end, he lets little by lying
or promising impossibilities; for if he be catched in them, he will never
bluch, so he can catch first poor souls in his snares.

Conclude to enter upon a virtuous life stoutly and with courage: to bridle
thy appetites and inordinate desires: not to believe the Devils flatterings,
promises or fawnings, lastly, to thank thy dearest Savior for shevving thee
the way how to resist and vanquish him; as also for breaking his force first
upon his own sacred person.

6. Consider sixthly, how when the Devil rose to that height of pride, as to
demand adoration, our meekest Lord could brook him no longer; but with a Uade
Satana, Deum tuum a lorabis, and illi soli seruies, a vant Satan, thy God shall
thou adore, and him only shall thou serve, sent him packing with confusion
and despair: and the holy Angels came visibly round about him; and presently
adored him for their true Lord and Master, to the greater confusion of the
Devil; and sung him some glorious hymn for his victory over that great and
fearful Golias. Learn hence my soul what to do in the day of battle and
temptation, if thou yield. the good Angels fly away with sorrow, and the
devils grin and laugh over thee; if thou fight valiantly, the devil is
confounded, the Angels are rejoiced and keep thee company. Et ministrabant ei,
and ministered unto him that is, they brought him somewhat to cat, a piece of
bread and a jarre of water, to relieve his feeble and ouertired body: see the
wonderful temperance and decency with which he takes this small repast: o
creep in amongst the feet of the blessed Angels, Vt comedas de micis, quae
cadunt de mensa Domini tui: that thou may eat of the crummes that fall from
the table of thy lord and master. And run thence with speed to give tidings
to the B. Uirgin of her long-wanted and lookedfor Son; relate unto her all
what has passed, what he has done and suffered since his departing out of
her doors.

Conclude to fight ever stoutly against temptations, with great confidence in
thy Savior and his holy Angels: provide thy self vvithsome fit sentence
against the temptations thou most fear, either out of holy Scripture, or else
where, they will serve like so many two edged swords, to strike thy enemy
thorough.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. How our B. Savior called his Disciples and his
conversation with all sorts of people.
1. COnsider first how our B. Savior after thirty years humility, poverty and
obedience; after a Baptism in the waters of Jordan; after forty days fast
and prayer, and the triple temptation of the Devil overcome; thinking
himself, in our manner of speech sufficiently armed and prepared for all
encounters, comes forth at length into the field, to fight against the great
Goliath of sin and ignorance, to plant his new and heavenly doctrine in the
world, and by his own death to redeem mankind. A perfect example for all
those who aspire to the preaching of Christ's word and the conversion of
souls, how to prepare themselves at home and within themselves ere they
venture out to so dangerous and hard a combat. See how our Savior goes about
to gather up disciples, with which to found and begin his Apostolical
College and Semmarie, Andrew and Peter, James and John, Matthew etc. where
two things are to be noted: the one, the quick and ready obedience, with
which they all follovved his call, leaving suddenly all they had, and
follovving him: the other, that he called none unto him, but poor ignorant and
simple fishermen, or the like, Stulta mundi elegit Deus vt confundat sapientes,
and infirma vt confundat fortia: the folish things of the world has God
chosen, that he may confound the wise, and the vveake things that he may
confound the strong. These are the Cerethi and Phelethi of our King David, the
daily lifeguard of our great Solomon; the great counselors and politicians,
that the Son of God chose to reduce the rebel world to obedience and
loyalty.

Conclude to follow promptly thy Saviors vocation and inspirations; and that
thou may be worthy te be called into his College and company, be a true
Deuote to humility, poverty and sincerity: lastly when thou art admitted,
venture not out to the field, until thou have prepared and armed thy self to
proof by penance, fasting, prayer, and ouercoming thy three enemies, the
flesh, world and devil.

2. Consider secondly how it is said of our Savior Cepit Jesus facere, and
docere: Jesus began to do and to teach: his life and conversation was a
perfect mirror and pattern of all virtue and sanctity, for he was Sanctus
Sanctorum: the Saint of Saints: his outvvard conversation was not with those
corporal austerities and rigours as S. John Baptist and other Saints have
used; neither are they the essential part or perfection, but only helps
thereunto; neither were they convenient for our Savior, who coming to teach,
cure and convert all sorts of people, was to accommodate himself to all
companyes and places, But the essential perfection was in him Tamquam in font
and centro, as in its sountaine and centure, as humility, meeknes, patience,
poverty, temperance, sweetness etc. O discite a me, quia mitis sum and humilis
cord: O learn of me, because I am meek, and humble of heart: but above all,
his inflamed and burning love and zeal of the honor of his Eternal Father,
and the curing and saving of poor souls; for this did he labor both day and
night; for the finding of this lost sheep, were bent all his thoughts and
endeauours; for this were his trauells by sea and land, from city to city,
from people to people, thorough heat and cold, rain and snow, poor, hungry,
ever on foot and those also ever bare: o how often did he sit down weary and
tired! how often was he benighted in the cold fields without shelter or relief!

Conclude since now thou art an Apostolical disciple of Christ, to ground thy
self here with true virtues, but above all in humility and charity; and when
thou shall be sent to thy poor country, think not of thy ease and commodity:
but know that thou art sent to go thorough thick and thin with danger of
health, wealth, life and all, and this for the least soul that there lives.

3. Consider thirdly, the terrible opposition and contradiction the world made
against our Savior in this enterprise, in his good name, honor and life: in
his own town at the very beginning they laid hands on him, and would have
thrown him over a great steep to break his neek: his own kindred once would
have tied him up for a fool or madman: in Jury how often would they have stoned
him to death; so that once he fell into this sweet expostulation with them,
Multa bona opera feci vobis, propter quod horum vnltis me lapidare? many good
works have I done to you, for which of those works vvil you stone me? In
Samaria they would not receive him, nor give him a nights lodging: the
Geraseni Gerasens begged of him to leave their country, preferring the safety
of their hogs before his company. O my soul how often have thou done the like,
preferring thy foul and hoggish pleasures before his sweetest presence? how
often did they call him glutton, tipler, friend and companion of Publicans,
whores and base people; profane, wicked and breaker of the Sabbath day: at
length Samaritan, (which is now as much as Jew) coniurer, vvitch; Daemonium
habet, and in Beelzebub Principe daemoniorum eijcit damonia: he has a devil,
and in Beelzebub the Prince of the devils he casts out devils. And
whatsoever else rancour and malice could invent and spit out against him: all
which our most humble and meek Lord bore with patience; nothing could weary
him or make him desert his enterprise.

Conclude to imitate thy dearest Master: have thou entered the lists of virtue?
expect then encounters, oppositions, blows from all sides, friends, foes, and
kindred: but resolve to stand to it, for in this spiritual combat two thingss
are most certain and rare, first that the victour shall never be defrauded of
his laurel; next he is sure to be victour, who does not willingly lyedowne
and yield.

4. Consider fourthly the special and singular care and sweetness our B.
Savior showed upon all occasions to poor and helpless sinners, not only in
receiving and cherishing them with gentleness and charity, when they came
themselves unto him; but also in seeking all occasions to meet and treat with
them, to allure, cure, and convert them: for this end he went often amongst them
to their meetings and feastings, without being invited and called; in so much
that the Pharisees, a precise and puritan sect of the Jews, were scandalized
thereat, and willed his disciples to put him in mind, how it little beseemed
his person to frequent such company, eating and drinking with publicans and
sinners: vvhereat out Savior presently raze up with these words, Non est
opus valentibus medicus, sed male habentibus; those that are whole need not
the Physicion hut they that are ill at ease, and, Non veni vocare iustos sed
peccatores: I came not to call the just but sinners. And vvithall extended his
discourse more at large with the parables of the shepherd seeking his lost
sheep, and bringing it home on his shoulders; the woman also having found her
lost Dragma, or grote and calling together her goships to rejoice with her: and
lastly of the Father receiving with open arms his prodigal Son, who
having spent all, returned home a beggar, was welcomed and feasted: lastly,
with these words he concluded his sermon: Dico vobis quod ita gaudium erit
in caelo super vno peccatore paenitentiam agente etc. I say to you that so
there shall be joy in heaven upon one sinner that does penance, etc.

Conclude with most humble and hearty thanks to thy Savior for his goodness
toward poor sinners, and toward thy self in particular, for having so often
invited thee, inspired thee, called thee to amendment, and how often have thou
rejected all his visits? and contristated both him and the Angels of heaven? o
return yet at length with humility and a sincere resolution, and he will not
reject, but embrace thee.

5. Consider fifthly, how to show the love and care he had of sinners; he took
Matthew a Publican and usurer into the College of his Apostles, and made him
moreover an Evangelist: let no sinner then despair how great soever, to mount
unto perfection through his grace. Zacheus a Prince of Publicans had but a
desire to see him, and presently our most sweet Lord invited himself to his
house and made him a Son of Abraham, Magdalene a famous and public sinner
came creeping unto him; he received her, suffered her to touch, vvash and kiss
his feet, to the great offense and scandal of the proud Pharisee; from whose
slanders he defended her, pardoned in public her sins, and sent her away so
great a Saint, as all know. But the conversion of the Samaritan woman is most
svveet and delightful; a woman of base and lovv condition, and of a worse
life, having been married to five husbands, and now living with one, that
was none of her own: our B. Savior like a cunning fowler of souls, lay
watching for her at a vvelhead in the heat of the day; began to parley with
her, and by little and little drew her on so far that she threw down her
pitcher, and ran into the City, a preacher and Evangelist to her people.
Finally he defended the poor woman taken in adultery, absolved her, and sent
her home free from sin and death: he pardoned the thief at the last gasp on
the Cross: in fine his general proclamation for all is; Venite adme omnes qui
laboratis and onerati estis, and ego reficiam vos. Come to me all that labor,
and are burdened, and I will refresh you.

Conclude to run unto this fountain of sweetness, whensoever thou find
thy self defiled with sin; but run with humility and confiden ce: be
also ever diligent and vvatchfull to help poor sinners to their conversion:
nothing is more grateful to Christ; Docebo iniquos vias tuas; and impij ad te
conuertentur. I will teach the unjust thy vvayes, and the impious shall be
converted to thee.

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. Of the miracles and doctrine of our Savior.
1. COnsider first, how as the fruit of the tree in Paradise gave life, and the
leaves health to the nations; so, though our B. Saviors principal end, and
intent was to give life and salvation to souls, yet the abundance of his
goodness spread out his leaves also to the health of the body, with such
prodigious miracles, that surpass all understanding and language: Let us
consider these two points; the first is the number of them, which S. John
affirms to be so great, that if all were written, he thinks the whole
world could not hold the volumes: see the Scripture, and at every step we
shall meet with the lame, the blind, the deaf, the leprous, the dumb, the
dead, the possessed, all perfectly cured, raised, freed; Quia virtus de illo
exibat and sanabat omnes. Because virtue went forth from him, and healed all.
The next is the benignity, facility and promptness with which he did all
this; little need of entreating, let him but know the grief, and the cure was
at hand: his mother said no more, but, Vinum non habent, they have not wine,
and presently the vessels of water were turned into wine: the leprous man
had no sooner said, Domine si vis, potes me mundare, Lord, if thou vvilt thou
can make me clean. But suddenly: Uolo, mundare: I will, be thou made
clean: the Centurion, could hardly say; Domine puer meus iacet in domo
paralyticus. Lord my boy lies at home sick of the palsy. When he was cut
off, Ego veniam, and curabo eum. I will come, and cure him. S. Martha and
Magdalen sent to him; Domine quem amas, infirmatur, Lord he whom thou loves,
is sick: With which he presently came unto them. Blessed of all creatures be
such bowels of mercy and sweetness.

Conclude to praise and thank him ever for this his heavenly benignity and
readiness to do us good, and to cure our infirmities: resolve also to imitate
thy heavenly Master, to do freely and nobly for the good of thy neighbor,
either spiritual or temporal, what thou art able, without any proper
interest and respects, and without so much entreating and vvoing.

2. Consider secondly, how far different is the charity of our dearest
Savior, from that of men to one an other; we fly, excuse and shrink our
shoulders at every thing, that is asked us, though never so easy for us to
do; though never so necessary for those that ask; but our B. Savior, as he
never differred the petition of any, Nec expectare fecit oculum pauperis; nor
has made the eye of the poor to expect; so he many times out of his
ouerflowing love, prevented the very asking: as when seeing the paralyticke
lying at the pond-side called, Probatica, without help or hope of cure, he
asked him if he would be cured; and presently said unto him, Toll grabatum
and ambula: take up thy bed, and walk; Again, moved with the tears of the
sad vvidow of Naim, for the death of her only Son; he bid the hearse stand,
called up the dead youth to life and delivered him to his nowastonished and
joyful mother; to the great vvonder and applause of all the people. So he
took an other paralyticke, prostrate before him, by the hand and sent him away
sound and lusty. So in the wilderness he twice fed thousands of poor people,
that followed him, with that miraculous multiplying of five loaves and two
fishes: with many more, which are not known or specified, to his own
infinite glory, and comfort of poor creatures.

Conclude with great confidence in this thy so good and liberal a Savior;
for know, that his charity and love to man is still the same, ever most ready
at thy call in all necessities, both temporal and spiritual: hear him
complain; Sum, inquit, dives; a me tamen nemo quicquam postulat: sum
misericors, nemo tamen fidem in me collocat: petite and accipietis. I am,
quoth, he rich, and yet no man demands any thing from me; I am merciful, and
yet no man places his trust in me; ask and you shall receive.

3. Consider thirdly the doctrine of our divine Master, In quo reconditi sunt
omnes thesauri scientiae and sapientiae Dei. in whom are all the treasures of
knowledge and wisdom hid: and first the excellency thereof; for on the one
side it is most plain and clear to the lowest understanding; so that now
every poor woman knows more of God and his perfections, then ever did Plato
or Trismegistus: on the other, it is so profound and full of hidden mysteries,
that the highest understanding of men and Angels reaches not half way: it is
compared to the sun, by which all things are seen, and it self never fully
in the face; to the river of Nilus, whose waters ouerflow the banks of the
Church; but the vvell-head never fount out, never known: to the vast Ocean,
thorough whose waves we sail, but see neither depth nor end. Next ponder the
perfection of this doctrine, which is not to fill the brains with vain
chimeras, the heart with pride and the tongue with tatling, as humane
sciences commonly do; but it storeth the understanding with solid mysteries,
and fills the soul with all virtues; Domine, verba vitae aeternae habes,
Lord thou have the words of eternal life, quoth S. Peter; the Precepts teach
the high way to heaven; the counsels raise to a more Angelical pitch; both,
though they seem rigorous in their commands, yet are most sweet in the
observance: for so says our Savior; Iugum meum suaue est and onus meum leave.
My yoke is sweet, and my burden light.

Conclude with most humble thanks to the Eternal Father for sending us such a
Master, to teach us the way of life: resolve to learn and practice his
doctrine; take it for ^^^erne of all thy actions, as S. Francis did; at lea^ as
far as thou art table; Et inuenies requiem anima tuae; thou shall find rest
to thy soul. Attend ever to the holy Scripture with humility and reverence,
and thou vvilt find new comforts in thy soul.

These follovving must begin to be read on Sexagesima Sunday at night.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER, Of the Passion and Death of our B. Savior.
NOw we are come to the last Seen of our Saviors life and sufferings; which
as it is ever more full and patheticall, then all the former; so shall we
find in this his period, both the malice and hatred of his enemies more
violent, then ever; and his patience, love, magnanimity never more perspicuous:
and lastly for a Christian soul, no where greater examples to all virtues;
apply therefore, o Christian, the mouth of thy soul to these flowing conduits
of life and grace: suck the blood of the Lamb of God, sacrificed for thy
redemption.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. How our Savior is sold by Judas; and takes leave of
his Mother.
1. COnsider first, what an injury it was to our B. Savior to be sold to
his enemies by his own disciple; and that for thirty pence: Si inimicus meut
male dixisset mihi, sustinuissem vtique; if mine enemy had spoken evil to me,
I would verily have borne it; but thou, my beloved Apostle, Dux meus and
notus meus; my guide and my familar; who lived and slept together, and eat
our bread at the same table; this seems to surpass all measure: were it not,
that the vileness of the price yet goes further: o Judas, could thou set the
Son of God at no higher a price then that of a common slave? why, he bought
thee and us allvvith the price of his blood. But how came Judas to fall into so
desperate a treason? see whether a passion, not at first resisted, carries a
man: his covetousness made him first steal for himself out of the common
purse, which he kept; at last increasing made him sell his Master, to get
thirty pence; and afterward to hang and damn himself. Now what face, what
color could he put upon so horrid a fact, as to sell this Paschall Lamb to
those bloody wolves; that is; his own Master to his public enemies? what
reasons could he allege? forsooth, that he was weary of his company, because
he broake the law; kept not the Sabbath; kept company with public sinners,
glutrons, drunkards, whores, Publicans etc. was a coniurer, blasphemer, and
made himself for all this, the Son of God: o Judas! how against truth, and
thy own conscience do thou blaspheme? but all is there good and holy, the
bargain is made, and the money paid: and Judas returns home to his Masters
company; follows him, and speaks him fair, as though nothing were done; as
though his Master knew nothing of it.

Conclude to take heed of thy passions at the beginning; slight them not,
neglect them not trust not to any dignity, thou art placed in, none higher then
an Apostle-ship, from which Judas fell; examine thy self well, it thou have
never sold thy Savior for less, then he did; for a thought, or for a rotten
pleasure.

2. Consider secondly how the time being come, that our B. Savior was to
enter into the last and most terrible combat of his passion; and to take his
last leave and farewell of his most dear Mother; he takes her a side, and
beginning a most solemn and sad discourse; first as a most grateful and
humble Son thanketh her for all the love and care, she has showed him in his
education and breeding; and for the bread he hoth eaten at her table: then
declares unto her, how the time appointed him by his Eternal Father to
accomplish the redemption of mankind, was come; how he was now to go to
Jerusalem; there to be taken prisoner by the treachery of his own disciple
Judas; to be falsely accused, condemned, hanged on a Cross betwixt two
thieves etc. all which he was most vvilling to undergo, because it was his
Eathers will, and for the good of men; and desired her to do also the same,
and to conform her will to Gods, as he did. And with this he embraced her
most tenderly; asked and gave a mutual blessing; took his leave and left her;
but in what case, expect not to have it written or expressed; for he his more
dull then lead, who cannot apprehend somewhat and more stony then flint, who
cannot drop one tear: but to vvade into the depth it self, as it was, not
the tallest Cedar of Libanus; nor Angel of heaven can do it.

Conclude therefore; every one for himself, with that sorrow, tears and
compassion, that such a story deserves; and both Christ and his B. Mother shall
inspire.

3. Consider thirdly here for all that shall follow in our Saviors passion;
that as on the one side the sorrow, grief and anguish which the B. Virgin
suffered at every passage and station of her Son's Tragedy, was the greatest
that ever has or shall oppress a humane heart, and exceeded only by that of
her Son; able a hundred times, not only to dismay and put her by her self,
but also quite to bereave her of her life: so on the other side, her modesty,
courage, and comportment was such that being every where present, and often an
eye-vvitnes of what passed; yet she never showed the least weakness, fear, or
imperfection in the world. Her grief proceeded from her love, which being by
all titles the greatest, that ever was, increased her sorrow in like
proportion: her constancy and fortitude was supernatural, grounded in that her
total resignation and conformity to the will of God: this was so great and
entire, that duubtles had God so commanded her, she would without the least
flinching or pusillanimity, like an other Abraham, have sacrificed him with
her own hands; that is, scourged, crowned and crucified him; although every
thorn and nail would have pierced her tender heart, more then her Sons
flesh. O how often did she use the prayer of her Son in the garden, and cry out
to the Eternal Father? Pater mi, si possibile est, transeat a filio tuo and
meo calix iste, verumtamen non mea, sed tua voluntas fiat. My Father, if it be
possible, let this chalice pass from mine and thy son, but yet not my will
but thine be done.

Conclude to accompany the Virgin Lady in this her sad pilgrimage to mount
Caluary, with true sorrow; compassion and tears; but with as full a
resignation also of thy self to God, In tompore and aeternitate: in time and
eternity: take heed thou increase not her Sons torments, and her griefs by
sin; for this it is, that pierces more to the quick both their hearts, then
all the nails and thorns of his enemies.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of his last supper and washing of feet.
1. COnsider first, how our B. Savior accompanied with his Apostles, went to
Jerusalem; and entered into a house prepared for him, Canaculum grande stratum:
A spacious and well furnished dining-roome, fit and capable of the great
mysteries, which were to be wrought in it: for here he eat his last
Paschall supper: here he instituted the most B, Sacrament: here after his
resurrection he appeared to his Disciples: here came down the holy Ghost upon
them all: here was said the first mass, and raised the first Christian Altar.
Entering here, his first words were: Desiderio desideraui hoc Pascha manducare
vobiscum antequam patiar: with desire I have desired to eat this Pasche with
you before I suffer: to show the long and earnest desire he had to suffer for
our redemption: blessed be that breast, where such love did harbor: when he
saw the Paschall Lamb lie roasted on the table before him; o how did he see
himself in this figure, lying on the table of the Cross before his Eternal
Father, the true Lamb, Qui tollit peccata mundi, who takes away the sins
of the world, flead with the knife of the divine justice, and roasted in the
flames of his own charity? But harken unto his most just and amorous
complaint; Amen dico vobis, vnus vestrum me traditurus est: Amen I say to you
one of you is about to betray me; o Judas how do thou look? how do thou
not sink under the table, at such a thunderbolt? o how true is it, Peccator
cum in profundum venerit, contemnit? a sinner when he shall come into the depth
of sin, contemns? he stirs not, but with the rest of the most innocent
and fearful Apostles durst ask; Nunquid ego sum Rabbi? o Judah tu dixisti; is
it I Rabbi? o Judas thou have said. Yea thou art he; but repent, and be sorry;
and I will yet forgive thee.

Conclude to prepare in thy soul a Coenaculum grande a great refecterie for
thy Savior; that is, a free and noble heart; but let it be stratum; clean
from filth and adorned with graces, take heed no Judas enter, he will spoil
the quiet and sweetness of thy heavenly banquet.

2. Consider secondly, how the Paschall supper being ended, and with it all
the figures and ceremonies of the old law; and our Savior intending to ordain
and institute the Sacraments and rites of his new law; to show the dignity of
them before those others; and the different reverence, they required; see the
solemnity wherewith he begins: Sciens quia omnia dedit ei Pater in manus and
quia a Deo exiuit and ad Deum vadit, surgit a caena, and ponit vestimenta sua,
and cum accepisset linteum praecinxit se, deinde mittit aquam in peluim and
capit lauare pedes discipulorum etc. Knovving that the Father gave him all
things into his hands, and that he came from God, and goes to God, he rises
from upper, and lays a side his garments, and having taken a tovvell, girded
himself, after that he put water into a basin, and began to vvash the feet
of the disciples etc. Where he has recommended unto us three virtues, most
necessary for the use of these his divine Sacraments; that is, purity or
conscience, humility and charity; the first he signified in the washing his
disciples feet, saying; Qui lotus est, to wit from great sins, non indiget,
nisi vt vt pedes lauet, sed mundus est totus, He that is vvashed, needs not
but to vvash his feet but is clean wholy. From all what so ever: the other
two he practiced himself in the highest degree. Behold, my soul, the Son of
God, the Monarch and Master of the world, lying at the feet of poor
fishermen, washing and vviping them with those hands, that had done so many
miracles; that made both heaven and earth; and with the powers of heaven stand
astonished at such a spectacle; again his burning love and charity would not
admit a servant, a boy to help him in this act, all must be done by his own
hands, that belonged to our good and example: Discite a me quia mitis sum and
humilis cord. Learn of me, because I am meek, and humble of heart.

Conclude never to come to the holy Sacrament without some special exercise
of these three virtues, of purity of conscience, of profound humility and
sincere love, both of God and thy neighbor; then may thou come confidently
ad mensam Domini tui. To the table of thy Lord.

3. Consider thirdly, how the holy and zealous S. Peter seeing his Lord and
Master cast himself at his feet to vvash and wipe them, all amazed and
affrighted, drew back his legs and cried out; Domine, Tu mihi lauas pedes?
Lord, do thou vvash my seete? thou my Lord and Master? thou, whom lately by
the revelation of thy heavenly Father, I have publicly confessed to be the
Son of the ever living God? Thou to me a poor worm, and vile sinner far
too unworthy to do the like office to thee? Be content and yield, quoth our
Savior; Quod facio, nescis modo, scies autem postea: that which I do thou
know not now, hereafter thou shall know. No, no dear Lord, what soever
it be, J care not; Non lauabis mihi pedes in aeternum. Thou shall not vvash my
feet for ever. Our Savior seeing Peter so hot, and out of humility to forget
his obedience; with a gentle yet piercing frown said; Si non lauero te, non
habebis partem mecum: If I vash thee not, thou shall not have part. with me.
Where at poor Peter, as one thunder-strooke, shrinkes up his shouldyrs, and
boweth down his head with, Domine non tantum pedes meos, sed and manus and
caput; Lord, not only my feet but allsoe my hands and head; all what thou will
good Lord, rather then lose or displease thee. A most devout passage and
containing two necessary lessons; the one that our duty and obedience toward
our Prelates and Superiors must not be broken or omitted for any pretense or
color of private or public good, no not virtue it self; for we see S.
Peter's humility could not excuse him: the second, that upon the least notice,
that what we do offends God, presently we surrender our selves and fly
back without any more excuses or disputes.

Conclude to learn and practice these two wholesome lessons, as thou hopest
to have a share with Christ: see and mark the daily occasions thou have to
use either one or both of them.

4. Consider fourthly, how our most humble Savior with the basin in his
hand, and tovvell about his middle, passing on from S. Peter to the rest, found
in every one the like effects of admiration, humility and obedience; until he
came to the traitor Judas; where besides some dissembling perhaps, and false
hearted complements, he found nothing, but a sink of sin and treason; a rock
of obstinacy and malice: noe waters so chrystall-cleare, as can cleanse him;
no bathes so vvarme, as can mollify him, See the Lamb of God, with more
humility, doubtless, than ordinary, prostrate at this traitors seet, washing,
vviping and kissing them, to the astonishment of heaven and earth; and with
bedeawed eyes speaking thus unto his benumbed soul: o Judas, friend, disciple,
and Apostle of mine; why vvilt thou persist in thy malice and treason? Quid
feci tibi, aut in quo molestus fui? what have I done to thee, or in what have
I been trovvblesome? or rather, Quid non feci pro te? what have I not done for
thee? I have made thee my Apostle; given thee power to do miracles; cast out
devils etc. Et si hac parua sunt, adijciam tibi multo plura: and if these are
little I will add far more, only repent and save thy soul: fear not, I shall
suffer for thee and all the world; but why by thy treason, and damnation?
thou heardest what I said even now,; Va homini illi per quem filius hominis
tradetur. vvoe be to that man, by whom the Son of man shall be betrayed. But
all in vain; the Traitor feels nothing: Daemonium surdum, caecum and mutum.
A deaf, blind and dumme devil.

Conclude to imitate thy sweetest Savior; in vvinning thy enemies by sweet and
amiable means: hear what he says: Exemplum ded^ vobis, vt quemadmodum ego
feci and vos facitatis: I have given you an example, that as I have done, so
you do all so: next take heed of an obdurate heart: all the deaw of heaven is
hardly able to mollify it: pray to thy Savior daily: Animo irreuerenti and
infrunito ne dederis me. Give me not over to a shameless and foolish mind.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of his instituting the B. Sacrament and prayer in the
garden.
1. COnsider first, how true are those words of S. John, speaking of our
Savior preparing himself for the instituting of the most B. Sacrament of his
body and blood; Cum dilexisset suos, qui erant in mundo, in sinem dilexit eos;
whereas he had loved his that were in the world, unto the end he loved them:
that is, showed greater signs and gave greater pledges of his love at the end,
then ever before: let us for the present ponder only these two points: the
first, what he gave and left with us; which we shall also find to be two
things, so great and superexcellent; that heaven and earth are capable of no
more: the one is his true and real body under the shape of bread, his true and
real blood under the shape of wine; where unto is annexed his Divinity, and
in a word the whole B. Trinity, or what soever is contained in him as God and
man: the other is a full absolute power to all Priests good or bad, wise or
simple, when, where: and as often, as they please, to consecrate the same body
and blood, and give it to whom they please, good or bad. O you holy Angels,
envy us not. The second is, when and why he left us this holy Sacrament;
when did he it? but when the high Priests and Jews were plotting his death;
when Judas was betraying him; when his Apostles with all the world were ready
to run away and forsake him: finally, then was he preparing a banquet for
us, when we were preparing vvhippes, thorns and naises for him: and why, o
most loving Jesus? Haec, quoth he, quotiescumque feceritis, in mei memoriam
facietis; these things as often as you do them you shall do them for the
commemoration of me. The greatest sign of an ardent lover is, when he
desires to be beloved again: nothing but this does our Savior require of us
for all that he has done and suffered for us: Fili, praebe mihi cor tuum.
Son, give me thy heart.

Conclude to thank thy Savior daily for this inestimable Sacrament: and for
the power, he has given to Priests to consecrate it: repay him in the coin,
he requires: that is, love for love, heart for heart.

2. Consider secondly, how our sweetest Savior having communicated all his
Apostles, and Judas gone about his villainy: he makes unto them a very large
and most heavenly sermon, set down by S. John in four longs chapters: and
most sweet to any devout soul, that shall read it: every sentence is a flame,
and every word a spark of that loue-burning furnace of his divine breast:
taking his last leave of his dear and best beloved Disciples; and comforting
their vveake and heavy hearts: Filioli, modicum vobiscum sum; Little children, a
little while I am with you; farewell, for I am going to my Father: but be not
grieved, it is for your good, to prepare you a place in heaven; to send you the
holy Ghost; nay I will not leave you orphans, but I will come again and take
you to my self: in the mean time, ask my Father what you will in my name,
and he will give it you; for my Father loves you tenderly, and so do I also;
and the holy Ghost and we will all come, and live with you to the end of
the world; and if you be persecuted and grieved, know that your grief shall
be turned into joy; and you shall do miracles and wonders greater than ever I
have done. I have much more to say, Sed non potestis portare modo: pacem meam
relinquo vobis, pacem do vobis: But you can not bear now: my peace I leave to
you, peace I give to you. Farewell dearest children; and take this command as
my last will and testament: Mandatum nouum do vohis, vt diligatis inuicem;
sicut dilexi vos, vt and vos diligatis inuicem: in hoc cognoscent omnes quia
discipuli mei estis, si dilectionem habueritis ad inuicem: surgite, eamus hinc.
A new commandment I give to you, that you love one an other: as I have loved
you, that you also love one an other; in this all men shall know that you are
my disciples, if you have love one to an other: arise let us go hence.

Conclude with all the tenderness, love and tears that thy heart and eyes can
afford thee: love him, that is, keep his commandments, and above all his last,
that is, love thy neighbor, keep mutual charity, whatsoever it shall cost
thee; deceive not thy self with pretenses, but look truly in thy heart, and
if thou find not there this love, thou art not Christ's disciple.

3. Consider thirdly, how our B. Savior having at length ended his sermon; he
lifted up his eyes to heaven, and made a long and most devout prayer to his
Eternal Father, both for his disciples then present, and also for all that
should believe in him to the end of the world Vt omnes vnum sint, sicut tu
Pater in me and ego in te. That all may be one, as thou Father in me, and I in
thee. This done, he led them out into the garden of Gethsemani, a known place
to the Traitor, because he often used to repair thither with his Disciples.
Behold my soul the Lamb of God, walking now amidst his disciples and friends,
shortly to return the same way bound and dragged by his vvoluish enemies:
behold him enter the garden, the field and place of battle: our first Adam
with the abuse of his liberty lost us all in a garden: our second Adam, to
restore us all with the loss of his own liberty, enters also a garden: but
as far different from the former, as the fruit they both yielded: that with
it is sweets brought us to death this with it is bitterness restored us to life.
Here leaving the eight behind, with Sedete hic and orate: sit you here, and
pray. he goes a little further with those three, that had seen his glory on
mount Tabor, to be also now vvitnesses of his bleeding anguish in the garden of
Gethsemani: to these commending more earnestly, Sustinete and vigilate mecum,
stay and vvatch with me; he betaketh himself to prayer, the only shield in
the day of battle, the surest helm in a stormy and boistrous sea.

Conclude to accompany thy Savior in this sad passage with compassion, tears
and sorrow; but above all with prayer; take heed of what happened to the
Apostles and to that valiant Peter, who because they slept, when they should
have prayed, ran away, when they should have fought and dyed with him, as
they had promised. O take heed; purposes are to little purpose, unless backed
and strengthened with prayer.

4. Consider fourtly, how our B. Savior discloseth unto these three disciples,
the torrent of grief, fear and anguish, which oppressed his tender heart;
Caepit contristari, pauere, taedere and maestus esse; He began to fear, to be
sorry heavy and sad. Which hitherto he had repressed, that he might comfort
and encourage them: but now, o my trusty and beloved disciples; Tristis est
onima mea vsque ad mortem; my soul is sorrovvsull even till death; that is,
with a grief, that now presently would strike me dead, did I not preserve my
self for the future torments, that is, with a grief, that shall endure till
my death, without the least spark of comfort or relief. Dearest Lord, what
sudden storm in this? is not thy soul glorious! and cannot she then dispell
these clouds, and quiet these thy inward troubles? yes, she is both glorious,
and can do it; but now she does quite abandon the inferior part to all her
natural passions and fears, to suffer the more truly and feelingly for us:
and so consider him hence forward in all his passion, as a pure man, weak,
tender and delicate of complexion: and so, as desirous of company, a thing
natural to grief and fear; he said unto them Sustinete hic and vigilate
mecum: stay here and vvatch with me: what did the poor Apostles think, to
hear this new language from their Master? how did they look to see him
tremble and all in a cold sweat? certainly their vveake hearts were all in a
confusion, and their grief burst out into a flood of tears.

Conclude to keep them company with a true and loving compassion of thy
dearest Saviors affliction: thank him most humbly for discovering this his
tribulation, which being inward, would otherwise not have been known, and so
have lost the due thanks, which all Christians owe him for it, as being
suffered for them.

5. Consider fifthly the fortitude and courage, with which our B. Savior
took from the company of his disciples, a natural comfort to grief; Auulsus
est ab eis; he was pulled away from them; and falling prostrate on the ground
before his Eternal Father, cried out; Pater mi, si possibile est, transeat a
me Calix iste; my Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass from me.
this was the cry of the inferior part, trembling at the future torments; but
presently checked by the Superior, least it might prove inordinate, with,
Uerumtamen non mea sed tua voluntas fiat: but yet not my will, but thine be
done: this he repeated three times, for three whole hours at least, with the
humility, instance and fervor, as we may imagine: yet he made
notvvithstanding two interruptions, to visit his three disciples, and see how
they behaved themselves, but found them both times alseep. O my soul, how
careful and sollicitous is thy Savior for thy salvation, but how drowsy and
careless art thou? Behold him in the saddest plight, that ever happened; going
and coming betwixt his Father and discipless there petitioning for his own
grief, and here soliciting their good and salvation; but can get not hearing
on either side: left and forsaken of all, in a solitary place, in a darksome
night, in the deepest anguish of an afflicted soul. Till at length; an Angel
from heaven appeared to comfort him. O my God! is it come to that pass, that
an Angel must come to raise up that head, and cheer up that face, In quam
omnes Angeli desiderant prospicere? On which all the Angels desire to look?

Conclude with the affections, thy devotion shall give thee: strive to imitate
thy Savior in two things, in his humility perseverance and resignation in his
praying: and also in care and vvatchfulnes, first for thy own salvation, and
next for theirs, who are under thy charge,

6. Consider sixthly, what kind of comfort this was, that the Angel brought
him; it is not expressed, but by the effect it had in him, we may be certain,
it was no other, than that his Fathers pleasure and last command was, he
should die on the Cross for the redemption of man: for, Faitus in agonia,
quoth S. Luke, prolixius orabat, and factus est sudor eius sic^t guttae
sanguinis, decurrentis in terram. Being in an agony, he prayed the longer, and
his sweat be^ame as drops of blood trikling down upon the earth. Who has
ever heard of a sweat like this, of drops so thick, so great, and those not of
water; but of purest purple blood, trickling down a pace, not on his face or
garments, as usually, but round about from all his body, to the very ground
vvhereon he lay, Decurrentes in terram. Trikling down upon the earth. If his
body suffered thus, what pangs then, what agonies did that his noble and
tender soul, endure from whose sole anguish those showers of blood streamed
through his body? in our griefs and fears the blood recoiles from the outward
parts to the heart; but here the heart of our dearest Jesus is so pinched and
pressed, that it spouts forth it is best and vital blood upon the ground:
pressed, I say, on the one side with the natural fear of so crueell and
ignominious a death; and on the other, with a vehement desire to obey his
Fathers will, and redeem man; and so great was the violence, so strong the
impression of the Superior part upon the inferior to make her stoop and
pronounce these four words, Non mea sed tua voluntas fiat; not my will but
thine be done; that it cost her a mortal agony and a shower of blood.

Conclude at least with a drop or two of tears, if thou can repay thy
Savior in no better coin: o thank him for that sinall consent for that, Fiat
voluntas tua, thy will be done, on which depended our eternal happiness; by
which he bought us of his Father, and sealed the contract wirh his blood; by
which finally we are pardoned and received into favor. Blessed be our
bleeding Jesus for ever.

7. Consider seventhly the real causes, that so oppressed the heart of our
stoutest David, and laid flat on the ground the strength of our Samson: the
first was the lively representation of his imminent death with all the
torments, ignominies and scoffs he was to suffer; so that we may truly say,
that he suffered all his bitter passion twice over; once by the hands of his
enemies, and once by his own; that is, by his clear imagination of all at
once, what in the execution came but successively. The second was, a distinct
knowledge and sight of all the sins of the world, from the beginning to the
end, how little or great so ever; and that all this black scroll was now laid
to his charge by his Father, to be crossed and cancelled with the last drop of
his blood. Most innocent Lamb! hell doubtless with all its furies, could not
affright thy soul like one of those monsters. The third was, to see the
little use and fruit, the very Christians would make of all his labors and
sufferings; but most blind, ungrateful, and obdurate, would rather turn this
honey into their poison; Et conculcare sanguinem Agni; and tread under foot the
blood of the lamb. Then endeavor thereby to work their own salvation.
These with many others, like a fierce squadron of enemies assailed at once his
noble and tender heart, and made it dissolve into sighs, groans, an not
tears, but streams of blood.

Conclude o Christian soul with a true feeling and hatred against sin, the
sole cause of all thy Sauiour's miseries, and thy own: again, hate
ingratitude, Quae exsiccat ossa; which dries up the bones; make good use of
his passion, for thou can not please him better. Lastly provide in time for a
good death; for if in Christ, Et in viridi ligno haec fiunt, and in the green
vvood those things be done, to wit, these fears, these agonies: In arido
quid fiet? in the dri^ what shall be done? what will a poor sinner do at
that hour? how will he look? whether will he run?

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. Of our Saviors being taken prisoner.
1. COnsider first how our B. Savior, having after so long and bloudya combat
vanquished all fear and pusillanimity, rises from the ground with his face
and eyes swollen and inflamed, his vhole body and garments in gory blood, Et
rubicundi sicut calcantium in torculari: and red like those that tread wine
in the press. But vviping and clearing up his countenance as well as he could
he went to his discipls, whom again he found asleep, little thinking in
what case their dear Master had been: but he was now so far from chiding
them, that as a most tender Father he said: Dormite iam and requiescite. Sleep
now and rest. But thou sweetest Jesus, Quando dormies? quando requiesces? when
vvilt thou sleep? when vvilt thou rest? vvearied, toiled and congealed in thy
own blood, when or where vvilt thou repose? no more sleep, no more rest for
thee, but In ara Crucis, the last sleep of death on the hard bed of the Cross.
But behold Judas thy Apostle, thy disciple is come as Captain to a band of
soldiers with clubs, bills and swords; and offers thee a most false kiss,
with Aue Rabbi: hail Rabbi: strike this Goliath dead, o David, confound these
Philistine troops, o our Samson: nothing less: our Savior with a settled and
undaunted courage goes forth to meet him, receives the kiss, with, Amice ad
quid venisti? Judah osculo filium hominis tradis? friend where to art thou
come? Judas, with a kiss do thou betray the Son of man? J know and have
told thee what thou come for: thou have betrayed me; be yet ashamed, and
repent, and J will forgive thee, and as a friend receive thee into my favor
and grace.

Conclude with admiration and hatred of such obdurateness, with fear of so
desperate an estate; with love also and considence in the goodness of thy
Savior how much soever thou have offended him; for he denies his friendship
to none, who offered it to Judas. How often have thou betrayed thy Savior with
a kiss in coming unworthily to the blessed Sacrament; for he that does so,
inuiteth Christ in amongst his enemies.

2. Consider secondly, how our B. Savior, to show that no force was able to
take him; had he not freely and of his own will delivered himself; he
wrought by his omnipotent hand no less then five miracles in this passage.
The first, that although they had. seen Judas kiss him, which was the sign
agreed on, yet he blinded them so, as they for all that knew him not; for
asking them, Quem quaeritis? whom seek ye? Their answer was, Iesum
Naezarenum; Jesus of Nazareth; not knovving, that it was he who asked them;
and this happened not once but twice: the second, that at these two words,
Ego sum, I am he, like men thunderstruck, they all reeled backwards, and fell
flat on the ground; and there had remained, had he not raised them again with
a second, Quem quaeritis? whom seek ye? o who shall be able to stand the
thunder of his voice at the day of judgment, that Ite maledicti, go ye
cursed, if these two words so mildly uttered throvv down troops? The third
was: the curing with a touch of his blessed hand the ear of Malchus, which
the sword of valiant Peter had cut of. The fourth, that none yet durst lay
hands on him, but stood like dogs at a bay, until after a large discourse unto
them, and complaint that they came unto him as to a thief, he gave them leave
in these words, Haec est hora vestra and potestas tenebrarum: This is your
hour, and the power of darkness; yet not without the condition (and this
was the fifth miracle) that they should not touch any of his disciples; Si
ergo me quaeritis sinite hos abire. If therefore you seek me ^et these go
their vvayes.

Conclude with joy and thanks to thy Savior for this his glory; with humble
gratitude^ for delivering himself so freely into his enemies hands for thy
redemption: beg of him that he will never let thee fall into such
obduratnesse of heart as these blind men did; who, for all so many miracles
done before their eyes, went on with their wicked entreprise.

3. Consider thirdly, how no sooner had our B. Savior delivered himself with
those words, Haec est hora vestra and potestas tenebrarum; this is your hour,
and the power of darkness; but like so many ravenous and hunger y wolves
they rushed in upon him; and such was their fury and multitude, bore him over
to the ground, where they buffetted him, kicked him, and pulled him by the
hair of the head and heard; Conculcauerunt me inimici mei, quoniam multi
bellantes aduersum me; mine enemies have trodden upon me, because they are many
that war against me; o what clamor;, what shouts, what opprobrious out
cries did they make! Sicut exultant victores capta preda: as conquerors rejoice
after a pray is taken, and presently, seast he should slip from them, as before
he had often done, they cast great ropes about him; one, as S, Bernard
contemplates, about his neck, another about his middle, with his hands noosed
behind him. O you Philistines fear no more our Sampson, his Dalila has
betrayed his strength into your hands; a hempen twist will hold him. Thus they
dragge him away thorough thick and thin; now running, now falling, now
stumbling in the dark, without a hand to help himself, or without a friend
to lend him one: o you Apostles, where are you! what is become of your
valor, your loyalty, your promise? all gone, all vanished, and he alone In
medio inimicorum suorum, in the midst of his enemies, Is carried to the
slaughter like an innocent Lamb, for them and all the world, without opening
his mouth, or once complaining.

Conclude from hence forward to follow thy Redeemer from stage to stage, from
Judge to Judge, with prayer, love and compassion, but ever remember who he is
and the dignity of his person, Judge him not by his present condition, unless it
be to see, how low he stoopeth for thee.

THE FIFTH MEDITATION. Our B. Savior is brought before Annas and Caiphas.
1. COnsider first, how the first Judge before whom our innocent Jesus was
presented, was Annas Father in law to Caiphas, high Briest of that year;
because he was a man of dignity and his house lay in their way: behold this
proud Priest sitting in his chair, and with sweelling pride and content,
asking of the King of Majesty and Judge of the world, impertinent questions De
discipulis and doctrina eius: of his disciples and of his doctrine: our Savior
with his eyes on the ground and his hands tied behind him, answered nothing
touching his disciples; for what should he say of them? accuse them he would
not, and praise or defend them in this last action he could not: but for his
doctrine he raised up his head and voice, and said, Ego palam locutus sum mundo
etc. Quid me interrogas? interroga eos, qui audierunt etc. I have openly spoken
to the world etc. why ask you me? ask them that have heard etc. And it is
observed that our divine Master in all his passion seldom or never made answer
to any but in the behalf of truth or his doctrine. But here a vile servant
standing by, up with his sist, and gave him a blow over the face, with,
Siccine re^pondes Pontifici? ansvverest thou the high priest so? to the great
content and laughter of all present, but to our meek Lamb a great pain and
greater affront: yet he replied no more, but Si male locutus sum, testimonium
perhibe de malo; si autem been, quid me caedis? If I have spoken ill, give
testimony of evil; but if well, why strikest thou me? and this also in
defense of his former words.

Conclude to stand up ever for the Catholic faith and doctrine of thy Savior;
never hide thy head, never spare thy voice when or howsoever thou shall be
questioned about it; and what buffets soever thou shall suffer for it, answer
no otherwise than our Savior did; and how soever the world laugh at thee,
comfort thy self with this promise of thy Lord, Qui me coufessus fuerit coram
hominibus, confitebor and ego eum coram Patre meo. Every one that confesses me
before men, I also will confess him before my Father.

2. Consider secondly, how from thence he was hurried to the Palace of Caiphas
the high Priest, Vbi Scribae and Seniores conuenerant; where the scribes and
ancients were assembled. All with a longing desire to see before them this
new prisoner, and with a full resolution to make him away by right or by
vvrong: and therefore at his very entering after a scornful vvelcome fell
presently to the examining of witnesses; but because they could find none true,
they contented themselves with false ones, Multi testimonium falsum dicebant
aduersus eum; many spoke false witness against him; yet all in vain, for such
was the innocence of our Savior, that even false vvitnesses could conclude
nothing against him, Quia non erant conuenientia testimonia eorum, for their
testimonies were not convenient, but contradicted one the other, which even
made their galls burst with rage and envy; so that the high Priest rose up in
a storm, asking him why he answered nothing to all these testimonies! But to
what, proud man, to what? make first thy testimonies agree, how false soever,
and then demand an answer. Wherefore he tries another way, Et adiuro te, quoth
he, per Deum viuum, vt dicas nobis si tues Christus filius Dei. I adjure thee
by the living God that thou tell us if thou be Christ the Son of God. Our
Savior out of reverence to this Father, and in defense of such a mystery,
wouchsafed his answer, and said: Tu dixisti: thou have said: it is true; but one
day you shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds with majesty and
terror: whereat, out of zeal forsooth, they rent their garments, and cried
out, blasphemy, blasphemy! give sentence, what do you think of him? At illi,
without more ado, dixerunt, Reus est mortis. But they said he is guilty of
death.

Conclude thou to cry out to the contrary with all the Angels of heaven:
Dignus es, Domine, accipere virtutem and diuinitatem and honorem and gloriam
and benedictionem, Thou art vvorthie, o Lord, to receive power and divinity;
and honor, and glory, and benediction. Thank him for receiving this so not
only unjust but also illegal sentence of death for our sake; and take ever
great heed of opposing the known truth out of passion or any other pretense.

3. Consider thirdly, how this illegal sentence had an execution as illegal;
for all with unheard of barbarism and cruelty laid presently hands on him,
and like furies of hell more then men, showred upon him all manner of blows,
blasphemies and affronts: we may reduce them to these four heads. First,
they spit in his face, and disgorge their filthy fleame on that divine
forehead, where beauty and majesty sits: o my soul, what can thou think?
men seek a dunghill, or by-corner to spit in, but these devils find no other
sink, then that face, in which the Angels are delighted. Secondly, they
buffet, kick and strike him with merciles rage; and he, with his hands tied
behind him, not able tovvard one blow, wipe his face, or help himself: hear
what he says by Isaias: Corpus meum dedi percutientibus and genas meas
vellentibus, faciem meam non auerti ab increpantibus and conspuentibus in me. I
have given my body to the strikers, and my cheeks to the pluckers: I have not
turned away my face from the rebukers, and spitters. Thirdly, they cover and
muffle his face with some dish-clout; and then at every blow ask him in
scorn; Prophetiza nobis Christ, quis te percussit? Prophecy unto us, o
Christ, who is he that struck thee? These villains hide that face, which the
old Prophets cried out to see; Ostende faciem tuam and salui erimus. Show thy
face, and we shall be saved. Fourthly, they pulled him by the hair and beard,
with a thousand other as namelesse, as shameless affronts: what shall vv^e
more admire? the meeknes, patience and fortitude of our heavenly Sampson, or
the madness and frenzy of these Satanicall Philistines?

Conclude, as on the one side thou can not choose, but detest their malice,
and adore thy Sauiour's patience and magnanimity; so on the other, to bear
with like patience, what injuries shall befall thee; and to take heed how
thou ioynest with these villains in affronting thy Savior; believe it, every
mortal sin strikes him over the face, and spits at him more than all the
Jews did.

4. Consider fourthly, that none of all his torments, scorns and abuses
pierced his tender heart nigh so much, as did the utter loss of his disciple
Judas, and the most dangerous fall of Peter. Judas for the gain of a little
money, lost his Master, his life, his soul, nay and money too; for Proijciens
in templo abiens laqueo se suspendit. Casting it down in the temple he went
and hanged himself with an halter. How many in the world for the like dross
do daily the same, and come to the same end? sell their Savior, his faith,
his grace; and at one clap lose all, and gain hell and damnation. Peter, who
had received more favors, than all the rest; who like a Giant had vaunted
that if all forsook him, yet he never; who had been warned more than once, to
take heed; who had he known it, had doubtless run the traitor Judas
through with his sword: yet now he grows cold, stands by the fire, and at the
voice of a silly maid, once, twice and thrice, denies, swears and damnes
himself if ever he knew the man: strange, that he should not now know him, for
whom, but even now he had fought and cut of Malchus his ear neither could the
cock's crowing make him remember himself; till his sweetest Master amidst his
furious tortures' sent him a glance of his eye, and with one ray opened his
understanding, and warmed his breast anew; so that, Exiens for as, fleuit amare;
going forth he wept bitterly. Not only then, but all his life time from the
cock-crow till morning, ever watering his aged cheeks in penance.

Conclude to take heed by the example of these two Apostles, the one for ever
lost, the other hardly recovered: take heed, I say, in what estate soever thou
art, of covetousness of any worldly things, and of presumption on thy own
strength: then fear a fall most, when thou shall fancy thy self most secure
Finally learn of S. Peter to do penance for thy sins, and to thank thy
Savior for the million of times, he has raised thee, dead and drowned in
sin.

5. Consider fifthly, what a night our sweetest Savior passed amongst those
his vnsatiated enemies: for about midnight the high Priest with the Princes and
Pharisees going to take their rest, left him amongst the rout to use him at
their pleasure; who out of their own cruelty and malice, as also to please
their Masters, fell afresh upon him with all their fury and rage. O who can
tell, what our dearest Lord endured all this sad night? S. Luke passes them
over in these four words: Et alia multa blasphemantes dicebant in eum: And
blaspheming many other things they said against him. And S. Hierome affirms,
that all will not fully be known till the day of judgment. Yet sit by him a
while, my soul, and contemplate on the one side the fury, rage, and baseness
of these ministers of the devil; and on the other, thy Lord's invincible
patience, gravity and charity, even then praying Pro persequentibus se. For
them that persecute him. After a vvile step over to thy Lady, his most
afflicted mother, (who no doubt had quickly tidings of the state her Son
was in) and see, if thou can, the universal eclipse and oppression of her
soul, the floods of her eyes, the sighs and groans of her breast, the cries
she made to heaven for him; Pater si possibile est, transeat a filio tuo and
meo Calix iste; Father if it be possible, let this chalice pass from thine and
my Son; yet with the same resignation; Non mea sed tua voluntas fiat. Sic
plorans plorauit in nocte, and lacrymae eius in maxillis eius; non est qui
consoletur eam ex omnibus charis eius. Not mine, but thy will be done. So
weeping she has wept in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks; there
is none to comfort her of all her dear ones.

Conclude to accompany thy Lord and Lady some part of this sad night in
watching, prayer and compassion: offer all, that both suffered, to the
Eternal Father for all thy hidden and unknown sins, wrapped up in the night
of thy own negligence and carelessenes: beg light from these two
morning-stars to see them, amend, and satisfy for them.

THE SIXTH MEDITATION. Our Savior is brought before Pilate and Herod.
1. COnsider first, how early in the morning, the high Priest and the Princes
of the Jews meet in a full counsel, notwithstanding their late going to bed;
and what to do, but to satisfy their own malice, and extinguish the light
of the world? so it is, the wicked are far more vvatchfull and industrious
to obtain their wicked ends, than the children of God to obtain theirs. Our
Savior is again brought to the bar; the same question asked again; Si tu
es Christus, dic nobis; if thou be Christ, tell us: and the same answer
returned, that he was: with that, all rose up against him as a man convicted
by his own confession: Et surgens omnis multitudo duxerunt eum ad Pilatum. And
all the multitude rising up, led him to Pilate. But why did they carry him to
Pilate a Gentile and Roman Governor? why did they not stone him themselves
for blasphemy, as afterward they did S. Steven? for noe other reason, but
their malice, to have him die on a Cross, a death so infamous, that they
themselves could not inflict it; a death only for famous thieves, murderers
and malefactors. See by this, their rancour against this most innocent Lamb
of God: see how he is hurried away to Pilate's house at the further end of the
city, above a mile and a quarter; haled thorough the streets with showts and
cries; that now all was discovered; that he had confessed himself a
blasphemer, cheat and inchanter; and for that, the whole Council resolved to
deliver him over to the Gentiles etc.

Conclude to follow thy Savior this third stage to Pilate, and at length count
them all, and thou shall find almost ten miles, that he went from thursday
evening till friday noone. Take pity of his vvearied limbs; and vvish it lay
in thy power to ease him; but above all take heed of increasing his pain, by
sin, sloth and ingratitude.

2. Consider secondly, how the King of glory, Iudex viuorum and mortuorum, the
Judge of the living and of the dead, stands bound before a petty Governor; and
the Princes and chief of his own people stand for his accusers; but behold
the process: Pilate demands what they have to say against that man: they
thinking to bear all over with a kind of scorn; Si non esset hic malefactor,
non tibi tradidissemus eum. If he were not a malefactor, we would not have
delivered him up to thee. We have already examined and condemned him, what
needst thou ask any more? but when Pilate would have particulars, presently
new ones were invented: this man disquieteth the people; forbids tribute to be
paid to Caesar, and makes himselfes King of the Jews. O shameless men! did not
he persuade the people to obey even you, such as you are, because you sat in
the chair of Moses? did not he command all, Dare quae sunt Caesaris Caesari,
to give the things that are Caesar's, to Caesan, and paid for himself and
Peter? did not he fly, when the people would have made him their King? how
many stand there present, that can give you the lie in all these things? But
though our Savior answered not a word, even to the great admiration of the
President, yet the force of truth is so great, that he believed nothing, what
they said; only he stuck at the word, King; and asking our Savior about it,
received full satisfaction, and labored to to free him.

Conclude to imitate thy Savior, when thou art falsely accused, to hold thy
peace, or to answer briefly and quietly; and having done, that, to commit the
rest to the divine providence, and force of truth it self, which will, in
spite of all her enemies, at length put forth and appear, to God's glory and
thy justification.

3, Consider thirdly, how Pilate seeing the malice of the Jews, to free
himself of their importunity, sent our Savior away to Herod, as one belonging
to his jurisdiction of Galilee. O my soul follow thy Savior this fourth
stage; see how they hale him again thorough the streets, with shouts and
cries to Herod's palace; who was most glad of his coming, and soon gave him
audience; asking him a hundred impertinent questions, and offering him no doubt
great favors, if he would but do some miracle before him; for to that end he
had long since much desired to see him* on the other side the Jews stood
alleging, all they could invent, against him, that Herod would put him to
death; Stabant Principes Sacerdotum and Scribae constanter accusantes eum. The
chief priests and the Scribes stood constantly accusing him. But our Savior
would not answer one word, either to their accusations, as most false, or to
Herod's allurements, as most vain and idle; and he a most bloody Tyrant, and
incestuous adulterer, who had killed S. John Baptist, and kept his brothers
wife. Whereat in a rage, Spreuit illum cum exercitu suo, and illusit indutum
vest alba. He with his army set him at naught, and he mocked him putting on
him a white garment. O you Cherubins of heaven, what think you of this? the
Eternal Wisdom of God, clothed in a fools coat, scoffed, kicked and abused
for a fool thorough the whole court and streets this only title was
vvanting to all the rest, of a sinner, blasphemer, Samaritane, necromantick etc.

Conclude with thy Savior to learn to hold thy peace, when vain curiosity
is the object of discourse; and if thou be called fool or idiot for thy
pains, look back upon Jesus Christ, and it is impossible it should grieve
thee: remember his rule; Non est discipulus super Magistrum, nec seruus super
Dominum suum: si patrem familias Beelzebub vocauerunt, quanto magis domesticos
eius? The disciple is not above the master, nor the servant above his Lord: if
they have called the good man of the house Beelzebub, how much more, them of
his household?

4. Consider fourthly, how our Savior with the new title and livery of a fool
was brought back again to Pilate; and this is the fifth stage; wherein, no
doubt, followed after the B. Virgin accompanied with S. John and the other
holy women; and was present at all what passed hereafter; but in what
plight of grief and sorrow, let every pious soul conceive of it, what she
can; and accompany in spirit and devotion the mother of God in these passions
and funerals of her only Son; Filius vnicus matris suae. The only Son of
his mother. But Pilate invented now a new way to deliver him: he had in prison
one Barabbas for raising sedition and committing murder in the City a notorious
and infamous malefactor; and being to set one free at Easter, whom the people
should ask, made sure they would never ask such a fellow: wherefore; Quem
vultis vobis dimittam? Barabbam; an Iesum qui dicitur Christus? Whom will you
that I release to you, Barabbas, or Jesus that is called Christ? here the
principes Sacerdotum and Seniores, the chief Priest, and ancients, persuaded
the people to ask Barabbas: Quid igitur quoth Pilate, faciam de Jesus?
Crucifigatur. VVat shall I do then with Jesus? let him be crueified. O
dearest Lamb of God, who can conceive the feeling of thy tender heart, to see
thy self so rejected and abased by that blind and ungrateful people, after so
many benefits, miracles and cures bestowed amongst them? these they who would
have made thee King, who cried but sunday last, Hosanna in excels^s,
benedictus qui venit: Hosanna in the highest, blessed is he that comes: Now
worse than Barabbas, Opprobrium hominum and abiectio plebis. A reproach of men
and out cast of the people.

Conclude never more to repine, if any be preferred before thee in honor,
understanding or virtue: for besides that it may be true, ever remember that
Barrabbas was preferred before Christ: beg of him, that he will never let
thee fall into such blindness and ingratitude of beart, as to praise him in the
morning and offend him before night.

5. Consider fifthly, how Pilate wondered at the unheard of malice of the
chief Priests, and blindness of that people, to prefer such a public
villain, as Barabbas, who had deserved a hundred deaths, before Christ, in
whom neither he nor they could find the least color of a fault; and so,
partly out of a natural honesty, partly because his wife had warned him,
Nihil tibi and iusto illi, have thou nothing to do with that just man; but
chiefly Because God by him, in spite of all his roaring enemies, would declare
to the world the innocence of his dearest Son, behold how Pilate and the
Jews contest: they cry: Toll hunc and dimitte nobis Barabbam; quid enim mali
fecit, Dispatch him, and release us Barabbas: why, what evil has this man
done; quoth Pilate; see, I have examined him before you, and can find nothing:
no nor Herod, as you see, to whom I remitted him: Crucifige, crucifige eum,
Crucify, crucify him: quoth they: but he; Nullam causam mortis inuenio in eo:
I find noe cause of death in him: what have you more to say against him?
Corripiam ergo illum and dimittam: at illi instabant vocibus magnis postulantes
vt crucisigeretur and inualescebant voces eorum. I will correct him therefore,
and let him go: but they were instant with loud voices requiring that he
might be crucified, and there voices prevailed. O innocent Lamb, how do these
ravenous wolves thirst thy blood? was it ever heard, that the Judge should
stand up and protest the innocence of the accused; and the accusers without
shame stand barking like dogs; kill him, kill him, without alleging of any
the least crime?

Conclude with joy of heart and hearty thank to God for the honor he did his
Son, and thy Savior before the face of all his enemies, then when he seemed
most forsaken of all: conceive also a neglect of what the world shall cry
against thee; and a confidence in God, that he will defend thee, if thou ^ee
innocent, when thou shall be most oppressed.

THE SEVENTH MEDITATION. Our Savior is scourged at a pillar.
1. COnsider first, the most unjust proceeding of Pilate, who knowing the
malice of the Jews, and publicly professing the innocence of our Savior, yet
to satisfy their cruelty, caused him to be most cruelly whipped; a punishment
so ignominious, that it was inflicted on none but slaves, thieues and whores;
and a Roman citizen could, for no crime what soever, be liable to it: and yet
the Son of God, to free us from the gastie stripes of hell, would subject
himself unto it. Behold therefore, my soul, how four fierce tigers lay hands
on this Lamb of God, strip him of his clothes, tie him to a stony pillar hands
and feet, naked as he was borne, without a ragge to cover him from shame or
cold, in public vview and scorn of all the people; and then cry out to the
powers and dominations of heaven, to come down, to cover, defend or revenge
this their universal Lord, as they did afterward diverse of his Saints in the
like streights. Who can apprehend the confusion, that covered the heart and
face of our dearest Jesus, when he saw his Angelical body, made by the hands
of the holy Ghost, and borne of a Seraphicall Virgin, lie open and every way
exposed to the view and scoffing of those villains? and what did then his
Uirgin Mother feel in her heart, and show in her countenance? Vere operuit
confusio faciem vtriusque. Confusion has truly covered both their faces.

Conclude on the one side with sorrow, but on the other with infinite thanks
to thy Savior, who undergoes this shame, to satisfy for thy shamelesnesses;
and suffers this nakedness, to gain for thee the robe of grace: say to him
with S. Bernard: Quanto pro me vilior, tanto mihi charior. The viler he has
made himself for me, the dearer he shall be to me But above all fly all acts
of unchastity, Per illam en^m renouas nuditatem Redemptoris. For by it thou
renevveth the nakedness of thy redeemer.

2. Consider secondly, how having tied him fast and sure, not able to stir
hand or foot, they begin to thunder upon is blessed back and shoulders whole
peales of stripes, lashes and scourges without measure or number;
Fabricauerunt supra dorsum meum peccatores and prolongauerunt sulcum suum;
sinners have builded upon my back; and they have prolonged their furrovvs,
That is; plowed and harrowed upon my back and now, the blood comes spouting
forth on all sides, drops a pace on the ground, and Tanquam sanguis Testamenti,
as the blood of the testament, besprinkles the people standing round about: yet
the blows increase, the vvounds grow vvider, and the flesh opens to the very
bone, and entralls; till at length all comes to be but one sore, from neck to
heel, A planta pedis vsque ad verticem non est sanit as. From-the sole of the
foot unto the top of the head there is not health. See, Christian soul, see
how thy Jesus stands as immovable, as the pillar, to which he is tied; not
able to avoid or ease himself of one blow, but only to shrink up is
shoulders, and lift his eyes to heaven for comfort: When presently they turn
him on the other side, and with fresh vvhippes and hands left him not till
they had made him all over a perfect ulcer; Quasi leprosum and percussum and
humiliatum. As it were a leper, and stricken of God, and humbled. O divine and
princely blood, how frankly and prodigally art thou shed, Sicut aquae in
plateis? as waters in the streets: how art thou trampled under the feet of
those hangmen? as though thou were not more vvorth than a thousand vvorl^s:
and as though thou were not the licour, Ad saluandas gentes. To save all
nations.

Conclude to shed at least a tear or two, to mingle with this thy Creatour's
blood; so of both to make the mixture of that balsame, that must cure and sear
up all those gaping wounds of thy soul; but especially those two of pampering
thy flesh in riot and luxury, which now costs so dear.

3. Consider thirdly, that this flagellation of our Savior was unto him a
most grievous torment; so that he himself never speaks of his passion, but
makes ever mention of it, as one of the principal parts: and this for many
reasons; as first for the number of stripes which as it has been revealed,
exceeded five thousand; and those laid on by four most cruel villains, with
three sorts of whips; as rods, twisted cords or bull's nerves, and little
chains of iron. Secondly, because Pilate caused him to be scourged to appease
the furious hatred of his enemies, so that it could not but be most cruel,
according to the proportion of their rage: but most of all for the tenderness of
his most virginal and delicate body, of complexion more sensible than the body
of any little child; and now also tired out with a bloody sweat and watching,
trauells and torments of the night past: yet his ardent love of us so far
exceeded all, that to leave us a most copious redemption, he bore these most
willingly, and was most ready to receive them all over again and again, if it
had been required. O insinite goodness and charity, deserving a gratitude and
correspondence far different from that we vvretches return thee! stir up
thy self, o Christian soul, and desire at least to do or suffer somewhat for
this thy all-suffering Lord.

Conclude with a fervent desire to suffer for Christ, in what way soever it
shall please him, in body or soul, honor or fortune; and be sure the greatest
favor God can do thee in this world, is to give thee matter and grace to
suffer for him: honor therefore from thy heart his holy Martyrs and
Confessors, who in thy poor country and else where, Lauerunt stolas suas in
sanguine Agni, and dealbauerunt eas. Have vvashed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the lamb.

4. Consider fourthly, how these hangmen, tired at length, cease; and untying
our Sauiour's hands and feet from the Pillar, there leave him helpless to
help himself; but ah! how helpelesse? how unable to move or stir? bathed
all over in his gory and congealed blood, harrowed as it were with vvounds
and sores; and trembling with vvearines and cold, without a hand to vvash his
vvounds or stanch his blood, without any to reach him his clothes and cover
him from the cold; with bruised arms and vvearied knees leaning himself
against the cold and hard pillar. Run now unto him, o Christian soul, how
sinful so ever; for never shall thou find a fitter opportunity; offer him thy
back and shoulders to leave and rest his vvearied limbs on, or any other poor
service thou can afford him. See him creeping to the corner, where his
clothes were thrown, and putting them all on, as well as he can, even to the
fools coat, which Herod had bestowed on him: o dearest Jesu, what do these
course and vvoollen clothes do, but stick and clean to thy sores, and so keep
thee in a continual torment? who doubts of this, let him put any vvoollen
ragge upon the least sore he has; and he shall quickly feel how true this is?
so that the ulcers he now bears, go increasing every minute* and upon every
touch until his death.

Conclude with all the compassion thy soul is capable of; or, if thou find
thy heart so stony, look about, and find out his afflicted Mother, standing at
a distance yet within view of this bloody spectacle, and she will teach thee
to lament and grieve: thank him for this flood of blood, shed for thee; and
turn thy anger, not upon his executioners, but on thy own foul sins.

THE EIGHTH MEDITATION. How our Savior is crowned with Thorns.
1. COnsider first, the insatiable fury of these ministers of hell: one would
have thought the past scourging a sufficient punishment for innocence: but now
they will crown him for King forsooth; never was a cruelty so barbarous
heard of: they hale him into the Praetorium, the Palace, or Court of Audience,
Conuocant totam cohortem; they call together the whole band; violently strip
him again of all his clothes; set him on a bench or stool; throw about him
some purple ragge; twist a wreath of long, hard and sharp thorns; clap it on
his sacred head; put in his hand for scepter a cane or reed; bow their knees
before him with a scornful, Aue Rex Iudaeorum, Egredimini filiae Sion; Hail
King of the jews Go fortth ye daughters of Sion. all Christian souls; Et
vi^dete Regem vestrum in diademate, quo coronauit eum matter sua, and see your
King in the Diadem vvhervvith his mother, that is the Synagogue, In die
desponsationis suae, has crowned him in the day of his despousing, with his
Spouse the Church. But, what can we first admire? what first lament? the
Devils monstrous inhumanity, or our Jesus his prodigious charity and
patience? the ripping up of his former vvounds? the renewing of his nakedness?
the piercing of the pointed thorns into the middle of his brains? or the
scoffs, ieeres and shouts, with which they treated him? let every one
conceive and bewail, what he can, and yet all together shall never reach unto
the thou sandth part of what here passed.

Conclude as thou hopest one day to see him in his glory, and to adore him
there with the four and twenty Seniours, not to forsake or neglect him now:
accompany him with compassion and imitation; be not one of those, Qui regnare
cum Christo volunt, non pati: who would reign, but not suffer with Christ:
but hear S. Bernard; Non decet sub spinato capite membra esse mollia and
delicata: Soft and delicate members becomes not a head, crowned with
thorness: suffer as he does, if thou mean or hope to reign with him.

2. Consider secondly at leisure, and imprint in thy soul the image and Idea
of thy dearest Lord, seated on this throne of scorn; and see, whether
exceeds in cruelty, his torment or ignominy: being placed on some bench or
footstool amidst a whole troop of soldiers; his face full of shame and
consusion; his eyes swimming in tears for all the world; an old ragged cloak
over his shoulders, rubbing his green wounds, without covering his nakedness
from shame and colo; a crown of piercing thorns on his head; guess at this
torment, by the touch of a pin or needle on the temples or sinews of thy head,
if thou dare not pierce it deeper; a reed in his hand for scepter, with which
ever and anon they press and beat down the thorns into his head; Et
percutiebant caput cius arundine; And they smote his head with a reed.
Wherevvith the blood came trickling down afresh on his face and neck: his
enemies saluting him by turns with scoffs, buffets and spitting again in
his face; which before being more beautiful than the sun, was now all
bruised, bloody, defiled with spit and dirt: and he, his hands being tied, not
able to wipe or ease him self: when thou have viewed him well in this sort,
then turn thy eyes upward, and see how he sits in heaven Ad dexteram Patris,
adorantibus Angelis; Adored by Angels at the right hand of his Father; and
having compared these two extremes.

Conclude to adore him, love and praise him, as much here In Praetorio Pilati,
In Palats palace, as there, In Palatio Caeli; in the court of heaven; for,
Quanto pro me vilior, tanto mihi charior. The more vile he has made himself
appear for me, the dearer is he to me: Lend him also a few tears of
compassion, lest thou prove more stony and unhuman than these barbarous
soldiers, or the furious Jews.

3. Consider thirdly, how Pilate, confident now that the rage of the Jews
would be allayed; and their malice glutted at such a spectacle, led him forth
by the hand as he was, and from some eminent place showing him to the people
said, Ecce homo; behold the man, you so much feared would rise with the
Kingdom, trouble and captiuate you all: fear him no more for such, but rather
take pity of him, as of a man of your own country, flesh and blood. But they;
Crucifige, crucifige eum: Crucify, crucify him: o cry of hellish fiends and
not of men! Take him you, quoth Pilate, and crucify him; Ego enim non inuenio
in eo causam: For I find noe cause in him: Wherefore say and do, what you
will, I am resolved to set him free: vvhereat they cried out with open
throats; Si hunc dimittis, non es amicus Caesaris. If thou release this man
thou art not Caesar's friend. What now poor Pilate? what vvilt thou now do?
if thou free the most innocent Son of God, thou shall be no more Cesar's
friend who can conceive somevvhat of that grief, which pierced the heart of
our dear est Savior, to see himself so banded against by his own but most
obdurate and vvretchedly ungrateful people? how he pleaded also unto them his
Ecce homo; lo the man; promised and sent unto them by his Eternal Father, to
redeem and teach them the way to salvation: he who has done so many
miracles, cured all their diseased, and preached unto them the word of life
etc.

Conclude thou also with two Ecce homo's; lo the man's; the one to God the
Father, representing unto him this his disfigured Son, that looking fast upon
his passion and merits, he may view thee with mercy: the other to thy
afflicted Savior, that for the sad case, his love has put him in, he will
look upon thy weakness cure thy vvounds made by sin, and give thee strength
to imitate his sufferings: take heed of a Jewish obdurateness; take heed, thy
sins cry not against him a new Crucifige, Crucify him.

THE NINTH MEDITATION. How our Savior is sentenced to death, and carries his
Cross.
1. COnsider first, how Pilate overcome at length with the vvearilesse
importunity of the Jews, and with the fear of losing the savor of his
Prince, placed himself in the judgment seat; and yet even there his conscience
accusing him, made one weak reply more, saying; Ecce Rex vester; lo your
King. But they no way relenting; Toll; toll, crucifige dum: Regem vestrum
crucifigam? Non habemus Regem nisi Caesarem. Away vith him: shall I crucify
your King? we have no King but Caesar. Then Pilate calling for water, and
washing his hands before all the people, made this last protestation for
himself and the innocence of Christ: Innocens ego sum a sanguine iusti huius;
vos videritis: I am innocent of the blood of this just man; look you to it:
But they, o blind and desperate nation! took this dread curse upon themselves
and their children yet unborn: Sanguis eius, super nos and super filios.
nostros. His blood be upon us, and upon our children. Then Pilate pronounced
sentence, by which he set Barabbas free, Iesum vero tradidit voluntati eorum,
vt crucifigeretur: but delivered Jesus to the will of them to be crucified; in
this one act committing two most foul iniustices; the one in setting a thief
and murderer at liberty, the other in condemning whom he and all the world
know to be most innocent, and also a great cruelty, in delivering him to the
will and pleasure of his bitter enemies, who, you may be sure, rejoiced and
exulted not a little thereat. But o see thy Savior with what humility,
charity and silence he hears and receives this sentence, as most necessary,
as most just; not from Pilate, but above from the decree and pleasure of his
Eternal Father.

Conclude with humble thanks to thy sweetest Jesus for this sentence; which
as it freed Barabbas then from a temporal death, so it freed all mankind from
an eternal one: inuoke this his blood also upon thy soul, not to thy
condemnation, but to free it from the sentence of eternal death, so often
incurred.

2. Consider secondly, how this sentence was as cruelly put in execution, as
pronounced: for presently Barabbas was set at liberty; and a most heavy Cross
of some fifteen foot long, with greatness proportionable to bear a man, was
laid on the shoulders of our dearest Savior, with two thieves more to keep
him company. OB. Jesus, what is this familiarity and affinity, thou have
with thieves? a thief sold and betrayed thee; as to a thief they came with
clubs to take thee; a famous thief was put in balance with thee, nay and
preferred before thee: now two thieves accompany thee, and are to hang by thee;
Et cum iniquis deputatus est, And with the wicked he was reputed. Come all
devout souls, and view with attention this procession or last progress of
your Redeemer and King of glory. A crier leads the way publishing aloud the
crimes, murders, treasons and blasphemies of this never heard of malefactor;
and o how truly? for Posuit super eum Deus iniquitates nostras: For God put
upon him our iniquities: then follow the whole band of soldiers to guard his
person: next the hangmen with ropes, ladders; nails, hammers etc. after goes
or rather creeps our sacrifice. our Isaac, with a thief on each hand, all
bruised, bloody, and torn, with a massy beam on his back, and a crown of
thorns on his head, dragging it forward step by step: his heavenly Abraham
above him with the svvord of justice and fire of charity ready to sacrifice
him: lastly, round about him all the Psiests, Elders, Scribes and people
cursing, reuiling and scoffing at him; besides the multitude of all nations
then at Jerusalem, as it is thought, above a hundred thousand.

Conclude to follovv also thy Savior this his last stage or Catastrophe: But
seek out the B. Virgin, S. John, and the other holy women, to keep them
company, with like affections to theirs.

3. Consider thirdly, how our B. Savior having with unspeakable toil and
torment, carried his Cross toward a mile through the streets, now
stumbling, now falling, alvvayes groaning under the weight, and staggering at
the kickes and blows they gave him to have him forvvard; at ledgth falls
flat down, not able with all their haling, kicking and pulling, to rise any
more, or carry it a foot further. O svvetest Jesus! what shall a poor and
sinful soul say here unto thee? Quaerens me sedisti, seeking me thou have a^t
down. Or rather, cecidisti lassus, redemisti crucem passus: vvearie thou have
falen, and by undergoing the burden of the Cross, thou have redeemed us: it is
not the weight of this piece of timber, that oppresses thee, o no, thou
sustainest the whole world with thy little finger; it is the unsupportable
weight of my sins, that lay thee so along: Quid faciam tibi o custos
hominum? what shall I do to thee, o keeper of men? give me thy Cross, and I
will carry it with Cyrenaeus after thee; Vel tollam crucem meam and sequar
te, or I will take up my Cross and follovv thee, as thou have commanded me:
in the mean time, I will accompany thee with my tears amongst those devout
women, that followed thee, and to whom thou saydst; Filiae Jerusalem, nolite
flere super me, sed super vos ipsas flete, and super filios vestros; quia si in
viridi ligno hoc faciunt, in arido quid fiet? daughters of Jerusalem weep
not upon me, but weep upon your selves, and upon your children; for if in the
green vvood they do these things, in the dry what shall be done? If this
body more fresh and green than the trees of Paradise, feel so much this
nipping vvinde of persecution; how will your trunkes, dry and rotten with
sin, seele and endure the allscorching flames of hell?

Conclude to vveep and bewail thy Saviors, burden, that is, thy own sins,
and those of the whole world; and take heed, how thou layest more weight on
his shoulders; but resolve rather to ease him, of what he already bears;
that is, take up his Cross after him, and bear it for his sake, Quicumque te
angariauerit, aut tibi eam imposuerit; Whosoever will force thee, or put it
on thee; for to this only end he has laid it down.

THE TENTH MEDITATION. How our Savior is nailed on the Cross.
1. COnsider first, how being'arriued at length at mount Caluary about midday,
in the case we may imagine; it seems, that the malice and rancour of his
enemies increased with his torments: for the first thing they do, is, to mix
gall in the cup of wine and myrrh, which usually was given to comfort and
hearten those, that were to die: o Tigers and not men? well did Moses say of
you: Uua eorum, vuafellis and botri amarissimt; fell draconum vinum eorum: their
grape the grape of Gall, and the clusters most bitter; the gall of dragons
their wine: but what did our meekest Savior do? Cum gustasset, noluit
bibere; when he had tasted he would not drink; that is, he took as much, as
would torment his taste, tougue and palate, but would not vvithall receive the
comfort it might afford his vveake stomach: that is, to cure us thoroughly, he
would suffer in every part purely without ease to the rest. Next they
violently strip him again stark naked, Nam nudus pependit in ligno; for he
hang naked on the cross: o who can express or conceive the horror of this
torment? his inner garment was by this time congealed to his flesh and
vvounds, and the crown of thorns was fast to his head, and entangled with
his bloody and clotted hair: yet both are pulled off with merciless rage,
and the crown with no less clapped and pressed on a new: all his wounds are
opened again and bleed a fresh; the cold air pierces him thorough and
thorough; and new shame before such a multitude confounds his divine face: o
see him, while the Cross is preparing, falling on his knees with his arms
crossed, and offering himself to his Eternal Father In holocaustum
vespertinum, an evening holocaust, to appease his wvrath against mankind etc.

Conclude to kneel down by him, and make the same oblation: to drink the
bitter Chalice of his passion with him, which thy sins have made more
bitter then gall: and to imitate his extreme poverty and nakedness, not a ragge
nor leaf of a tree to cover him.

2. Consider secondly, how the Cross lying flat on the ground and all things
in readiness, they lay our dearest Redeemer stretched out upon it; and first
spreading out his vvearied arms, and driving sharp and gross iron nails
thorough the palms of his hands, fasten them to the vvood; then pulling down
his legs to the length, do as much for his sacred feet; and all this, with
such violent cruelty, that it is thought with stretching and pulling, they
mightily strained his whole body, and disioynted it in many parts; according
to that, Foderunt manus meas and pedes meos, and dinumerauerunt omnia ossa mea.
They have dug my hands and my feet they have numbered all my bones. O
Christian or any humane soul, what can thou here think, say, or do?
did thou ever feel any nerve, sinew or vein contracted or pierced but
with, a pin? or a bone, never so small; or joint displaced? or did thou
ever see it in an other? tell me then, what cries, what shriekes, thou
made, what restles pains and tortures thou suffered'st: and what were all
that to this torment of thy Savior; whose hands and feet, where all the
sinews, veins, and bones concur, are bored thorough with nails of a finger
thick? o view it well, if thine eyes will give thee leave; think on it, if
the affright distract thee not. Run to thy bleeding Savior, who calls on
thee with these words: Surge, and veni amica mea, speciosa mea, columba mea,
in foraminibus petrae, in cauerna maceria; lectus noster floridns, arise, and
come my friend, my beautiful one, my dove, in the holes of the rock, in the
holovv places of the wall, our bed is slorishing, with the red blood that
waters this bed of my Cross etc.

Conclude to make good use of this occasion; enter into these caves of the
rock, that are opened for thee; and shelter thy self here, whensoever the
storm of temptation shall invade thee; chouse this Cross for thy bed, pillow,
or couch to rest thy wearied soul on.

3. Consider thirdly, how having fast nailed him on the Cross they begin with
forkes, halberds and ropes to raise him in the air: o what shouts, cries and
blasphemies made his enemies, when he appeared over the peoples heads? but
what affrights, sighs and tears over vvhelmed his dearest Mother and other
devout friends? At length, they let the foot of the Cross fall into the hole
made for it, and so fasten it straight up in the air: Et sicut Moses
exaltauit serpentem in deserto, ita exaltatus est filius hominis and filius Dei
in Caluario: And as Moses exalted the serpent in the desert, so has the
Son of man and Son of God been exalted on Caluarie: but with such new
torments, that all hitherto will seem but trifles: his body now hangs poised
in the air, and it is whole weight on his pierced hands and feet, with a new
and continual renting open of the said vvounds; with a horror and trembling
of his whole body, which now is become the chief torment to it self. Et
factus est sibimetipsi grauis. And he is become burdenous to himself. O now
crucified and tormented Jesus, how do all things conspire to thy torture? thy
Father has forsaken thee, thy mothers presence pierces thy heart; thy enemies
shouts amaze thee; thou thy self, thy own body does most of all torment thee;
Nec habes vbi caput reclines, nor have thou where to repose thy head. But upon
thorns; nec vbi manum aut pedem figas, nor where to fasten thy hand, or foot,
but on piercing nails. O vos omnes qui sititis venite ad aquas, o ye all that
thirst, come ye to the waters, put your mouths to these four rivers or
conduits, which stream from Paradise, Ad irrigandam vniuersam terram. To
water all the earth. Run and vvash your leaprie into snow in the blood of
the Lamb.

Conclude with all the compassion of thy soul and tears of thy eyes; and
vvish at least, that it lay in thy power any way to ease thy tormented
Savior, or his afflicted mother; remember the hard and flinthy stones opened
at his passion; and yet how many be there in the world; and Christians too,
that never drop one tear for him, or scarce think on him?

4. Consider fourthly, the infinite charity of our Savior, and no less malice
of his enemies; he amidst his torments cries out; Pater, dimitte illis, quia
nesciunt quid faciunt; Father forgive them, for they know not what they do;
they grin and shake their heads at him, Vah qui dostruis templum Dei; salua te
ipsum; si filius Dei es, descend de Cruce; Vah thou that destroys the temple
of God; save thine own self, if thou be the Son of God, come down from
the cross; and this not only the soldiers and common people, Sed and
Principes Sacerdotum illudentes cum Scibis and Senioribus dicebant, alios
saluos fecit, seipsum non potest saluum facere; si Rex Israel est, descendat
nunc de Cruce and credimus etc. idipsum autem and latrones, qui crucifixi erant
cum eo, improperabant ei: In the like manner allsoe the chief Priests with
the Scribes and ancients mocking said, he saved others; him self he can not
save; if he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross and
we will believe etc. and the selfsame thing the thieves also that were
crucified with him, reproched him vvithall: this is the music of our
Salomons bed chamber In die despensationis eiu?. In the day of his despousing.
Observe notwithstanding and rejoice to see how in despite of all, his Eternal
Father proclaims him for the true Messiah, and the King of those very Jews,
that murder him; by causing Pilate to put over his head in three languages,
that all nations might read and know it, this his title; JESUS NAZARENVS REX
IVDEORVM; JESUS OF. NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. neither, do they what
they could, would he alter a letter of it. Again nature by her sufferance
acknowledges him for her sovereign Lord and God; and in token of her grief
to see him so treated by man, breaks open her bowels, renteth her hardest
rocks a sunder, and hides her face in a dark Eclipse for three hours space;
the religious Temple also renteth her sacred veil from top to bottom, not able
to bear the horrid sacrilege, nor hear the fearful blasphemies, that her
own Priests committed and powered out, against her God, her manna and Arc of
her Testament.

Conclude to join with the Angels of heaven in thy Saviors praises, whilst
his enemies curse and scoff him: and in mourning with dame nature, and all
good souls whilst his enemies exalt and rejoice at their imagined victory
over him.

These follovving must begin to be read on Saturday night the Eve of Passion
Sunday.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER, Some pious considerations and questions upon our Saviors
Passion.
WHILST thy dearest Lord and Savior is hanging on the Cross, struggling with
three hours unspeakable torments; and his enemies like so many wolves or dogs
stand all howling and barking about him, creep in, o Christian soul, and place
thy self at the foot of the Caosse, nigh his distressed Mother, S. John and
the rest of those devout persons; Sub vmbra cius sede, and fructus eius dulcis
erit gutturi tuo: Sit under his shadovv, and his fruiste will be sweet unto
thy throat. From thence contemplate some circumstances, ask him some pious
questions, and hear the last seven words of thy dying Master; for, Crux
fidelis inter omnes arbor vna nobilis; nulla sylua talem profert fronde, flore,
germine. The cross of all trees is the soundest and most noble; never did any
vvood bring forth a tree sos excelling in either lease, blosome, or branches.

THE FIRSTH MEDITATION. The consideration of some circumstances.
1. COnsider first, and lifting up thy eyes see who he is, that there suffers;
and again; looking downward, see for whom he suffers. He who suffers what
thou have hitherto seen, is true God and true man; as God, besides the common
attributes of the divinity, he is the second; person of the B. Trinity, the
Eternal Word of the Eternal Father, equally reverenced, praised and adored
with him by all creatures whatsoever etc. As man, he is absolute Lord and
King of the whole universe, as well of the Angels above, as of men and all
below; with full power over life and death at his pleasure; heaven and hell
are in his hand, Data est ei omnis potestas in coelo and in terra: All power
is given him in heaven and earth: this is that power which divines call
Potestatem excellentiae, the excelling power, by which he disposes of all
the treasures of heaven at his will: his body framed by the holy Ghost in the
womb of a purest Virgin, was the most tender and best complexioned, that
ever has or shall be: his soul at the first instant full of all knowledge,
grace, and glory; called therefore, Sanctus Sanctorum, ex plenirudine cuius
omnes accepimus, The holy one of holies, of whose fullness all we have
received, not only men, but Angels: finally his authority and esteem among
the people so great, that the like was never seen in Israel. But for whom
does he fuffer? for man only a poor crawling worm; for his friends, but not
only; for his enemies also; nay for those, that stand barking at him; finally
for thee alone, no less, but every way as fully and as willingly, as for the
whole world; Qui dilexit me and tradidit semetipsum pro me. who loved me,
and delivered himself for me.

Conclude with astonishement and admiration, to see this great change of these
two extremes; Nouissimi primi and primi nouissimi: the last the first, and the
first last: God fallen to the lowest abyss of misery; Opprobrium and abiectio
plebis; A reproach of men and outcast of the people; and man raised to the
highest of hapines; Filius Dei viui and haeres regni: The Son of the living
God, and heir of his kingdom: pour thy self out into tears for thy
sufferring God; and into humble thanks, as much for thy self, as for the
whole world, by him redeemed, exalted, deified.

2. Consider secondly; how as S. Thomas and all divines teach, the pains both
exterior and interior, which our Savior suffered in his passion, were the
sharpest and greatest that ever were suffered in this world: although thou
have seen them hitherto one by one, yet resume them here again all together,
from Gethsema^^to mount Galuarie? no part of his most delicate and tender body
has escaped its particular and terrible torment; A planta pedis ad verticem
capitis non est inuenta in co sanitas: From the sole of the foot unto the
top of the head there is found noe health therein: again he suffered in his
fame, by false vvitnesses, and ignominious titles of seditious, fool etc, in
his honor by the scoffs, mockings and shames, they used him with. But now
what he suffered interiourly in his soul, no soul but his own can feel or
express; Secundum magnitudinem amoris, est and doloris; According to the
greatness of his love, the more vehement is his grief; he loved, honored and
reverenced the Godhead with an immense and incomparable love; how then did it
grieve and oppress his noble heart to see altogether all the sins of the
world passed, present, and to come, like an army of foul Giants banding and
scorning the Divinity? how did he feell the eternal loss of those million of
millions of poor souls, tumbling hourly into hell flames? again, the love
he bore his B. Mother was without comparison, how then did her grief for
him, increase his for her? how did these two fiery coals, inflame and kindle
one the other? say no more, my soul, but look only and contemplate them both
present by thee, him hanging on the Cross with his eyes cast down upon her;
and her standing at his feet; but whether looking up on him or no, I know not.

Conclude to get first a perfect love of thy Savior, and then thou vvilt
easily be a partner in his grief: desire heartily to suffer somevvhat for him,
in thy fame, honor, goods, body, and soul; who has suffered in all at once
for thee. Fix thy self at the foot of his Cross, and never depart thence.

3. Consider thirdly, from whom or at whose hands he suffered all this; reflect
and thou shall find, that he has suffered from all sorts of people; Jews,
gentiles, great and small, Princes and plebeians; some accusing, others judging,
others executing, all crying out; Toll, toll, crucifige, crucifige: away,
away with him, crucify, crucify him; from his Apostles; the one betraying
him, the other forswearing him, all flying and leaving him: from the presence
of his B. Mother, though without her fault, whose sight and sorrow pierced
his very heart, and redoubled all his pains: from his own body, whose
weight on the Cross caused and increased his torment beyond measure; finally
from himself and his Eternal Father, both forsaking him, and both the chief
and original causes of all this; he by his free will, and his Father by the
sword of his justice: so that the whole universe concurred and conspired his
death; but not one creature afforded him the least help or comfort.
Considerabam ad dextram and videbam, and non erat, qui cognosceret me: I looked
tovvard the right hand, and savv, and there was none that would know me: o
forlorn and forsaken Jesus; how all are at thy left hand to afflict thee? none
at thy right, to pity thee? o what a case wast thou in, when this universal
desolation made thee cry out to heaven; Deus, Deus meus, vt quid dercliquisti
me? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Sweetest Savior, give a devout
soul leave to ask thee the same question; Vt quid dereliquisti teipsum? Why
have thou forsaken thy self? his answer is; Vt nunquam derelinquat te gratia
mea. That my grace may never forsake thee.

Conclude with a strong resolution, grounded on a sincere love, never to side
more with those, that persecute thy Savior; that is, with sin and
ingratitude; for only these two can now reach and offend him, where he is
siting at his Fathers right hand. If thou find thy self sad and comfortles,
recurre to thy Savior on the Cross; and be confident, that either he will
comfort thee; or, which is to him more acceptable, give thee his grace to sit
by him, and keep him company.

4. Consider fourthly the manner our Savior suffered Ex part sua, of his
side, that is, the rare virtues he practiced and left drawn in purple and sky
color, as we may say, In carne sua, in his flesh. As patterns and samples
for all his faithful children: and to begin with that, which was the first
source and spring of the rest, his ardent love and charity to do and suffer
for us: o my soul, thou have at leisure seen and pondered all the wonders, he
has done, and all the persecutions he has suffered in thirty three years;
and those he now feels, hanging before thee on the Cross; all tokens of
excessive love: but could thou look into that burning furnace of his divine
breast, thou would find there such a fire of love and charity, Quam nec aqua
Oceani possent extinguere, nec flumina passionum vmquam obruere: which neither
the waters of the sea can extinquish, nor the floods of passions ever
ouervvhelme: ever ready to suffer a fresh all, and more, over and over, again
and again. Next his infinite humility in exposing his Majesty to such
abasements and contempts; and perfect obedience, Vsque ad mortem Crucis, even
to the death of the cross, to comply with his Fathers command. Then his
vvonderfull patience, meecknes and silence; Tanquam ouis coram tendente se non
aparuit os suum; ita vt miraretur Pilatus valde; As a sheep before his shearer
did he not open his mouth; so that Pilate marueled much; without the least
contradiction or answer for himself: his fortitude and perseverance most
invincible till the end, till he had conquered death, sin and hell: his
justice and mercy, in taking on him and paying so to the full our ransom; his
poverty and contempt of the world in the highest degree etc. without end or
limit.

Conclude to follow the steps of thy Sovereign Lord and Master: o if thou
could once get and keep one spark of his love in thy breast; how it would
season all the actions of thy life? how it would inflame thee to suffer for
him, as he has done for thee? how it would nail thee to his Cross hands
and feet? Tota vita Christi, quoth the devout Kempis, crux suit and martyrium:
and tu quaeris requiem and gaudium? erras, erras, st aliud queris quam pati
tribulationes. The whole life of Christ is a cross and martyrdom, and do
thou seek rest and joy? thou errest, thou errest if thou seek any thing,
but to suffer tribulations.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Pious questions and answers upon the Passion.
1. THe first point, and first question: why did our B. Lord suffer himself
to be tied with cords, and haled with ropes like a thief? Answer: Adam in
Paradise committed theft, eating the fruit was none of his own, but forbidden
him: for which the Devil had all his posterity tied up like thieves, in the
cords of sin and damnation: to break these bands, he that is
incomprehensible, would be comprehended, and he that is liberty it self, tied
up like a thief

Kiss these bands, my soul, and pray that they may tie up thy understanding
and affection in the knowledge and love of thy Savior.

The second question: why did he suffer himself to be accused with so many
false vvitnesses? Answer: no man is so just, but the Devil will find enough
to accuse him in, at the day of judgment: wherefore this our supreme Judge
would take now on himself unjust and false accusations, that we might then
be secured from those just and true ones. Thank thy Redeemer, my soul, and
that thou may be the better secured at that day, follow now his example, and
bear false calumnies and accusations with patience.

The third question: why did he never make answer to any of them, being so
false, and so often urged against him? Answer: falsity is of that nature, that
nothing can so easily consute it, as silence; no way so facile to discover a
ly, as to leave it to it self; let it alone, and you shall soon see, how it
will vanish into smoke, and truth thine like the sun; Nam magna est veritas
and praeualet. For truth is powerful, and does prevail. Learn from this
example of thy most patient Savior, a rare and compendious method, how to end
contentions, answer injuries. and discover lies: and conclude with most humble
thanks to thy Redeemer for all.

2. The second point, and first question: why would our dear Lord suffer his
divine face to be spit on, and mufled with a dirty clout? Answer: Adam in
eating the forbidden fruit, did first spit as it were in the face of his
Creator, contemning his command; and at the same instant the devil bespit and
defiled the soul of him, and all his, with the muck of sin: next he aimed
at the forbidden knowledge also Boni and mali, of good and evil, and was
presently struck blind with ignorance and error, our Redeemer therefore had
his face defiled and muffled, Vt nos a tenebris and sordibus, in quas nati
sumus, peccato sc: and ignorantia, liberaret: that he might free us from the
darkness, and uncleanness to wit sin and ignorance, in which we are
borne: o my soul take heed of spitting in thy Saviors face with the Jews;
take heed of covering his face of mercy from thee.

The second question: why would he be treated and rejected for a fool?
Answer: to quell and quench in us the heat and vain curiosity of knowing more
then belongs unto us, inherited also from Adam's vain hopes; Eritis sicut dij,
scientes bonum and malum: you shall be like Gods, knovving good and evil: for
if the original Wisdom of the Eternal Father, from whence flows all
knowledge in heaven and in earth, be once esteemed foolery; how shall man ever
swell or be proud of his knowledge? But vvoe to us poor bubbles, swelling ever
with a puff of self conceit till we break our selves.

The third question: why would he suffer Barabbas, a thief and murderer, to
be preferred before him? Answer: to give us warning, how to make our choice,
on which depends life or death: Adam erred preferring a creature before his
Creator, and died for it: the Jews erred, preferring the Prince of thieues
before the Prince of Angels, and were destroyed for it: take heed, o my
soul, thou prefer not sin before grace, thy pleasure before thy duty, least
eternal death be thy doom.

3. The third point, and first question: why would the Son of God be
scourged and crowned with thorns? Answer: remember the tr^ueller, that went
down from Jerusalem to ^^richo, Et incidit in latrones, qui despoliauerunt eum
and plagis impositis abierunt semiuiuo relicto: that sell amongst thieves, who
allsoe spoiled him, and giving him wounds went away leaving him half-dead:
this is he whom our good Samaritan comes to cure; and so he applies his own
vvounds to the curing of his; he makes a bath of his precious blood to recover
his gasping soul; Nam anima Christiani in sanguine Christi est: For the life
of a Christian is in the blood of Christ: he is crowned with thorns and
wounded in the head, to mitigate the temptations that never cease to prick and
sting our weak, imagination: he is stripped of his own clothes, and covered
with purple, with a cane in his hand; Ut nos deponamus veterem hominem qu^:
corrumpitur, and indunmas nouum qui sicundum Deum creatus est etc. That we may
lay away the old man, which is corrupted; and put on the new man, which
according to God is created etc.

The second question: why would this Prince and Lord of Angels, be now
accompanied with none but thieves? answer, to abate and confound the pride of
that old thief Lucifer, who stole man from Paradise and a great part of the
Angels from heaven: but now the wheel is turned; he is the lowest and foulest
of devils, and man placed among and above the Angels.

The third question: what do the three Crosses of mount Caluary signify?
Answer; that on the left hand signifies the state of wicked men; who how
iocund so ever they seem outwardly, yet their restles conferences sing within
an other tune: that on the right hand signifies the state of penitents; whose
Cross is contrition and satisfaction: that of our fauiours in the midst is the
state of the perfect, who also never want their Crosses, as long as they live
in this world. Embrace my soul, the foot of this Cross, vvhereon thy Savior
hangs, this is the high way from mount Caluary to Jerusalem; from sin to
grace; from grace to glory.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of our Saviors death and burial.
1. COnsider first; and give care to the last lesson or sermon, which thy
divine Master makes unto thee from the chair or pulpit of the Cross,
consisting of seven words or sentences uttered as he hung in the last
torment or agony of death. The first was, when all the world was banding,
scoffing, and spitting their malice and venom at him, then was his soul in a
furnace of charity, sparkling forth pity and compassion for them, with Pater
ignosce illis, quiae nesciunt quid faciunt: Father forgive them, for they know
not what they do: o mellifluous Jesu! how can this be? have not thou yet
done sufficiently to make them know thee? remember what thou did once say of
them; Nunc autem excusationem non habent de peccato suo: but now they have no
excuse of their sin. But o! Omnis peccator ignorans, and nescit quid facit;
every sinner is ignorant, and knovves not what he does; whom 'he offends,
what he offends, what he loses, and whether he runs. The second was,
when Damas the good thief astonished and converted at the former words and
unheard of charity; reprehending his companion, accusing himself, declaring
the innocence of Christ, and turning unto him with, Memento mei Domine dum
veneeis in regnum tuum; Lord, remember me, when thou shall come in thy
Kingdom: received this sentence of eternal bliss; Amen dico tibi quia hodie
mecum eris in Paradiso: Amen I say to thee: this day thou shall be with me in
Paradise: o happy thief, who by this plenary indulgence. A culpa and a paena
From both crime, and punishment dve there unto, have carried away the
preuiledge from all the Patriarks, Prophets and Saints of the old law, to leap
over Purgatory and Limbus immediately into Paradise and glory: and had by thee
at thy death Jesus and Mary, thy Redeemer and his mother.

Conclude two things; the one to conne and learn this new lesson with all thy
endeauours to wit, then to forgive and pray for thy enemies, when they are
actually persecuting of thee; the other, to turn to thy Savior with humility
and confession of thy sins, with a, Memento mei Domine in hora mortis meae;
remember me, o Lord, in the hour of my death; and to his mother with, Ora pro
nobis nunc and in hora mortis. Amen. pray for me now; and in the hour of
death. Amen.

2. Consider secondly how, Stabat Matter dolorosa, iuxta crucem lachrymosa, dum
pendebat filius; The doleful mother stood by the cross weeping, whilst her
son hung thereon; covered over with an Ocean of afflicting agonies; suffering
all and more in her soul, then did her son in his body; so that with more
advantage might she say that of the Apostle, Christo crucifixa sum Cruci;
with Christ I am nailed to the cross and that also with three nails, the one
of love in the highest measure, the other of grief, proportionable to the
love; the third of conformity and resignation, Fiat voluntas tua: thy vvil be
done. so that, Viuo ego, iam non ego viuit vero in me Christus. I live, now
not I: but Christ lives in me. But her dearest Lord and Son looking down
upon her grief and solitairnes, and his beloved disciple S. John by her, said
unto them, Mulier ecce filius tuus, ecc^ matter tua: woman behold thy son,
behold thy mother: the Apostle was well content, Et accepit illam in suam; and
he took her to his own; but o the doleful mother, how could she like the
change? the disciple for the Master? the Son of Zebedeus for the Son of
God? how could she take this last farewell; her own son gave her, and
bequeathed her to an other? having thus taken his leave of his mother, he
turned himself to his Eternal Father, Et exclamauit voce magna: Deus Deas
meus vt quid dereliquistime? and he cried with a loud voice: my God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? me, thy only and natural Son? Vt quid? why?
for what, or for whom? for sinful and ungrateful man? who will hardly ever
thank thee for it; nay many take hence an occasion to offend thee more: but,
be it so dear Father; let me be forsaken by thee, so thou never forsake them.

Conclude to use this same cry to God in all thy temptations; and beg his aid
and assistance for the respect of what his only Son suffered in being now
forsaken by his Father, and also for what his B. Mether felt, in being left by
her Son, and, put of to an other; and know, that we may now more boldly
call her our Mother, then before, for her Son has bequeathed her to us all
in S. John, and she bears to all the love of a mother.

3. Consider thirdly, how our dying Savior having hung on the Cross some
three hours, said, Sitto: I thirst; two great and vehement thirsts did he
suffer, the one corporal, for having fasted so long, spent all the blood of
his body, and moisture of his stomach, and passed so many torments and trauells
how could there choose but follow a parching drouth thorough all his body? and
it was fitting we should know it, as well as the rest of his torments, to
show our due gratitude for it: but the other and greater thirst was spiritual
in his soul for our good and salvation, and that all the world would come and
drink Ad sontem aquae viuae passionis, At the fountain of the living water
of his passion. But o the cruelty of savage beasts! they give a gasping and
dying man nothing, but four vinegar to quench a consuming thirst; Et siti mea
potauerunt me aceto: in my thrist they gave me vinegre to drink: but yet more
cruel sinners, who instead of pious gratitude, give him nothing but the gall
and vinegar of sin and wickedness. Our meekest Lord having taken this
piercing draught, as one well refreshed and satisfied, said, Consummatum est;
it is consummated: that is, perfected and consummated is the whole work of
man's redemption; the figures and prophecies of the old law are fullfilled; the
papers, writings and accoumpts of sieve thousand years with the divine justice
are quitted and cancelled with my blood; finally the whole Economy, for which
I came, is now ended with my life. Happy that soul that at the hour of death
can truly say, Consummatum est, it is consummated: or, cursum con^ummaui,
fidem seruat^e etc. I have consummated my course, I have kept the faith etc. I
have complied with the obligations of my estate and calling.

Conclude to beg of thy Savior for this torment he suffered, that he will
quench in thee the heat and drouth of thy carnal sensuality; and give thee
that other of spirit, Vt sitiat anima tua ad Deum fontem viuum. That thy soul
may thirst after God the living fountain. Beg of him also and his B. Mother,
that at the hour of thy death thou may with joy and comfort say, Consummatum
est, it is consummated.

4. Consider fourthly, how the hour being come, that he would permit death to
seize upon him; and by the separation of those two individual and inseparable
companions his body and soul, perfect so the work of our redemption; listing
up his oppressed head and watery eyes to heaven, Clamans voce magna ait: Pater
in manus tuas commendo spiritum meum; and inclinato capite tradidit spiritum
and expirauit: crying with a loud voice, said: father into thy hands I commend
my spirit; and bowing his head, he gave up the ghost: stay a while, Christian
soul, stay from thy just groans and tears, with which I know thy breast
and eyes are full, thou shall presently accompany in this his hopeles,
comfortles and sonneles mother; see in the mean while and know, that the
thundering sound of this his last cry was heard down to the abyss of hell,
and made all these infernal spirits flit up and down with horror and
affrightment, and run deeper into their dungeons, to hide themselves: it
penetrated Limbus, and gave those vvearied souls a joyful alarm of their
freedom; it mounted also to heaven, warning the Angels to prepare their
voices and instruments to sound his triumph and victory over all his enemies.
Yet (o sweetest Jesu) least men should fear, as most justly they might, that
he went away angry or vvrathfull from them, he inclined and turned down his
head and eyes upon them, to offer them the kiss of peace; his arms open to
receive them; his feet nailed not to fly from their approches; finally his
vvounds all open, that we may enter into his shelters and forts every way,
and hide our selves there In die belli; In the day of vvare.

Conclude never more to lift up thy head against God, since thy Savior has
inclined his his to death in obedience to his Father, and love to thee: thank
him anew for all that he has suffered from the garden of Gethsemany to this
moment: and never think thy self truly his, till thou suffer willingly
somevvhat for him.

5. Consider fifthly, how our blessed Redeemer had no sooner given up the
ghost, with an Humiliauit seipsum vsque ad mortem, mortem autem Crucis; he
humbled himself unto death, even the death of the cross: but his Eternal
Father begun presently to exalt and magnify his name: hence the sun grew
dark; the earth trembled; the stones cracked; the graves opened; the veil of
the Temple rent from the top to the bottom; the people went home knocking
their breasts; the Centurion with many more were converted, and publicly
confessed him for the Son of God; Vere filius Dei erat iste: indeed this man
was the son of God; when Longinus had with a lance opened his side, true
water and blood came gushing out: whence proceeded the Catholic Church,
Matter viuentium: Mother of the living: and the seven Sacramental Conduits of
heavenly graces. Finally his disciples who before hid themselves Propter metum
Iudaeorum; for fear of the Jews; and treated with him only by night, now
boldly show their faces, and Joseph ab Arimathea intrauit ad Pilatum and
audacter petijt corpus Jesus: Joseph of Arimathea went in to Pilate, and boldly
asked the body of Jesus: Nicodemus came also with an hundred pound of
precious ointments and aromatic spices. O what new rancour and hatred did
these things beget in the hearts of his enemies the Jews, to see all their
malice consumed in vain and turned to his greater honor; so that, Sagitta
paruulorum factae sunt plagae eorum; Childrens arrows are made their
wounds.

Conclude thou with joy and exultation of heart, to see the just glory of thy
Savior begin to show it self: thank heartily his Eternal Father for it: and
learn hence to be confident in his sweet providence; whatsoever storms of
adversity ouerwhelme thee.

Thursday night and Friday morning nothing is read. On Friday night read for
Saturday.

6. COnsider sixthly, how Joseph, Nicodemus and S. John vnnailed the sacred
body of our Redeemer from the Cross, and with all reverence and devotion laid
it once more in the arms and lap of the sacred Virgin Mother. O what soul
can imagine, or tongue express the tears, sighs and anguish of her afflicted
heart? Enter, o faithful soul, and falling at the cold and bored feet of thy
Savior, accompany these last and funeral tears of the B. Lady, S. John, S.
Mary Magdalene and the rest: o vos omnes, qui transitis per viam, videte si est
dolor similis, sicut dolor noster. o all ye that pass by the way, attend, and
see if there be sorrow like to our sorrow. From hence begins that most
solemn Procession of his burial to the new Tomb of Joseph, In quo nondum
quisquam positus fuerat. Wherein never yet any man had been laid. Hither was
brought the sacred Corpse richly embalmed, vvrapped in fine linen, and
accompanied, as it beseemed the Son of God, with his own Mother, those holy
and noble personages of men and women, and with all the Angels of heaven,
sent down from their great Lord in mourning weeds, Et in planctu, sicut
plangi solet in morte Primogeniti. And to perform those funeral obsequies,
which are wont to be performed in the death of a first-begotten. Finally they
lay him in his grave, adore him, and with new floods of tears, and speechles
sobbes taking their last leave; Aduoluu^t lapidem ad ostium monumenti; and they
roll a stone to the door of the manument: and return in company of the sad
Lady Ad sanctum coenaculum. To the holy refectorie.

But stay thou here a while, my soul, Et sedens foris ad monumentum plora, and
sitting without at the monument weep, the death of thy God, the anguish of
thy Lady and Mistress with thy own solitariness. Next, Recogita in
amaritudine animae tuae, Recount in the bitterness of thy soul. All what
thou have seen pass Ab horto Gethsemani ad sepulchrum: from the Garden of
Gethsemani to the sepulcre: make unto thy self Fasciculum Myrrhae, a bundle of
myrrh. of these three ingrediens; the cruelty and malice of the Jews, the
enormity of sin; and the ouerswelling charity of thy Lord and Savior.

THE THIRD PART, MEDITATIONS FOR the Perfect, or for the Unitive way.
THE end and scope of the Unitiue way is, to unite our souls with God,
according to the Apostle, Qui adheret Domino, vnus spiritus est: he that
adheareth to our Lord, is one spirit: to effect this, three acts are required;
the first is of the understanding, by which we form and conserve in our
memory the full and perfect Idea of our Sovereign God, and of his perfections,
as a lively and present image of him. The second act is of the vvill^, by all
her affections, and especially by that of love, extracted from her self and
all other creatures, and totally united and made one with her Creator. The
third is of imitation, conformity and resignation to his holy pleasure in all
things. In tempore and aeternitate, in time and eternity, the height and top
of all Christian endeauours. Gustemus ergo and videamus, quamsuauis sir
Dominus. Let us taste, and see, how svveet our Lord is:

THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of our Sauieurs Resurrection and apparitions.
Our Savior says of himself; Ego sum ostium, per me siquis introierit
saluabitur; and ingredietur and egredietur and pascua inueniet: I am the door,
by me if any enter, he shall be saved; and he shall go in, and shall go out
and shall find pastures; that is, all hope of salvation, all progress in
virtue, and access to God, is by me. Wherefore, as by his mortal life amongst
us he has given us examples and documents for all sorts of virtues; so by his
immortal life, which begins from his resurrection, we have a near and
easy access to the contemplation of the most hidden an sacred mysteries of his
Divinity; Vbi pascua inueni^mus and inebriabimur a torrente voluptatis: where
we shall find pasture and shall be inebriated with the torrent of pleasure.

THE FIRSTH MEDITATION. Of our Saviors Resurrection.
1. COnsider first, how our Redeemer no sooner gave up the ghost upon the
Cross, but his most powerful and glorious soul, united to the Divinity,
took her way directly toward the place called Limbus Patrum; a^ hollow and
darksome Cave under ground, next door, as I may say, to the hell of the
damned; where were kept in prison and sad mourning all those pious souls, who
departed hence in grace, and had suffered in Purgatory what pains were due to
their sins; but could not yet enter heaven, till the general rausome was
paid by Christ. Hither now went his glorious soul, accompanied with millions
of Angels crying out before him to those dark Iaylers; Aperite portas,
Principes, vestras, and introibit Rex gloria: Open your gates, ye Princes, and
the king of glory shall enter in: which like thunder put them all to flight
and eternal confusion; and so, Conterendo portas aereas and vectes ferreos
confringendo, by destroying the gates of brass, and by breaking the bars of
Iron, he entered triumphantly, Inter mortuos non solum liber sed and liberator.
Among the dead not only free, but their frceer. O sweetest charity, and most
profonnd humility! charity, in going down in person to deliver those poor
prisoners, whereas his omnipotent word would have served, or twelve legions of
Angels at his command: his humility, in vouchsafing to visit in person those
foul and base dungeons, and remain there almost forty hours. The Apostle
takes notice of it; Quod autem ascendit, quid est nisi quod and desc^^dit
primum in inferiores parts terrae? that he ascended, what is it, but because
he descended also first into the inferior parts of the earth. Assigning his
ascension for an effect of such humility.

Conclude with joy in thy heart for thy Lord's victory over death and hell:
strive to imitate his humility, in what state and dignity so ever thou be;
and his charity, in serving his servants and children with thy own hands,
not putting it of to others, as usually we do.

2. Consider secondly, how our all glorious and triumphant Lord, entering into
those darkesome dungeous, with the splendor of his presence turned them all
into a lightsome Paradise, and gave unto those pious souls the full and
beatificall sight and vision of his Divinity. O who can conceive this sudden
and great change from one extremity to another; from so many thousand years of
mourning and expectation, to a secure Eternity of joy and bliss? See old Adam
and Eve come forth out of their five thousand years inprisonment, and, as yet
half blushing, cast themselves at their Sons and Saviors feet, with a
public confession of their own fault, and of his grace and mercy. Behold the
ranks of Patriarchs, Prophets, Priests, Kings and Martyrs, all in their due
orders falling at his feet, in loyalty and homage, as to their supreme
Sovereign; and singing with full Quires: Dignus es Domine Deus noster,
accipere gloriam and honorem, and virtutem, quia redemisti nos Deus in sanguine
tuo, ex omni Tribu and lingua populo and natione etc. Thou art vvorthie, our
lord, to receive glory and honor, and power because thou have redeemed us o
God in thy blood, out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation etc. On
the other side, who can apprehend the ouersvvelling joys, contents and
jubilees of our Sauiour's glorious soul, to see such sudden and copious fruit
of his death and passion? o how well does he think all bestovved? Pro eo quod
laborauit anima eius, videbit and saturabitur: and dispertiam et plurimos, and
fortium diuidet spolia. For that his soul has labored, he shall see and be
filled, and I will distribute unto him verte many, and he shall divide the
spoils of the strong.

Conclude to join with these glorious souls in the praises of thy Savior:
vvish them all a thousand joys with Eternity of bliss: beseech thy Father
Abraham and the rest, to remember us, laboring yet in the toiles of this
mortal and dangerous passage.

3. Consider thirdly, how it is most credible and in a manner not to be
doubted but the souls in Purgatory also, were partakers of this joyful
solemnity; and with a plenary indulgence were freed all Ab omni poena: from
all pain. For how could our svvetest Jesus do less, In die hac iucunditatis
eius and laetitiae cordis, in this day of his mirth and joy of heart, then apply
the yet al most vvarme blood of his death and passion to all that were any
way capable of it, as the holy souls of Purgatory were? Angels therefore
are sent thither, who svveep clear those fiery caves of that pious fevvest;
and conduct them all to the glory of Limbus. But did the Hell of the damned and
those lovver dungeons feel noe alteration to the so nigh presence of our
triumphant David? surely they did; but of shame, confusion and greater torment:
O see and laugh, my soul, at the great Goliath, Lucifer, with all those
Princes of darkness sinking down into the lovver abysses, Tanquam a facie
fulguris: As at the presence of thunder: o how do they groan to see, how
are they deceived in procuring so maliciously and violently his death; of whom
it is said and now verified; O mors, ero mors tua, and morsus tuus, iuferne. O
death, I will be thy death, and thy bite, o hell. The like horror felt the
damned souls, and above all that of Judas, and the wicked Thief; who fell
from so high a dignity, and so nigh and inuiting an occasion of Eternal bliss
and happiness.

Conclude thou with joy and iubilee of heart for thy Sauiour's glory; for the
good souls delivery, and for the confusion of hell and the Devil: but yet
with fear for thy self: for the blood of Christ, how efficacious soever,
does not wash obstinate and perverse souls: o trust not to any dignity or
vocation whatsoever; but, Gum timore and tremore operare salutem. With fear
and trembling work thy safety.

4. Consider fourthly, how our Blessed Redeemer having often said, that he was
to be three days and three nights in the bovvells of the earth, and that he
was to rise the third day; such have he made to comfort his afflicted Mother,
and now hope less Disciples; that he reduced the whole time into less than
forty hours, to wit from Friday three a clock, that he died, to Sunday four
in the morning: when accompanied with all those happy souls, he left those
Infernal caves robbed and sacked of all, and taking his course directly to the
holy sepulcher, found there his sacred body, in the same manner, as it had been
laid there on Friday-night, all bloody, rent and torn. The glorious souls
adore it with all due reverence, and pour themselves out into new
admirations, thankes-giuings, and praises: but the holy Angels bring together
from all places the sacred blood, that had been spilt, and other relikes
belonging to the integrity of his body; and his most triumphant soul entering
into it, and shaking of the ointments and linne^, with which it was buried,
clotheth it with new immortality, and gifts of glory, more bright and
resplendent than a thousand suns; the wounds glittering beyond all diamonds
or precious stones: and thus he rose from his three-dayes sleep, penetrating
all obstacles, and unperceived of the Guards.

Conclude to be present in spirit at this solemnity of the Resurrection, Quae
facta est propter iustificationem nostram: which was done for our justification
but remember to shake of first all carnal and worldly affections, in which
thou have hitherto lain buried in the sepulcher of sin and vice.

5. Consider fifthly, how at our Sauiour's rising a great earthquake was
made, and Angels in glittering shapes removed the stone of the sepulcher and
with terror amazed the soldiers, who were set to guard it. But our Lord
went straight to mount Caluary, where the holy Cross yet stood; which all
the Angels and souls present reverenced and adored, as the royal and
victorious standard of the worlds redemption: and he in the same place, where
he had on the Friday before prayed and offered himself as a holocaust to his
Eternal Father, now with his face and eyes erected to heaven, gives him
immortal thanks for the glorious victory bestowed on him over the world, the
Devil, death, hell, and all his enemies; applying to himself the words of
the Patriarch Jacob, when he returned rich and prosperous from Mesopotamia: In
baculo meo, with my staff (of this Cross towit) transiui Iordanum istum I
passed over this Iordain (of my bitter passion) and nunc cum duabus turmis
regredior, and now with two troops I do return (of Limbus and Purgatory)
rich in that his possession, prosperous in the success, and glorious in the
victory; Conuertens planctum suum in gaudium sibi. Turning his lamentation in
to joy. Finally to secure us, that he rose not for himself only, but for us
also; and to give us also a new pledge of his liberality and omnipotency, he
commands those souls whose graves opened on the Friday, to go take up
their bodies in glory and immortality; who afterward appeared to many in
Jerusalem, and at the ascension by a singular privilege, mounted with him to
heaven.

Conclude to imitate thy Savior, Qui resurgens ex mortuis tam non moritur:
who riseing from the dead, now dies not, o my soul, Exuamus veterem hominem
cum actibus suis, Let us put of the old man with his acts, and putting on the
new robe of grace, let us never dye more by sin, but live ever to glory.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of our Saviors apparitions.
1. COnsider first, how doubtless, the first apparition our Savior made, was
to his afflicted Mother, though the Evangelists speak not of it: but because
her feast of joys is at hand, we will differ this point till then, as more
proper. The next apparition therefore he makes, is to sinners, S. Mary
Magdalen and S. Peter, and first to her, as the weaker sex. S. John describes
the most sweet passage in his twentieth chapter: how Maria stabat ad menumentum
foris plorans: Marie stood at the monument without, weeping: how two Angels
appeared in white, and said unto her; Mulier, qrid ploras? woman why
vveepest thou? but she; Quia tulerunt Dominum meum, and nescio vbi posuerunt
eum: Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have
put him: presently she saw Jesus at her back, but knew him not: who asking
the same question; Mulier quid ploras? quem quaeris? woman, why vveephest
thou? whom seek thou? she not naming her beloved, supposing all the world
must know him; Si tu sustulisti eum, di^ito mihi, vbi posuisti eum, and ego eum
tollam: If thou have carried him away, tell me where thou have laid him, and I
will take him away: o the presumption of love, Cui nihil videtur difficile;
to whom nothing seems hard; and what if he were In praetorio Pilati, in
the court of Pilate, or nailed again on the Cross? Ego eum tollam: I will
take him away. Our sweetest Jesus could hold her no longer in suspense, but
said, Maria; Marie, and she, Rabboni my Lord and Master, and with her
vvounted boldness fell at his feet; but he forbad her with. Nol^ me tangere,
vade autem ad fratres meos. Do not touch me, but go to my brethren. O
sinners, despair no more of your Sauiour's goodness; see a woman, De qua
septem daemonia eiecerat, out of whom he had cast seven devils. now the first
in favor, and sent as an Apostle. Euangelizare gaudium magnum quia surrexit
Dominus. To Euangelize great joy, because our Lord is risen.

Conclude not to think thy self in the favor of Jesus the less, for having
been a sinner, if thou find in thy heart, true love of him; for he it is, Qui
non venit vocare iuslos sed peccatores: and qui nunquam despicit cor contritum
and humiliatum. Who did not come to call the just, but sinners: and who does
never despise^ contrite and humble heart. O happy soul, that can make known
her beloved more by the heart, than by the mouth, more by work than by word!

2. Consider secondly, how S. Peter upon the news the holy women brough of
our Lord's resurrection, ran with S. John to the sepulcher and not finding him
there, returned, Secum mirans, quod factum fuerat: maruelling with himself at
that which was done. When Jesus met him on the way, all in glory and
splendor: o who can express this encounter? S. Peter fell with shame,
confusion, and teare^ at his Master's feet, for his late sin yet fresh in his
memory; not able to speak a word; but with sighs and sobbs expressing his
sorrow and repentance: but our most svveet and indulgent Lord bad him rise, and
comforted him with these ^r the like words: Pan tecum, noli timere, Ego um,
dimissa sunt tibi peccata tua confirma fratres tuos: o Jesus, quam magna est
multitudo dulcedinis tuae erga peccatores paenitentes? Peace he with thee,
fear not, it is I, thy sins are forgiven thee, confirm thy bethren: O Jesus,
how great is the multitude of thy sweetness toward penitent sinners? Next,
but the same day, he appeared to the two disciples on their way to Emmaus;
asked them the nevves, expounded to them the Scriptures; vvalked with them
till toward sunne-set; was their invited and forced guest; and in breaking
of bread discovered himself and vanished. O, quoth they; Nonne cor nostrum
ardens erat in nobis dum loqueretur in via? was not our heart burning in us
vvhiles he spoke in the way? And how could it otherwise be, o holy
disciples? Jesus was in your company, in your mouth, in your heart; and he is
all love, fire and heavenly charity.

Conclude with new confidence in the mercies of Jesus; for he cannot cast
off, who confide in him, though it were Judas himself, so he become
repentant: remember and make use in all thy necessities, of those words of the
two Disciples; Mane nobiscum Domiue, quoniam aduesperascit and inclinata est
iam dies. Tarry with us, o Lord, because it is tovvard night, and the day is
now far spent.

3. Consider thirdly, how the same day of his Resurrection, in the evening our
Savior appeared to all his disciples together: and again the eight day after,
when S. Thomas was also present: he entered in upon them, the doors being fast
shut Propter metum Iudaeorum, For fear of the Jews, and standing in the
midst of them, saluted them with, Pax vobis, nolite timere, Ego sum. Peace be
to you, fear not, it is I. They all affrighted and amazed, as if some spirit
or ghost had come amongst them, believed nothing less, than that it was their
Master; then, he showed them his hands and his feet, and bid Thomas, more
incredulous then the rest, put his fingers into his wounds and his hand into
his side: called for some meat and eat with them, as he was wont; till at
lenght he won credit, and they believed in him, and S. Thomas cried out,
Dominuus meus and Deus meus. My lord, and my God. A passage, which shows most
clearly the most tender care and love of Jesus; and how blind and wretched all
mortals are without him; Sine quo nihil possumus facere. Without whom we
can do nothing; Finally redoubling his Pax vobis, peace be to you, and
breathing upon them, he said; Accipite Spiritum sanctum, Receive ye the holy
ghost. With full power to forgive sins: and presently bestowed upon them the
dignity of Apostles; Sicut misit me Pater, and Ego mitto vos. As my Father has
sent me, I also do send you. Where observe, that our good God to show the
franknes and freeness of his gifts, bestows them then upon us, when we are
least disposed and most unworthy of them; as it now happened to his weak
disciples.

Conclude first, never to rely upon thy own strenght or worth; for nothing
more stops the current of God's bounty and mercy: next to be ever most
prompt to his holy visits and inspirations, which way soever they come, from
friend or foe: o how many admonitions of his do we let slip every day: and
esteem them either as not from God, or as not made to us?

4. Consider fourthly, how as our B. Lady was the first in love and
consequently in sorrow for her Sons passion and death; so doubtless was she
the first in the visits and joys of his resurrection. The dolorous Virgin,
after the burial of her Son, had retired her self into her private Oratory
with heavy heart and flowing tears, for the loss and absence of her beloved;
yet with a most firm faith and undaunted hope of his resurrection the third
day. O how did she count the days, the nights, the hours, the minutes?
especially toward the Sunday-morning, how did she labor with her cries to
raise this sleeping Lion; with, Exurge gloria mea, exurge Psalterium? Arise my
glory, arise Psalter? when behold, her dearest Lord, her God, her Son, full
of glory, full of splendor and majesty, and no less full of love and
sweetness, enters in upon her, and salutes her by the name of loving, dear and
gracious Mother, behold thy only Son in the Eternal robes of glory, never
more to suffer, never more to die, Et mors illi vltra non dominabitur? Death
shall no more have dominion over him; and withal he embraces her in his arms:
o my soul, where will thou begin? or what can'est thou fancy or conceive of
these joys, jubilees, embraces, looks, kisses and soliloquies of our Jesus
and Mary? o how, Secundum multitudinem dolorum consolationes laetisicant animam
eius? According to the multitude of griefs does consolations make her soul
joyful? conceive what thy devotion affords, for all words lose here their
signification.

Conclude with new joy in thy heart and countenance, with new
congratulations to thy Lady and Mistres In hoc Festo gaudiorum eius: in this
feast of her joy: if thou find not thy heart really ioyed and comforted; look
back and thou vvilt find the reason to be, because thou were not feelingly
sorry in her griefs and afflictions: and both proceed of want of true love.

5. Consider fifthly, how our glorious Savior came not alone and
unaccompanied to visit his mother; but like a Conqueror of death and hell, or
like vvealthy Jacob returning from Mesopotamia, cum duabus turmis Limbi and
Purgatorij, with twotroopes of Limbus and Purgatory, all now blessed and
glorious souls: and yet all prostrate themselves before the Queen of glory,
with great reverence, humble thanks, and joyful congratulations; reverence
to the dignity of her person, thanks for the great share she bore in the
work of their redemption, and congratulations for the common joy of their
Redeemers Resurrection; in which also she bare the chiefest part. Behold
first old Adam and Eve blushing yet almost for their fault, and blessing this
their daughter, which had turned their Eva Eve into Aue: All hail: see next
old Abraham, Moses, David and Isaias, with all the troops of Patriarks,
Judges, Kings and Prophets, all with their diverse salutations and greetings,
but with one love and respect: lastly but not last in vvorth or place, comes
her dearest spouse S. Joseph, John Baptist, old Simeon etc. neither may we
think that the presence and music of Angels was vvanting, which vvanted
not in the stable of Bethlem: finally all is bliss, joy, and heavenly jubilees.

Conclude to enter in last of all, and prostrate at the feet of thy Sovereign
Lady give her the para bien with a Regina coeli laetare alleluya: Rejoice thou
queen of heaven alleluia: happy thou if thou can get admittance into such a
Paradise: learn humility and purity, for these are the two keys that give
entrance to the Palace, where Jesus and Mary live.

THE SECOND CHAPTER, Of the Divine perfections or Attributes of God.
THE great S Denis assigns two manners or ways of considering the Divinity,
and its attributes; the one he calls the way of affirmation, the other of
negation: the affirmative way places in God all the imaginable perfections of
his creatures; but the way negative denies, and takes off from God all the
conceits and words of creatures, as short and unworthy of him. The first way
is compared to that of a painter, the second, of a caruer.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of the knowledge of God by affirmation.
1. COnsider first, that to frame in our understanding an image or Idea of God
Almighty, we must proceed, as a painter uses to do, when he intends to
paint or draw any perfect image or picture: for first, he seeks our from all
parts, tempereth and prepares the purest and rarest colors of all sorts, that
he can; then with his best skill and finest pensill lays them on upon a
smooth table, until by little and little he bring his intended work to
perfection. So must we, casting the eyes of our consideration through out this
whole visible world, gather up all the rare colors or perfections, the
divine providence and goodness has imprinted in it; and with curious labor
lay them upon the table of our understanding; to-vvit the cho^cest perfections
of all creatures, without the dross and imperfections, that run mixed in
them. And we shall find a double Idea of our greatest God; the one, In ordine
ad se; in relation to himself; Tovvit that he is, a subsistent being, life,
beatitude, eternity, goodness, beauty, wisdom, power, sanctity etc. the
other, In ordine ad creaturas, in relation to creatures; a Creator, Conseruer,
Governor. Father, King, Savior, Glorifier etc. and all these most refined,
most pure in him, without the least imperfection.

Conclude with reflection upon this Idea of thy God, thou have framed, and give
him a double homage, the one of praise due to his greatness; the other of
thanksgiving, due to his goodness; and raise thy heart to an ardent
contemplation of both in one, for in him all is but one.

2. Consider secondly, and raise thy thoughts a degree higher; for this first
draught is but gross and corpulent: seek out therefore with thy
understanding all the celestial and supernatural gifts of grace and glory of
all the Angels and Saints both of heaven and earth; the soaring wits of
C^erubins, the flaming breasts of Seraphins, the longanimity of the Prophets,
the power and vigor of the Apostles, the fortitude of Martyrs, the purity of
Uirgins, the patience of Confessors etc. but above all, what perfections
soever are contained in the two modells or abridgements of the divinity; towit
in the humanity of Christ and his B. Mother; ruminate and pause on as many of
them, as thou can; and at length looking up from whence these rivers flow,
thou shall find that great and boundles Ocean of the Divinity, flowing and over
flowing Totius faciem Paradist; the face of all Paradise; concentricating in
the indivisible point of his own being, the quintessence of those perfections,
which his liberal goodness has dispersed: where again no imperfection has
admittance; and the excess so great, that hence our B. Savior said, Nemo
bonus uisi solus Deus. None is good, but only God.

Conclude to contemplate this second Idea of thy God with humility, reverence
and love: whatsoever thou find admirable in the Saints, raise up thy soul,
and admire it in Gods whatsoever virtue thou love in the Saints, love and
seek it in God; A quo omne bonum descendit. From whom all good descends.

3. Consider thirdly, how Deus est illud, quo maius cogitari non potest; God is
that, then which nothing can be thought greater; nothing higher, seeing
therefore, that man's understanding can mount to conceive him every way
infinite, every way immense, without end or limitation, it follows that he
is really so in himself; for otherwise man's capacity would be greater, than
the Being of God; that is, the brook higher than the springs the cre^^ure
greater, than the Creator. Hence it follows that his Being is infinite,
independent of al^, and all depending of him: that he is eternal without
beginning or end, variety or mutability: that his greatness is immensity,
comprehending heaven and earth, like a granie of sand, and he comprehended of
none: that his marefty is terror it self, in whose presence the earth does
quake, and the pillars of heaven do tremble: that his power is ommpotency,
doing what he please, and his evil resisted by none: that his justice is in
rigor infinite, not sparing his dearest friends, nor highest Seraphins, if
they offend him: finally, Vsquequaque magnificus, terribilis; and quis poterit
stare in conspectu Dei huius? On all sides magnificent and terrible, and who
can stand in the sight of this God?

Conclude to live in perpetual fear and trembling of so great a Majesty:
never dare to appear before him, but with thy knee, head and heart cast to
the ground: o poor worm:! how dare we lift our eyes before such
Soueraigne^y? or our hands against omnipotency? Consige, Domine, timore tuo
carnes meas. Pearse my slesh, o Lord, with thy sear.

4. Consider fourthly out of the same principle, the more lovely and
delightful attributes of our good God; and thou shall find them all, I may
well say, more then infinite: infinite is his wisdom, to whose sight are
present all possible things; infinite his providence, stretching from the
highest Angel to the smallest leaf, that falls from the tree: infinite his
truth ^^verity, impossible either to deceive or be deceived: infinite his
amorous and radiant beauty, on which feed and surfeit all creatures, and he
himself: his riches and glory have no bound, Gloria and diuitiae in domo eius:
Glory and riches in his house: his sanctity more clear, then a thousand
Chrystals: his clemency, benignity, nobleness, liberality etc. Quibus maius
cogitari non potest. Then vnhich greater can not be imagined. But his goodness,
his sweetness, his love; his mercy, Super omnia opera etus; above all his
works; infinitely surmounting all imaginations: his goodness it is, that
makes him pour himself out so upon his creatures, Et solemn suum facit oriri
super bonos and malos: and makes his sun to rise upon Good, and bad; his
sweetness it is, that rauisheth the souls of all, that treat with him: his
love it is, that cherishes his little one more than the tenderest Fathers or
mothers: his mercy it is, that so often forgiueth, and so patiently suffers all
sort of sins and iniquities: finally our God is Undique speciosus and totus
desiderabilis. Most beautiful, and most to be desired.

Conclude to pour thy heart forth in the love of so, both lovely and loving a
God: hate what he hates, that is, all sin and impurity: love what he
loves, that is, all virtue and sanctity.

5. Consider fifthly, how having brought into this Idea of thy God all the
refined perfections of nature, grace, and glory; and placed in all these an
infinite eminency, Qua mayor cogit ari non potest; then which a greater can
not be imagined; yet thou art infinitely short, of what God is in himself;
and therefore strive no further with conceits or inventions; but reflect and
behold at leisure, and as it were at a stand, the picture thou have already
framed: as simple men use to gaze at a sight, they understand not: behold, I
say, and gaze with humble simplicity on this vast Ocean of Majesty, of
greatness, of beauty, of sweetness, of power. of wisdom, of soueraignety etc.
and presently opening: all the wings of thy affection, pour forth thy soul in
love, praise and joy: love, my soul, this Summum bonum, this chiefest good,
this vnicum amabile; this only thing to be loved: and seek no more abroad by
scantlings, what here thou have and may still enjoy altogether: praise, my
soul, this sole object of praise and honor; inuit all the Quires of Angels
and Saints to sing Canticum nouum Domino; A new Canticle to our lord; and
answer thou with a lowly Amen: rejoice and congratulate with him, that he is,
as he is, every way insinite, every way boundless in his perfections.

Conclude carefully to preserve in thy heart and memory this lively image of
thy God; let neither sin blot it ever out of thy heart; nor vain fancyes of
creatures blemish or obscure it in thy memory: Intus est bonum tuum, ne foris
queras. Thy good is vvhithin thee seek it not without.

6. Consider sixthly, or rather conclude out of the former considerations, to
harken to and follow the counsel of our B. Savior; Perfecti estore sicut
Pater vester caelestis perfectus est: Be you perfect, as also your heavenly
Father is perfect: and of his Apostle; Vt simus imitatores Dei sicut filij
charissimi. That we may be followers of God as mest dear children. We have
seen how our great God does with infinite advantage fill up all the names and
titles, we can give him; so that when we call him good, wise, powerful etc.
he is not only fully, but infinitely good, wise, and powerful: thus in
proportion may and must we comply with the names and titles we bear,
either of subjection or superiority. God is our Creator, our Father, our
Governor, our Master; hence we must alvvayes bear him the subjection of a
creature, the love and obedience of a son, the duty of a vassal, the
vvillingnes and promptnes of a disciple: again, what command we bear over
others, as of a Father, a Superior, a Master, a Prelate, let our first and
chiefest care be to comply entirely with what those names signify and oblige
us to, finally whatsoever denominations we have or pretend, of equality,
fellovv-ship, or cohabitation with others, or of any virtuous state and
calling we profess, consider and ponder well, what they import, and either
cast them of, or make a firm purpose to fill them up, not Nomi ne tenus, in
name only, and blast of a sound only, but Reipsa and veritate: in realitie:
bearing ever before thy eyes the pattern and Idea of thy most perfect, holy and
immortal God.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the knowledge of God by negation.
1. COnfider first, these words of the great S. Denis; In diuinis negationes
sunt verae, affirmationes incompactae. VVhiles we speak of God, negations are
true affirmations incompacted. We have follovved hitherto the way of the
painter, and added colors to colors of the rarest perfections of all
creatures; but raising our soul to a higher pitch of contemplation, and
reflecting on the Idea, we have made, we find it Prorsus incompactam; all
together incompacte: so full of created shadovvs, spots and blemishes, that
we are yet afraid to acknovvledge it for the true pourtraiture of that
incomprehensible Majesty: not but that the pureness and quintessence of the said
perfections is really and substantially in God; but that, both as they are in
creatures and also in our weak understandings, they are most short and
unworthy of his insinite Greatness; and consequently the very names unfitting to
be attributed unto him: so that the said holy Doctor concludes; Dei, inquit,
neque est sensus, neque phantasia, neque opinio, neque nomen, neque sermo. We
can attain, qnoth he, to the knowledge of God neither by corporal sense,
fantasy, opinion, name or speeth. What way then, or what remedy have we?
shall we add the superlatiue degree, and use the epitheton of super; more as
superbonissimus, superiustissimus, supersubstantia etc. More then most good,
more then most just, more then substance etc. it is true, this way is very good
and higher than the former; but yet being an affirmative, it is ever
incompacted, and carfieth some taint of a creature with it, and so fails to
express fully the Divinity.

Conclude, since thou have lost as it were thy former Idea, in qua tibi adeo
complacuit, in which thou have been soevvell pleased, to humble thy self, and
with lowest submission to adore him, whom thy weak sight cannot behold;
neither let this trouble thee; but rejoice rather, that thy God so surmounteth
all thy imagination.

2. Consider secondly, how failing of our aim in the way of a painter, our
next step is to imitate the caruer or statuarie, and by negation to cut of from
God Almighty all the persections, conceits and words of creatures, how
complete soever they seem to be: so that, as we are bound to say that God is
neither sun, nor moon, nor star, nor fire, nor air, nor man, nor any
other living thing of those here amongst us, by reason of the imperfection
which those words import; so we may also freely say, that he is neither,
Ens, nec substantia, nec vita, nec intellectus, nec bonitas, nec sapientia, nec
potentia, nec pulchritudo etc. Neither being nor substance, nor life, nor
understanding, nor goodness, nor wisdom, nor power, nor beauty etc. If
we consider the said perfections, as they are apprehended by us, or expressed
in our homely language; for as S. Thomas teaches, all our conceits and words,
of what kind soever, Afferunt secum imperfectionem, vel partis, si sint
abstracta; vel compositionis, si sint concreta; Bring with them an
imperfection, either of part, if they be abstracts, or composition if they be
compounds; and so both vvayes incompacted and incompetent to God: but if we
will consider the said perfections as they be solely in God, so they are far
surpassing the sphere Conceptuum and nominum nostrorum, of our co^ceipts and
names.

Conclude with an humble acknowledgement of Gods vnconceiued greatness; and cry
out with holy Job. Ecce Deus vincens scientiam n^stram: Behold a God exceeding
our knowledge: open all the affections of thy soul, to admiration, joy, love,
and praise; for this way shall we sooner comprehend him, than by any force of
wit or curious speculation; love reaches further than knowledge.

3. Consider thirdly, how thou art come at length so far in the quest or
search of God, that thou have altogether lost him; and if one should ask us;
what finally God is, if he be nothing of all those things we apprehend? we
must needs answer, that truly we know not. Neither must we therefore be
diffident or discomforted; for that we shall find by a feeling experience,
we know more, and conceive more sublimely of our great God, by this way of
ignorence, than by all the metaphysicall and quaint conceits of our
understanding: although we lose our sight in the sun, yet even blinded we
see as in a cloud the vvonderfull excess of light he has over all others:
this is the Nebula in qua habitat Deus; the cloud which God inhabiteth; and in
which Moses conuersed with him so familiarly Facie ad faciem, sicut solet
amicus cum amico suo; Face to face as a friend is wont to do with his
friend: which S. Paul calls Lucem in accessibilem, light not accessible, and
S. Denis, The^l^giam mysticam, mystical divinity, or cognitionem Dei per
ignorantiam: the knowledge of God by ignorance: o happy ignorance, and clear
blindness! nay we have words also fitly expressing this our ignorance; as
infinite, immenses ineffable, invisible, incomprehensible etc. which by
removing from God all the imperfections of creatures, leave him in the
aforesaid cloud and inaccessible light.

Conclude with humble prostration to adore the divine and inaccessible Majesty
of thy God: but with thy face covered and eyes shut, as the Seraphins do;
that is, in suspension, admiration, love, joy, praise and content, that the God
thou do believe and trust in, is so great, so far surmounting all the
understanding of men and Angels.

4, Consider fourthly the infinite distance or disproportion which is betwixt
God Almighty and any one of his creatures, or of all together: God is Ens a se,
that is every way subsistent and independent; Eus immensum, immense, including
all without extension; Ens aternum, eternal, without beginning, end, or
change: take now on the other side all this inferior and celestial globe, how
vast soever it seems, together with the whole Angelical nature; and first,
what is all but Ens ab alio, an insubsistent entitie, hanging and depending In
tribus digitis Dei, potentia, scientiae, and bonitatis? Of the tree fingers of
God, to wit power, knowledge, and goodness? so that if any one of these
slip, in an instant all falls into nothing: secondly all is, Ens limitatum;
limitated, greater far is a star to heaven, a drop to the Ocean, a sand to
the earth, than is all together to the immensity of our great God: finally all
is, Ens momentaneum, mometarie, compared to his Eternity, millions of ages, and
Aeuum Angelicum, an Angels d^ration, is but the twinkling of an eye, a moment,
an instant to his indivisible and every way permanent duration. Come now proud
man, and compare thy self with God: Quota pars how little a part art thou of
this universe, in being, in extension, in darance? not a moat in the Sun, not
a grain of sand, not an instant of an instant of durance: what art thou then
to Ens subsistens, immensum, aeternum? A subsi^tent, immease, and eternal
entitie? say truly and say, Non ens. Nothing,

Conclude, that as the best way of knovving God, is that of negation, so the
best way to know thy self, is an other negation: wherefore as thou have
removed from God all positive and affirmative words or denominations, Propter
excessum; by reason of his excess, so remove the same from thy self, Propter
defectum: by reason of thy deficiencie: And be confident, that this is the
only way to unite these two extremes together, God and thy self.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of the Divine Benefits.
OUR love to interest is so great, that we love no man so easily, as him who
is our benefactour: hence the consideration of the Divine benefits is with us
the greatest motive to the love of God; as also the best remedy against
ingratitude, a monster that stops the liberal hand of God from doing good,
and dries up the fountaine-head of his Goodness, from which flow all the
rivers of Paradise.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of Gods goodness toward his Creatures.
1. COnsider first how Bonum est diffusiuum and communicatiuum sui; Good is
communicatiue of it self: God therefore being sum bonus, most good, does
communicare seipsum sum, most communicate himself; that is, all vvayes
possible to his infinite wisdom, and the capacity of creatures; and more to
that which is Magis bonum fieri. To participate more. And here we must
observe three vvonderfull excellencies of this divine and unlimited goodness:
the first is, that although to do good be most natural to him yet it is also
most frank and free, without any necessity or coaction, but merely Quia
vult, because he will: the second is, that he does it, without any self
respect or proper interest, but purely, as we say, to do good; for neither
can any creature yield him profit, not he himself any way better himself,
being in himself every way full and infinite: and this is, Deum omnia facere
propter solam bonitatem suam: that God does all things for no other reason then
is own goodness; that is, his own nature only, which is Goodness, moves
and inclines him to do good. The third excellency is, that he does all good,
where and whensoever he can; o how he watches all occasions, and
opportunities to pour forth his blessings upon us, and as it were to
discharge his swollen breast and full hands amongst us? and o how little do
wordlings look upward, prepare or make themselves capable, of those blisses,
which, if they but open, would fall into their mouths?

Conclude to make thy self capable of all, by taking awayy the obstacle of
sin, and by an ardent desire of them, for only these two things are
requisite and suffice. Be good also, that is, imitate thy God in all these
three ways; do good to all frankly and freely, for God's and goodness sake
only; seek out all occasions for it, expect not they should knock, nay break
down thy doors before thou admit them in.

2. Consider secondly, that as, Ex font Paradisi egrediebantur quatuor fluuij,
Out of the spring of Paradise. Issued sour rivers, dividing themselves into
the four parts of the world; so Ex font huius bonitatis diuinae, out of the
spring of this divine goodness, proceeds the perfection of the whole
universe, divided into four degrees of being, Corporeum, vegetatiuum,
sensitiuum, intellectuum: Corporal, vegetative, sensitive, intellectiue: as
first, the vast heavens, elements, and mixts; secondly, the trees, plants, and
flowers; thirdly, all sort of beasts, birds and fishes; fourthly, all the
Angelical Quires and Hierarchies. Pause a while and consider the greatness,
and variety of natures and qualities of every degree, and yet the concord and
harmony of all together: and then reflect upon thy self, o man, and thou
shall find thy self none of all those; but an abstract, and abridgement of all
together; a Microcosme or lesser world; upon whom therefore the divine
goodness has more copiously poured it self out, then upon any other of his
works; Cui dedit esse cum inanimatis, viuere cum plantis, sentire cum
animalibus, intelligere cum Angelis. To whom he has given to exist with
inanimate creatures, to live with plants, to exercise his corporal senses
with living creatures, to understand with Angels; and consequently man only
is capable of all the benefits, gifts, and blessings, both corporal and
spiritual, which God's goodness, propt by omnipotency, can bestow upon the
universe; for to every one of the other degrees somevvhat is vvanting. What
follovveth then, but that man alone is as much bound as all the rest together,
and more than any one, to thank, praise, and love the fountain from whence
he flovveth.

Conclude to do so, and be no more unmindful or ungrateful: but return him
also four sorts of love: Ex toto cord, from thy whole heart, for thy
corporal being: Ex tot a anima, with thy vhole soul, for thy vital being:
Ex omnibus viribus, with thy whole power, for thy sensitive being: Ex tota
denique mente, lastly with thy whole mind, for thy Angelical and spiritual
being. Tandem ex omnibus simul propter omnia simul: and at last with all
together for all together: that is, for thy self, who art all.

3. Consider thirdly, how the bottomless goodness of our God not satisfied
with bestovving upon us the gifts of nature, pours forth streams of an
higher quality; and those also four, by which we participate the very
being, nature and substance of God. The first is that of Grace, to which is
adjoined charity with all the gifts of the holy Ghost. By this Grace, we
that by nature are nothing but slaves and Massa damnata, A condemned Mass, are
truly made the friends and sons of God; Diuinae consortes natura, partakers
of the divine nature: and heirs of heaven. The second is that of glory, by
which we are eternally deified, and penetrated by the divine essence, as hot
iron by fire; and herein consists our incommutable joy, bliss and content.
And these two are common to men and Angels: but now, leaving Angels, behold
how he exalts man, Et deliciatur cum filijs hominum; and delights to be with
the Sons of men: The third degree is that of the personal union of the Son
of God with humane nature, by which it is most true, that God is man, and man
is God; and so our nature mounted beyond all that is created. But is this the
height, the Non plus vltra, and utmost, of this endless Ocean of goodness?
truly no, for being to her self infinite, ^he is not satisfied with her
union to one only man, unless she do also spread her self to all and every
one; that is, In infinitum extensiue; with an illimitated extension: and this
she does in the most B. Sacrament, which is the fourth degree, where the true
being and natures divine and humane, are really and alike given to every one,
great and small.

Conclude, o my soul, with an ecstasy of admiration, love and thanks giving;
Redeant flumina, vnde exierunt; exierunt per bonitatem, redeant per
gratitudinem; Let the floods return from whence they flovved, they fl^vved by
goodness^, let them return by gratitude; love was the origin of all, let
another love reduce them to their origin.

4. Consider fourthly, before we come to more particulars, these three
circumstances common to all God's benefits great and small. The first is, who
is he that bestows so freely his blessings upon us; for the dignity of the
giver does much increase the estimation of the gift; let a King give but a toy,
or trifle, what esteem, brags and boasts are made of it. But our benefactour
is no less than the infinite Majesty of our Sovereign God, whom all
creatures adore with ttembling, and think themselves happy if he vouchsafe
but a glance of his eye upon them: what value then must his invaluable benefit
be of? The second is, on whom so great a Lord bestows so rich gifts; and
thou shall find him to be man, that is, by nature a poor and vile worm, by
sin an enemy, and by ingratitude a monster, a viper, gnawing out the bowels
of the divine Goodness; nay using the very benefits as instruments to offend the
Benefactour. The third is the manner; that is, no merit or desert on our side,
but rather obstinate and perverse vndeserts; but on God's side an infinite
liberality, franknes, sweetness and love, vvairing on all occasions to do us
good; vvishing us ever capable of more and more: finally ever striving Vincere
in bono suo malum nostrum. To surpass our wickedness in his own goodness.
O what heart so hard, as cannot love such love? or so ungrateful, as can
forget such goodness? or so shameless, as can spurn at such a benefactour?

Conclude with love, with gratitude, with shame for thy hitherto neglect, or
rather blindness in all: settle well these three circumstances in thy memory;
of, by whom, to whom, and how the benefit is done; and thou shall never
want matter of reverence, humility and gratitude.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the benefit of our Creation.
1. COnsider first, that what is nothing can both do and deserve nothing; thou
therefore; that so many years ago were nothing, could never have made thy
self, nor deserve that an other should make thee: by whom therefore, and why
came I to this something? by thy God and Creator; not for any necessity he or
the world had of thee, but out of his mere bounty and liberality. Ponder, o
my soul, if thou can, the distance that is, first betwixt something and
nothing, Ens and non ens; next the advantage, that man has above all other
insensitiue and senstiue creatures; and thou shall find the first to be
infinite, and the second little less; as far as immortality exceeds
mortality, eternity short time, or reason gross sense. And then fall down
and kiss the feet of thy bounteous Creator, who has made thy something an
intellectual and immortal being, and imprinted in thy face the true image of
himself. Behold what a stately Castle thy body is, both for beauty and
strength; the rare proportion and harmony every member, joint and nerve keeps
with one another and with the whole: then thy soul, a most beauteous Lady and
all-commanding Empress, ruling and governing the whole Microcosme as she
pleases. Finally, God has given thee both these sound and entire, Mentem
sanam in corpore sano. A sound mind in a sound body.

Conclude, besides thy customary thanks and gratitude, to look upon whose
image thou art, and return Quae sunt Dei Deo, The things that are Gods, to
God, that is, all that thou art, body and soul; begging also, Vt perficiat in
nobis opus quod operatus est. That he would accomplish in us that work which
he has wrought.

2. Consider secondly the end for which God at first created man; and thou
shall find a two fold end, both most noble and excellent, the one natural,
the other supernatural; the first is expressed in Genesis, Vt praesit piscibus
maris, and volatilibus caeli, and bestijs, vniuersaeque terrae, omnique reptili
quod mouetur in terra: That he might have dominion over the fishes of the sea,
and the fowls of the air, and the beasts, and the whole earth and all
creeping creatures that move upon the earth: That is, to be grand Lord and
Sovereign of all that is created, to kill, slay and use all as he pleases:
and although by sin he has lost much of the obedience which creatures owe
him, in punishment of his disobedience toward the common Creator; yet his
dominion and right is the same, and the most of creatures do willingly and
obediently serve him: great certainly is this dignity and worthy of all
gratitude, were it not so surmounted by the second and principal end: which
is to be heir apparent of the Kingdom of heaven: that is, to see God, love
God, and praise God in company of all his blessed Angels, to live in his
house, sit at his table, eat of the same dish that he does, drink of the same
cup of glory, and wear the same robe of immortality with him: this was
his first intention, this still his greatest desire, that all men should
attain unto: for this he made our soul so spacious, so capacious, that
nothing under God can ever fill or satisfy her appetite: for this he
continually gives his grace and assistance; so that Culpa sua perditur,
quicunque perditur. Whosoever is lost, is lost through his own fault.

Conclude two things, the one, to conserve entirely thy dominion over
creatures; let none command thee, nor thy affections, but thy Creator: the
other, to have and conceive noble and high thoughts; aim at nothing less then
God; esteem earth and heaven without him below thy ambition, and not worthy
of thy acceptance.

3. Consider thirdly, that as God created man for himself, that is to enjoy
him as his last end; so he created all the rest from heaven downward for man
only, for his necessity, commodity, recreation: for neither he, nor his
Angels stand in need of any of these things. Look then about thee, and see
whatsoever is in heaven, air, sea, or earth; and thou shall find all
conspiring to thy sustenance, commodity or delight; and therefore thy fatherly
God made and created them all before man, that all might be ready at his first
entrance to receive, serve, and churish him; every one with his several
dishand liuerie: and when thou have well pond^red this in every particular,
then list up thy eyes a little higher, and behold, the love, the care, the
solicitude, as we may torme it, with which sty de^rest Father prepares and
furnishes this great palace f^^ thee; not by any inferior steward, but with
his own hand Plantauit Paradisum veluptatis: he planted a Paradise of
pleasure: o see him, my soul, with admiration and vvonder, how he pondereth
and vvergheth every thing in particular, as he makes it; the heaven with it is
lights; Et vidit quod esset bonum; and he savv that it was good; the earth
with it is fruits and beasts; Et vidit quod esset bonum; and he savv that it
was goed; the are and sea with all the foul and fish therein; Et vidit quod
esset bonum: and he savv that it was good; finally, when all was finished,
with a new reflection he considered all together; Viduqueue cuncta quae fecerat
and erant valde bona, and he savv all things which he had made and they where
very good, for the use, to wit, and pleafure of man, for whom they were
created.

Conclude two things, the one to make use of creatures, as God has created
them; that is, so far as they conduce or further thee in the service of God:
the second to do with like love and diligence all things, which any way
tend to his honor and service.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of the benefit of our Conservation.
1. COnsider first, that Conservation is nothing less than a continual
Creation, a per^etuall sustaining of the being, once given; and consequently an
action of the same power, wisdom and goodness, as the first creation; but
more to be esteemed and gratified, by how much more it is, to give continually
the same thing, than to give it but once: by how much more it is to preserve
one every moment from salling back into nothing, than to draw him but once out
of nothing. Ponder here a little, my soul, the boundless goodness of our
greatest God and Father. The whole machine of all that is created depends
more on the least beck of his will, than does the shade on the body, or the
light on the sun: let him but stop one moment his concourse, and in the same
moment, if not sooner, all whatsoever from the highest Angel to the lowest
atome of the sun, will fade and vanish, not into dust, but into nothing:
yet, notwitstanding this, and the infinite offenses which daily provoke him,
he could never find in that his sweetest heart to annihilate the least
creature, he has made; but sustaineth all in their being; and most patiently
expects sinners, when they will return unto him: o see how he has
protected thee in thy Mothers womb, in thy infancy, in the whole course of
thy life to this instant: see how he has followed thee, when thou runnest
from him to thy own ruin: how he bore with thee, when thou most impudently
did provoke him to thy destruction, etc.

Conclude two things: the first is a continual and most profound humility Sub
potenti manu Dei: under the powerful hand of God: the next is a fear; but
let it be filial, to offend so dread a Sovereign, jointly with so dear a
Father; In quo semper viuimus, mouemur, and sumus. In whom we always live,
move, and be,

2. Consider secondly, that all creatures not only depend of God for their
life and being, but also for every action, thought, word, and deed they do;
for every twinkle of the eye, every breath they draw; for none of all these can
once be done without the immediate and special concourse and assistance of
God; nay from him all must first begin, and without him cannot end; Ipse enim
dat incipere and persicere: For the origin and accomplishment of each work is
his Gift: so that at the very instant, that God should withdraw or stop his
helping and concurring hand, all things in the world, how strong, how swift
soever, would suddenly stop and stand like a marble statue, immovable: this
being most true. see then and behold if thou can, the infinite wisdom and
power of thy Creator, extending himself at once to all the actions and
motions of the whole universe; Nam nec folium in terram cadit sine Patre
vestro; For a lease does not fall upon the ground without your Father, yet all
with that quietness and facility, as if he had but one thing or rather nothing
to do; Omnia mouens, immobilis ipse: moving all things he remains immouible:
but his goodness, who can admire and praise enough? so ready, so punctual, so
constant, that he never yet has failed his astistance to the least of his
creatures, as if he were Causa prorsus coacta and necessaria: a cause
altogether forced, and necessary: see in thy self, if ever thou have sound
him vvanting to the least motion of thy finger, or breath of thy nostrills,
ever since thou vvast conceived to this instant; nay in those very actions, by
which thou did heavily offend him.

Conclude with shame in thy face and confusion in thy heart, to see how
little thou do concur with the motions and inspirations of thy God; who
is so punctual with thee; how little thou follovvest his will, who has as
it were tred himself to thine: o my soul, let it be otherwise for love or
shame.

3. Consider thirdly, how thy good God held it not sufficient for the
conservation of man, that the whole corporal frame of this world should
attend and serve him, as the heavens with all the planets, the air, earth and
sea with all belonging to them: but his command and pleasure also is that his
Angels guard and defend him: Omnes quoth S. Paul, administratorij spiritus
sunt, missi propter eos qui haereditatem capiunt salutis. They are all
mimstring spirits, sent for them which shall receive the inheritance of
salvation. O who can vvorthly conceive or acnowledge so great a benefit? so
sweet a providence? that such noble Princes by nature grace, and glory, the
immediate attendants before the throne of the most B. Trinity, Courtiers of
those Eternal Palaces, Et commensales Dei, cating at the same table with
God, and feeding on the same food with their Creator should be sent down as
Guardians to so poor a worm as man? o man! how can thou ever harbor a
thought of pride over thy fellows, if thou ponder well the abasement of these
Celestial spirits to thy service? Every Kingdom then has his special
Guardian; so has also every common wealth, Province, City, Church, College,
Monastery, Community: so has every King Prince, Governor, and Prelate:
final so has eucry particular man from the highest to the lowest, from the
Court to the gallie; from the instant of his birth to the seat of judgment;
ever present, ever by his side, protecting him from his raging enemy, the
devil, and procuring for him all good possible.

Conclude, whereas God has appointed all treatures of thy service and
assistance, to return thy self and all to him and his service, by love and
obedience; but let it be thoroughly. Toium pro toto: all for all: break not
thou the order of the universe, which is; Vt omnia vestra sint, vos autem
Christ, Chri^tus autem Dei. That all might be yours and you Christ's and
Christ's Gods

4. Consider fourthly the words of the Psalm; Angelis suis Deus maudanit de te
vt custodiant te: o quantam, quoth S. Bernard tibi debet hoc verbum infer
reverentiam, afferre deuotionem, confer fiduciam; reuerentiam pro praesentia,
deuotionem pro beneuolentia, fiduciam pro custodia? God has given his Angels
charge of thee; that they keep thee: o how much reverence ought this word to
strike into thee how much devotion ought it to stir up in thee, how much
confidence should it produce in thee; reverence for the presence of such a
guardian devotion for his Goodvvill, and confidence on his custody? who can
recount the great and innumerable benefits, that every one of us receives,
every hour and minute, from the assistance of our good Angel? Diabolus
tanquam leo rugiens circuit quaerens quem deuoret; the Devil as a roaring lion
goes about, seeking whom he may devour; and from so great power and malice
who can defend us, but our ever present Guardian? when we sleep, he watches
over us; when we wake, he goes with us in all our business, both by sea and
land: when we sin, he sorrovveth; yet leaves us not, but uses all his
endeauours to restore us to the friendship of God: when we do penanes, he
reioiceth, and helps us, when we do, any good or pray, he presents our
works and pesition to the throne of God: final^y at the hour of death, and
at the judgment seat, when the devil is most violent against us, then is our
faithful Guardian most follicitous for us, protecting us at death, and
pleading for us at the bar. Et quid sub tanto custode timeo? fidelis est,
prudens est, potens est, quid trepido? And what do I fear under the
protection of so great a Guardian? he is faithful he is wise, he is
powerful, why do I tremble?

Conclude two things, the first, great reverence, love, and respect to thy
holy Angel; be alvvayes present with him, as he is with thee: consult with
him in all thy business, and follovv his inspirations: the second is, a great
confidence in his patronage; Quoties vrget tent^tio, and. tribulatio immines,
inuoca custodem tu^an, ductorem tuum, adiutorem tuum; inclama eum and dic;
Domine salua nos, perimus. As often as a temptatien urges thee, and any
tribulation is at hand call upon the Guardian thy guider thy helper, inuoke his
aid with, an o lord save us, we perish.

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. Of the benefit of our Redemption.
1. COnsider first, how all manking being lost in the sin of Adam, was
bereaved also of all hope of redress or ever recovering the favor of his
Creator; for the divine justice would no way be satisfied, without an infinite
satisfaction; and that among creatures was no way to be had: so that nothing
remained but a miserable bondage under the devil and sin in this world, and
as certain and sudden a passage to eternal torments in the next: o ponder
this a little with thy self, my soul; and then casting thy eyes up to heaven,
see how little it imported God Almighty or his Angels, whether thou were
saved or damned; neither being more or less blessed by thee, see again how
justly God might have left thee in thy damnation, as he had done the devils;
and what could thou have said to it? or if casting thee of, as he had done
them, he had created some new creature, more loyal in his service, and worthy
of his favor? But suppose, as it was, that out of pure mercy and goodness he
was pleased to forgive thee, and restore thee to his favor; a word, a thought
of his, had it not sufficed? it was sufficient to create both thee and the
world: or could he not have sent an Angel or Seraphin with full power? must
he needs come himself? must he needs send his only Son? O felix culpa, quae
talem meruit habere Redemptorem. O happy sin which has deserved such a
Redeemer.

Conclude with raptures of admiration and love of such goodness, sweetness, and
mercy: next inuit all creatures to thy aid to praise and bless him: lastly
put an higher price upon thy self, than hitherto: sell no more thy soul for
the fleshpots and onyons of Egypt; she is vvorth the life of the Son of God.

2. Consider secondly, how seeing he would come himself in person for man's
redemption, he might have come with the authority, splendor and dignity that
beseemed his sacred and royal person accompanied with all the Powers and
Princes of heaven, received by all the Kings and states of the world; and
with one command of his mouth enforce the Devil to deliver up his prisoners,
and hye himself away to the dungeons of hell; this had been both sufficient
for our redemption, and yet honorable for our Redeemer: o but the divine
justice would have satisfaction which consists In actu aliquo paenoso; In
some painful act: let it be so, and was not I pray, one tear of his, one
sigh, or prick of his finger satisfaction infinite; and consequently
sufficient for a million of worlds? why then such unheard of humility,
poverty, misery, affliction, persecution, shame, and scorn, from his cradle to
his Cross? Quare vir dolorum, and in doloribus a iuuentute mea? Why a man of
sorrows, and in afflictions from my youth? stay a while, my soul, upon this
point, and having pondedered well the effect, look about for the cause: to
do good, bestovv benefits, disperse his blessings amongst his creatures, we
all know it proceeds from his infinite goodness; but for the doing of this, to
suffer in his honor, person and life, as he did, this surpasses all the
bounds of goodness; and has no other cause, but the ouerflovving of his love
even above his goodness.

Conclude to correspond with thy Saviors love, but let it be, first not in
complements, but in real works; next not at thy ease, Saluo, as they say,
labor and honor; without labor or loss of honor; but what sweat or
blood soever it cost thee; and this voluntary also, not only forced.

3. Consider thirdly, how the fountaine-head being full, there vvanted yet the
pipes and conduits to convey the river of grace into our souls: and here also
our Redeemers sweetest providence, at his own charges, without any cost of
ours, provided seven conduits or spouts, all running from the vvell-head of his
passion, full fraught with diversity of heavenly graces, according to the
seuen-fold necessities we are subject to in this life; and all so easy and
facill for us; that of our part nothing is required, but an empty vessel of
good disposition, and the putting our mouth to the conduit; nothing but,
Aperies os tuum, and implebo illud. Open thy mouth and I will fill it.
Consider and see with love and gratitude, o Christian soul, what remedies thy
Christ and Savior has provided for thee: first being borne a slave of the
Devil, by Baptism thou art regenerated a Son of God: but being yet a child,
poor and weak, by Confirmation thou art made a valiant soldier: art thou
faint with hunger and thirst? behold a banquet is prepared for thee, the same
which the Angels and God himself feed on, Comedite and inebriamini amici
mei: Eat and be inebriated, my friends: art thou sick or vvounded to death?
see the medicine of penance every where at hand: art thou assailed by thy enemy
at the hour of death? Extreme unction is proffered thee: so is Order for thy
government, and Matrimony for thy weakness.

Conclude with infinite gratitude to thy Savior, call all the creatures of
heaven and earth to thy aid, Quia nomen Domini laudabo: For I will praise the
name of my lord: osser thy self for his perpetual and domesticke slave, to
serve both him and the children of his family, for him.

THE FIFTH MEDITATION. Of the benefit of our Vocation and Justification.
1. COnsider first, how Gods benefits, as they go on multiplying in number, so
they increase no less in their worth and greatness: what would our creation and
all the rest have auailed us, but to our greater damnation, unless we had been
called, and by Baptism planted in the lap of the Catholic Church? O my soul,
look about thee; and see how many souls were created at the same time with
thee; and how many of them fell among infidells, Jews, Turks or Heretics? nay
thy own fell into a country, where five thousand to one are Heretics; and yet
it has been thy good hap, with a fevv more either to light on Catholic
parents; or which is more, being once plunged in the filth of heresy, to be
povverfully drawn out, and placed in the clear light of the Catholic truth:
o what had become of thee, poor wretch, if thou had been left for ever
an enemy of thy God, a vessel of sin, and a slave to the Devil and
damnation? then see, what thou art by holy Baptism, a Son of God and his
Church, Spouse of the holy Ghost, and fellovv-heire with jesus Christ, of the
Kingdom of heaven. And not only this, but by a special vocation to the
state, thou art in, a domestic servant, In domo Dei, and Jesus Chrisii; in the
house of God, and of Jesus Christ; chosen, not only to save thy self, but
also to cooperate with thy Savior and his Apostles for the salvation of
others, thy brethren, kindred and country.

Conclude with most humble thanks to thy most good and liberal Creator:
conceive a loyal purpose to serve him faithfully, and let thy study be, to
conserve thy self, where thou art, and also to bring others to the same port
of salvation.

2 Consider secondly, how the benefit of justification surpasses yet all the
former, as far as heaven surpasses hell; or the state of grace the foulenes
of sin: let us ponder here three points: first, by the least mortal sin
we lose the white robe of innocence, with all the other titles of grace,
and claims to glory, and fall under the sentence, of eternal damnation:
suppose then thou were scorching in hell fire, as justly thou might be, and
millions of others are for less sins, than thine; and that God, of pure
pity, should end an Angel to free thee thence, and give thee an hours time
for penance; what profound and hearty thanks would thou give him? vhat
unheard of penance would thou give him? what then? did thou think it a
less mercy to be kept from falling into hell, so justly thy due, than to be
drawn out from thence? think on it well, and thou will find it otherwise.
Secondly, all the former benefits come from God freely without any rub on our
sides, but this comes from a God offended to his actual and bitter enemies:
thirdly he must begin the friendship, and inuits us unto it; for we poor
vvretches look neither after him nor our selves, but post on to hell. Ponder,
my soul, these points; and see what father could so often forgive his child, as
thy sweetest God has forgiven thee; sought thee round about the world, and
finding thee at hell door, has brought thee back to his savor and grace.

Conclude with humble sorrovv, and thanks for what is past; and for the
future with love and trembling fear, never dare to provoke thy dear God
more, least at length he let thee slip for ever out of his hand.

THE SIXTH MEDITATION. Of the benefit of Predestination.
1. COnsider first, that although no man's predestination be certain unto him,
yet every one is bound to hope it, as he is bound to hope his own salvation;
this therefore supposed, ponder these three chief points of this benefit: the
first, that not only all other benefits hi^herto specified, were of little
value and short durance without this of predestination; but that all
whatsoever, do flow from this, as from the first source and fountain; and so
by consequence is greater and more to be acknowledged and thanked than all the
rest. The second, that this benefit is not only older than the rest, but as
ancient as Eternity, or God himself; so that when he begot his eldest Son
Jesus Christ, in the same instant he adopted thee for his brother, companion
and fellow-heire of heaven among the Angels and the rest of his Saints: O amor
antiquus! o bonitas aeternal o ancient louel o everlasting goodness! how long
before I was, have thou had me in thy memory? loved me as a father? and
prepared heaven and earth for my habitation? and placed thy dearest Son Jesus
our head, Captain and Prince of this thy Celestial monarchy? O veritas antiqua
quam sero to cognoui? and quam tarde te amaui, bonitas aeterna? o ancient
truth how late have I known the? and how slow have I been in loving thee,
o everlasting goodness? the third, that although, so few are chosen and drawn
out of the general mass of damnation, yet he would have thee to be one of
these few; and why but merely of his own accord, good will and love toward
thee.

Conclude with all the humility, thanks and love thy heart can afford thee:
call upon all thy fellow Elect to thy aid, and making up one quire, begin now
that song of thanks, which here after shall endure for ever, Sub vno capite
Christo Jesus. Under one head Christ Jesus.

2. Consider secondly, that where as no man is certain of his Predestination,
nor, for all he can do, ever shall be in this world; yet many foolishly and
most unprofitably vex themselves about that point, which belongs not to them;
and in the mean while are totally careless and neglectiue in their duty to
God, their neighbor, and themselves; for which they have certain and
express commands; and without the observance of which they may be sure they
shall never be saved; as on the contrary never damned, if they comply with
them: a great temptation of our enemy; but manfully to be repelled by this
consideration: as it is certain, that God ab aeterno from all eternity has
set down and decreed unchangeably our last lot, so it is no less certain,
first that thou shall never want sufficient grace for thy salvation; secondly
that thou shall never be damned, but by thy own fault; and thirdly, that it is
in thy own hand to save thy self, if thou vvilt: all theses howsoever hard to
be explicated, are in them selves as infallibly true and unquestionable, as is
the first of Gods decree, to wit all a like certain by faith. Humbling
therefore our selves to things we understand not: let us leave to God what
belongs to him, and on our parts follow S. Peter's advice, Satagamus vt per bona
opera certam nostram vocationem and electionem faciamus; haec enim facientes
non peccabimus aliquando; Let us labor, that by good works we may make sure
our vocacion, and election: for doing these things we shall not sin at any
time; and without sin we shall never be damned.

Conclude a strong resolution to comply with thy duty in all points; and then
resign thy self totally body and soul to the will of God In tempore and
aternitate; in time and eternity; yet begging of him, that he never permit
thee to offend him: and take these acts for the surest signs of thy salvation.

3. Consider thirdly, that not only all the common benefits of which we have
spoken hitherto, but also the particular, bestowed on this and that man, flow
and proceed in the Elect from that first source of Predestination. Look about
thee therefore, my soul, and consider what thy most loving Father has done
for thee in particular; first in thy natural being, as well what thou have of
good, as what thou want of evil: a body sound and healthy, a soul perfect
in her powers and senses: thy birth of honorable parents, thy education in
corporal sufficiency, and in the school of learning; thy fame unspotted, and
thy honor preserved etc. the evils thou want are without number; see how
many lame, sick, mad, base, unlearned, miserable, disgraced, are in the world;
and so many benefits have thou received, in that thou art neither all nor any
of them: Nullum enim malum vni hominum accidit, quod alteri accidere non
potest. For noe evil happens to one which may not happen to another. Next
the supernatural gifts of grace, how many inspirations, illuminations,
occasions, commodities, examples, counsels, and helps to virtues have thou
received? again how many sins have thou been preserved from, which are
every where daily committed before thine eyes? and whence all this, but from
the sweetness of thy heavenly father? Nullum enim peccatum vnus homo committit,
quod alter committere non potest. For noe sin does one committ which same an
other may not committ. Besides all these, the hidden and unknown benefits as
well natural, as of grace; as well of good, as from evil; no man can count
them, but the giver himself, and yet all stand to our account.

Conclude to return all these benefits from whence they proceeded; that is, to
the honor, love and service of the divine goodness: call on all creatures to
thy aid to praise and bless him for ever; and take heed of abusing the
benefits against the giver.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. Of the Ascension, vvhitsontide, Trinity Sunday, and CORPUS
CHRISTI.
THese four great solemnities make up the period of all our Saniours
oeconomie, from his first coming down from heaven, to his return thither
again; and therefore it behooves all devout souls, to follow and mount with
him in union of spirit, Vbi videbit and affluet and dilatabitur. Where he
shall see and abound, and be enlarged.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of the Ascension of our Savior.
1. COnsider first, how our Blessed Savior, having for the space of forthy
days after his Resurrection daily, and almost hourly visited his dearest
Mother; and repaying her forty hours of grief and sorrow for his death, with
forty days of sweetest joy and heavenly content, he at length appeared unto
her, with new rays of beauty and majesty accompanied with the blessed souls
of her nighest friends and kindred; and after some amorous discourses, as
before his passion, so now again begins to take his leave of her; showing
her both the necessity of his going and also of her staying for the comfort of
his new-growing Church. The heavenly Virgin, as she could not but feel a
glance or two of tenderness and grief for parting with such a Son, so being
most prompt and resigned to his will and pleasure; fell presently, first into
the amorous embraces of a mother with her dearest Son; and then as a creature
at the feet of her Sovereign Lord and maker. See my soul and contemplate, as
far as thou art able, the affections that pass betwixt them; as also the
rest of her friends, who all salute her with lovv reverence, and take their
leave and farevvell.

Conclude to prepare thy self with all diligence possible, that thou may
assist vvorthylie at this great solemnity: and know that the best prepatation
is, purity from sin, and a soul full of love and resignation to the will
of thy Lord and Savior.

2. Consider secondly, how the same day our B. Savior at dinner time appeared
to all his Apostles and disciples; sat down and eat with them; and then
told them, how that day he was to ascend into heaven to his Eternal Father:
and because he savv the hearts of his poor children, no doubt, quite daunted
at such heavy tidings, we may well suppose he repeated again those three
reasons, he alleged in the sermon of the last supper to the same purpose: the
first, Si diligeretis me, gauderetis vtique quia vado ad Patrem, quia Pater
mayor me est. If you loved me you would be glad verily, that I go to my
Father because the Father is greater then I. O svvetest Jesus, who can do
otherwise than heartily rejoice and be glad at thy honor and adnancement,
which thou have bought at so dear a rate? but is not thy going also for our
good, as all the rest of thy life has herherto been? the second; Vado parare
vobis locum, and iterum veniam and accipiam vos ad meipsum: I go to clear the
way, and open heaven gates shut up by sin; then at the hour of your death
will I come, and take you to me, and place you in the eternal mansions. O
memento mei Domine cum veneris in regnum tuum. O remember me, o lord when thou
shall come into thy kingdom. The third; Expedit vobis vt ego vadam; si enim
non abiero, Paracletus non veniet ad vos: si autem abiero, mittam eum ad vos:
It is expedient for you that I go: for if I go not, the Paraclete shall not
come to you: but if I go I will send him to you: now of what importance was
the coming of the holy Ghost, none knevv better than the Apostles, taught by
the late experience of their own weakness.

Conclude with most humble resignation to the will of thy Savior, and
although he order all things for thy good and salvation, yet respect thou
nothing so much, as his honor and content; and therefore rejoice with him in
this triumph of his glorious Ascension.

3. Consider thirdly, how, His dictis, eduxit illos in Bethaniam, in montem
qui dicitur Oliueti; These things being said, he brought them forth into
Bethania, to the mountain which is called elivet; making his choice of the
same place to begin the glory of his triumph, where he had lately begun the
combat of his bitter passion; for Gethsemany lay on the side of mount Oliuet;
to give us to understand, that Nemo coronabitur nisi qui legitime certauerit;
Noe man is crowned, unless he strive lawfully; that is, the field of battle
and triumph is one and the same. But behold our glorious Redeemer, displaying
here himself to his B. Mother and the rest, with new beams of sweetness and
glory, inuiting them in stead of the last embraces and farevvells, one by one
to come and kiss his sacred seet and hands, and suck from those fountains of
Paradise the ever living waters of new graces and comforts: o how did his
dearest mother, and every one of the rest, desire to creep into, and hide
themselves in those Foraminibus petrae; and presently ascend with him to
heaven? when he, Eleuatis manibus, benedixit eis; lifting up to heaven both
those hands nailed on the Cross, and filling them with celestial treasures,
pours them freely out upon them all: o run in my soul and beg thy share of
this benediction; take heed thou come not too late with Esau, and so lose thy
heavenly inheritance for ever.

Conclude, as thou hopest to arrive to mount Oliuet, to behave thy self first
manfully in the garden of Gethsemani, and when thou can thew thy wounds
gotten in the battle, then may thou hope for a speedy and glorious Ascension
with thy Savior, and for a crown of triumph:

4. Consider fourthly, how Dum benediceret eis, recessit ab illis and ferebatur
in caelum, and nubes suscepit eum ab oculis eorum: VVhiles he blessed them, he
departed from them and was carried into heaven, and a cloud received him out of
their sight: not as Elias, raptus curru igneo; taken away in fiery chariot,
but by the power of his divinity raising himself by little and little into the
air, with unspeakable majesty and glory, accompanied with the two troops of
Limbus and Purgatory, and millions of Angels attending and celebrating the
triumph of their Lord and maker: the Virgin mother below with the Apostles and
disciples standing with their eyes fixed vpom him, all amazed and speechles. O
my soul join thy self with them in these three affections that then so
transported their hearts; the first of admiration at a sight so glorious, so
never heard of; next of joy to behold their dearest master to finish all his
past labors, afflictions and sufferings with a Catastrophe of such glory and
triumph; o how happily have we follovved him, and believed in him! how has
he filled and surpassed all our thoughts and expectations? the third of most
ardent desires and sighs to follovv him in body, whose hearts he had ravished
with him, for of this captiuating of hearts are understood those words of the
Psalm; Ascendens in altum captiuam duxit captiuitatem; Alscending on high he
led captivity captive; corporal eyes are but short-sighted, nubes snscepit
cum ab oculis nostris; a cloudpresently receeued him out of our sight; and so
the heart only and affection has the privilege Penetrandi caelos cum
Christo. To penetrate the heavens with Christ.

Conclude with an amorous and humble petition to thy sweetest Jesus; that thou
be ever one of his captives; and that bound unto him Vinculis amoris, with the
bonds of love, thou may mount with him unto the heavens, and ever remain
with him, Vbi sedet ad dexteram patris. Where he sits at the right hand of
the Father.

5. Consider fifthly our Saviors triumphant entrance into heaven; first the
ouerflowing joys and admirations of those thrice happy souls, that went in
his company, when they entered into the vast and glorious orbs of the Caelum
Empyreum, Empyriall heaven. Far different from their old habitation of
Limbus; quam dilecta tabernacula tua Domine virtutum! how beloved are thy
tabernacles, o Lord of hoastes! next the millions of Angels encompassing him
on all sides; some commanding, with, Attollite portas Principes, vestras: lift
up your Gatesye printes: others with admiration, Quis est iste, qui venit de
Edom tinctis vestibus de Bosra: who is this that comes from Edom, with died
Garments from Bosra. and all at length with vnanimoue jubilees; Dignus est
Agnus, qui occisus est accipere virtutem and diuinitatem, laudem, gloriam etc.
The lamb that was slain is vvorthie to receine power, and divinity,
praise, glory etc. But above all the embraces of his Eternal Father, the
vvelcomes he gave him, and finally the honor in placing him at his right hand;
Dixit Dominus Domino meo sede a dextris meis; giving him full power of life and
death, heaven and hell; and Donauit illi nomen quod est super omne nomen, vt in
nomine Jesus omne genu flectatur caelestium terrestrium and infernorum. Our Lord
said to my Lord, sit on my right hand; and has given him a name, which is
above all names, that in the name of Jesus every knee bow of the celestialls,
terrestrialls, and infernalls. Ponder here in silence my soul, as thou art
able, the joy, content and fullnes of thy Redeemers heart, to see himself
mounted from one extreme to another, from the Cross to his Fathers right
hand; from the company of thieves to that of Angels; from the cries and
blasphemies of the Jews to the blisses and praises of all the heavens; from a
crown of thorns, to that of glory and immortality: O quam vere dixisti bone
Jesus, qui se humiliat, exaltabitur? O trvly did thou say, o good Jesus, he
that humbles himself shall be exalted?

Conclude with all the joy and congratulation thy heart can afford thy dearest
Lord: conceive also a new and lively hope of entering one day those heavenly
palaces, whose gates are this day opened for thee: the rise of humility and
the vvings of love will securely and speedily carry thee thither.

6. Consider sixthly how the Virgin Mother with the rest of that holy company
stood still like marble statues, gazing up into heaven after their beloved
master, with their souls full of amazement and joy not able to remove
themselves thence, until two Angels appeared in glorious white, and gave
them this gentie reprehension; Viri Galilaet, quid statis aspicientes in
caelum? Ye men of Galilce, why stand you looking into heaven? your Lord and
master Jesus is now arrived and seated at the right hand of his Eternal
Father, wherefore stand no more here in idle amazement, but go and comply
with the commands he gave you; for we tell you, that one day, Sic veniet,
quemadmodum vidistis eum euntem in caelum: So shall he come, as you houe seen
him going into heaven: partly so, and partly not so; so in majesty and glory;
but not so in office and function: he is gone now full of love and sweetness to
open heaven gates for you; to be your advocate and sollicitour with his and
your Father; to send down the holy Ghost, with all his blessings amongst you:
but then will he come with most dread terror and severity, as Iudex viuorum
and mortuorum, Judge of the living and of the dead, to take an account of all,
sparing no man, that shall be found guilty. Look about you therefore, and
think not, that your Lord is so absent, as if he saw not, what you do; or
would never come any more among you. Et illi quidem adorantes regressi suns in
Jerusalem cum gaudio magno. And they ^loring returned into Jerusalem with
great joy.

Conclude to obey the Angels warning, that is, so to keep our hearts and
thoughts upon Jesus in heaven, as we neglect not our duties and obligations
here on earth; that so we may have him our sweet advocate there, and here
clement and merciful Judge.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the coming of the holy Ghost.
1. COnsider first, the inexhaustible goodness of our great God, first he gave
us our being by his own hand, Faciens hominem rectum; making man right; but
man cast himself into endless slavery and misery: next therefore God gave his
only Son to redeem us out of this thraldom; but we with unheard of
blindness crucified our own Savior: what could be now expected, but a
punishment due unto our malice? when behold our sweetest Father whole
goodness, cannot be abated by our malice, pours down upon us his holy spirit,
the third person of the B. Trinity: like a tender mother, having dried one
breast upon her child, spends and gives the other, as long as a drop will
run. O how is the whole B. Trinity, employed and busied, as, I may say,
about the good and salvation of man; as though it much concerned him? The
Father gives both Son and holy Ghost, and that for ever, Vsque ad
consummationem satuli; even to the consummation of the world; the Son comes
in person, and with his blood redeemeth us; the holy Ghost in person also to
perfect the work of our redemption, and assist in the Church by his divine
illuminations and inspirations.

Conclude to esteem thy soul more, then hitherto thou have done, seeing the
B. Trinity has made so much account of it: take heed of sinning against the
holy Ghost; what is done against the Father and Son may find pardon; but, Qui
peccat in Spiritum sanctum, who sins against the holy ghost, that is,
after so many favors and graces received, Non remittetur ei neque in hoc
saeculo neque in fut uro. It shall not be forgiven him neither in this world,
nor in the world to come.

2. Consider secondly the ends, for which the holy Ghost was sent down upon
the Apostles; and besides many others, we shall find two principal,
specified in holy Scripture: the first was to succeed our B. Savior in the
office of Master and teacher according to that; Ipse vos docebit omnia and
suggeret vobis o^^nia: He shall teach you all things, and suggest unto you all
things: upon which is founded the infallibility of the Catholic Church, and
the security of the Christian faith. O happy condition of Catholics above the
rest of the world, who alone have the holy Ghost for their master, teaching
them all necessary truth and preserving them from all errors! whereas all
sectaries having no other master, then their own brain, run round in a
giddines of errors without end or rest. The second end of his coming, was to
be our Protector, Advocate and comtorter in lieu also of our B. Savior; Ego,
quoth he, rogabo Patrem, and alium Paraclitum da^^^ vobis, vt: maneat vobiscum
ia aternam. I will ask the Father, and he will give you an other Paraclete,
that he may abide with you for ever. Thanks, dearest Jesus, for such a
Comforter; In labor requies, in astu temperies, in fletu solatium, an eaje in
labor, a refreshment in heat, and a comfort in sorrow, to all his faithful
and obedient children: Postulans also pro vobis gemitibus inenarrabilibus;
requesting for us with unspeakable groanings; that is, teaching and helping
pious souls to send up to heaven their amourous sighs In tempore
tribulationis. In time of tribulation. O who can be either dubious in his
faith, having such a Master; or difident in his troubles, having at hand such
a Comforter and Advocate.

Conclude thou with great assurance in this thy God; cast thy self into the
arms of his protection; Consolator optime, dulcis hospes anima, dulce
refrigerium etc. O best comforter, svveet guest of the soul, svveet refrshment
etc.

3. Consider thirdly the greatness and excellency of this gift, towit the holy
Ghost, and not to speak now of his divinity every way equal to the Father and
Son; the titles which are given him, are these: Donum Dei altissimi, Fons
viuus, ignis, charitas; the Gift of the most high God, the living fountain,
fire, charity; not that he is any of these created things or qualities; but
that he is the Principium, causa and origo the prime sour, cause, and origin,
of them all. So that, and the divine goodness thought it not sufficient to send
an Angel, but this only Son for our Redeemer; so was he not content to
give us only the supernatural gifts of grace, charity and the rest, but he
would infuse into our hearts the prime source and spring of all; Vt sit fons
aquae salientis in vitam aeternam. That it might be a fountain of water
springing up unto life everlasting. Let both heaven and earth never cease to
praise and love such bounty. This is that Fluuius aquae vitae, river of living
water, mentioned in the Apocalypse, procedens de sede Dei, and Agni,
proceeding from the seat of God and of the lamb, watering the lignum vitae
the tree of life of Paradise; per singulos menses afferens fructum suum,
yelding its fruits every month, towit these twelve fruits of the holy Ghost
numbered up by S. Paul, Charitas, gaudium, pax etc. Charity, joy, peace etc.
This is the Ignis consumens Dominus Deus tuus, cuius thronus flamma ignis;
consuming fire is thy lord God, whose throne is a flame of fire; which first
purges in us all the rust of our corrupted nature and sin, and then gives
heat, actiuitie, and light to all our actions. This is the Charitas, amor,
nexus, charity, love, and knot, most sweetly uniting our souls to the Father
and Son, and making one heart of all the children of God.

Conclude with all the affections, the holy Ghost shall inspire thee with;
but especially with that of love. Have ever in thy heart and mouth, the Ueni
sancte spiritus, come o holy Ghost; which the Church never cease to sing; or
those most sweet aspirations which S. Aug. breaths forth in the ninth
Chapter of his meditations.

Consider fourthly, three principal dispositions, that the Apostles practiced
for the receiving of the holy Ghost: the first was their recollection into a
private house or room from all noise and traficke with the world: for he
being Deus totius internae consolationis, the God of all our in ward
consolation, finds no greater impediment then a soul vvandeaing about the
world and full of the cares and turmoiles thereof; and hence our B. Savior
said, that the world could not receive the holy Ghost; who being compared to
the oil of the Prophet Elizeus never enters but into empty vessels; and as
soon as the vessels are full, cease his infusion. The second was, that
they were Omnes pariter in eodem loco, all together in the same place, all
united in true charity and brotherly love, with a real and entire conformity
of wills and affections: o Christian soul, deceive not thy self; Spiritus
sanctus Deus est pacis and non contentionis; the holy Ghost is a God of peace,
and not of contention; never hope for his company or comfort, if thou be
contentious with any man, on what pretense soever; know the badge of Christ
is no other, then this; In hoc sciet mundus quod mei estis, si dilexeritis
inuicem. In this ali men shall know that you are mine, if you love on an
other. The third was the fervor and assiduity of prayer, and that also in the
company of the B. Mother of God; for although they were most assured of the
promises of Christ, yet they knew that Pater coelestis dat Spiritum suum
petentibus se; The heavenly Father does give his spirit to those that ask
him; so that none but those that ask, obtain it.

Conclude to prepare thy self with recollection, brotherly love and prayer for
the entertaining of this holy spirit; which if thon perform as thou ought, be
sure of Mensuram bonam and super effluentem gratiae in sinu tuo. Good and oue
flowing measure of grace in thy bosom.

5. Consider fifthly, how on the day of Pentecost, ten days after the
Ascension, and fifty after the Resurrection, a solemn day amongst the Jews in
memory of the Law given on mount Sina; came this divine Lawgiver upon the new
Israelites, to write and engraue, not a law of fear and terror in tables of
stone, but of grace and sweetness In tabulis cordis carnalibus: Et factus est
repent de caelo sonus tanquam aduenientis Spiritus vehementis: In the carnal
tables of the heart: and suddenly there was made a sound from heaven as of a
vehement vvind coming: his coming was from heaven, Nam omne donum perfectum de
sursum est; For every perfect gift is from above; on a sudden, Nam spiritus vbi
vult, spirat; For the spirit breaths where he will, freely of pure grace
and liberality without the merits and deserts of any with the noise of a
strong air or vvind; o the breathing air of our souls, In quo viuimus,
mouemur and sumus; In which vve-liue move, and be; for as our being, life and
motion depends every moment on this corporal air; so, and much more, does our
supernatural being, life and action depend on this gracious air of the holy
Ghost; whose special notion therefore and title is, Dominus viuificans, a
life giving Lord. Note finally, how he is termed Spiritus vehemens, a vehement
vvind, giving towit force, speed and fervor to all our actions; Nescit tarda
molimina Spiritus S. gratia; quia enim aut suauius aut fortius amore? The grace
of the holy Ghost know noe delays; for what is more svveet ore strong then
love?

Conclude with most humble invocation of this all-refreshing spirit; open thy
soul unto him, that he may Perflare animam tuam, breath upon the soul, cool
all thy sensualities; and give thee new vigor and courage to all the actions
of grace and virtue.

6. Consider sixthly, how Apparuerunt illis dispertitae linguae tanquam ignis,
seditqueue supra singulos eorum. There appeared to them parted tongues as it
were of fire, and it sat upon every one of them. Fire the chief of Elements,
is for its actiuity and beauty so great a symbol of the divinity, that diverse
nations adored it for the true God; and in the old law God appeared for the
most part in fire, as to Moses in the burning bush, on the mount Sina, Quasi
ignis ardens in vertice montis; As a burning fire on the top of a mountain: so
that in the 4. of Deuteronomie, he declares to the people, that Ignis
consumens Dominus Deus tuus; A consuming fire is thy lord God; and almost all
sacrifices were performed and accompanied with fire. But besides this, the holy
Ghost would more especially appear in fire, both to declare unto us his own
nature, which is a Notionall love and charity betwixt the Father and Son; as
also to express the effects of his presence in our souls, which is the heat
and fervor of love, that fire towit, Quem Christus venit mittere in terram,
and quid vult nisi vt ardeat? Which Christ came to cast on the earth, and
what will he but that it be kindled? Next this fire was framed into tongues,
first to cure the malady of that member, which as S. James says is
Vniuersitas iniquit atis, and infiammata a gehenna; A whole world of
iniquity, and inflamed of hell; so that the fire of heaven may quell in us the
fire of hell. Secondly that the Apostles might have fiery tongues to heat and
inflame, the cold and stiff frozen hearts of worldlings.

Conclude with this or the like exclamation. O ignis sancte! quam suauiter
ardes! quam secret luces! quam desideranter aduris! vae ijs qui ex te non
ardent, qui per te non lucent. O holy fire! how sweetly do thou burn! how
secretly do thou shine! how amiable is thy enkindling heat: vvoe be to
them who are not enkindled with thee, nor shine by thy light. Inflame this
heart, rule and temper this tongue of mine.

7. Consider seuently, how Repleti sunt omnes Spiritu S. All are filled with
the holy Ghost. Even to the brim, yet some had more then others, according to
every ones capacity; more had the Apostles, then the disciples, and more the
B. Virgin then all the rest. O what heart can conceive or tongue express this
their fullnes or repletion? their understanding full of heavenly light; their
will and breast full of flaming charity toward God and their neighbors. O
mutatio dexterae excelsi! O change of the right hand of the highest! how rude
and simple they were before, even their birth and education does sufficiently
assure us; neither, had the three years conuersing with our Savior much
bettered them, so rude and dull they were: again, how fearful and cowardly
they were, besides all what had formerly past, even the present cloystering
up themselves Propter metum ludacrum, for fear of the Jews, does abundantly
witness. But immediately upon the receiving of the holy Ghost, their skill and
knowledge far exceeded all the Plato's or Aristotses of the world: and
Alexander's or Cesar's courage was a toy to theirs: for presently open fly the
doors, and out fly they about the City, Loquentes varijs linguis magnalia
Dei: Speaking with diverse tongues the great works of God: and soon after,
In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum: their sound went forth into all the earth:
and this their heat and fervor was so great, that the people thought them
drunk or mad: and not untruly, for being ouercharged with this new wine of
the Spouse they must, like full vessels, either have sudden vent, or burst.

Conclude to cry to heaven for one draught of this holy liquor: for till then
hope not for strength or understanding: never more rely on thy own ability,
but wholy on the guidance of the holy Ghost, Sit ille tibi Pater, Magister,
Sponsus. Let him be to the a Father, a Master, and a spouse.

8. Consider eighthly, how the divine providence so ordered it, that there were
diverse then at Jerusalem De omni natione quae sub caelo est: of every nation
that is under heaven: who as eyewitnesses should carry about the world the
wonders of this day: Quare facta hac voce, wherefore when this voiee was
made, or noise of the vvind, Conuenit multitudo; and mento confusa est, the
multitude came together, and was astonished in mind, every one hearing the
Apostles speak their proper language: and here also according to the custom
of the world, some said they were drunk; others laughed at them for simple
and mad idiots: others more prudent said, Quidnam vult hoc esse? what means
this? every one according to his disposition and humor passing their censures,
of what they understood not: when S. Peter as head of the rest, standing up
for all, with a most manly courage and heavenly eloquence in such sort laid
open unto them the present mystery, with the rest of our Savior Jesus
Christ; that forthwith he converted to the number of three thousand that very
day; and soon after far greater multitudes. O what joy and festiuity was
there both in heaven and earth, at this plentitull harvest of poor souls!
rejoice my soul and grue a thousand Parabiens to thy B. Savior, his glorious
Mother, Apostles, and new flock of the Catholic and Christian Church: rejoice
I say and.

Conclude to imitate the life and virtues of these primitive Christians, who
were Perseuerantes in doctrina Apostotorum, and communicatione fractionis
panis and orationibus: Perseuering in the dostrine of the Apostles, and in the
communication of the breaking of bread, and prayers. That is, in the doctrine
of the Catholic Church, in the frequenting of the holy Sacraments, and
devotion of prayers.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of the Mystery of the B. Trinity.
1. COnsider first, how God is and can be but only one in nature, essence,
power, goodness and all other attributes: this faith teaches us, when we
say; Credo in vnum Deum; I believe in one God; and again, Vnus Deus, vna
fides, vnum Baptisma. One God, one faith, one Baptism. This also natural
reason conuinceth; for first that we call and confess to be God, Quo maius
aut perfectius cogitari non potest; then whom nothing greater, or perfecter
can be Imagined; that is, who comprehends in himself all possible or
imaginable perfections: but if we admit but two only, different and
distinguished in nature, the one must have some what which the other has
not, from which arises the distinction: and consequently neither can have all
perfections, nor be, Quo maius cogitari non possit; then whom a greater can
not be imagined; that is, God: wherefore to be truly God, he must be but
only one, Secondly, who is God, must be Summus Legistator, the chiefest
lavv-maker, governing and swaying all at his will; Supremus Iudex, a supreme,
Judge, punishing and rewarding, the obseruers and breakers of his laws; and
Finis vltimus omnium creaturarum. The last end of all creatures. But none of
these could he be, were there any other equal to him; who having a different
will, would make different laws, and punish and reward differently from the
former; so that whom one would punish, the other would seek to revvard: and
so fall to jarres and divisions; Omne autem regnum in se diuisi^m desolabitur:
every kingdom divided against it self shall be made desolate: neither could
either be our Finis vltimus, our last end, or Omne bonum, all our good, for
that the other of them would have somewhat desiderabile. To be desired.

Conclude therefore to believe and adore but one only God, Vnum Deum and
Patrem omnium, quiest super omnia: one God, and Father of all, who is above
all: direct all thy intentions and actions to this one supreme end and good:
finally lament and pray for all poor infidells, who wander in the
multiplicity of their own fancies, Sed Deum ignorantes. But are ignorant of
God.

2. Consider secondly, that although God be one and the same in essence, yet he
is as truly and really three in persons, Father, Son and holy Ghost. Here
all understanding is captiuated In obsequium fidei; unto the obedience of
faith, natural reason finds no footing for this mystery in nature, neither
in causes, effects, nor examples: for here is that most true. Nemo nouit filium
nisi Pater, neque Patrem nisi silius, and cui voluerit filius reuelare, no ma^^
knovveth ^ix Son but the Father, neither does any know the Father but the
Son, and to whom it shall please the Son to reveal: although this be so,
yet reason raised once above her pitch by the light of faith, may glance at
some seeming congruences and similitudes: and first, all perfection is to be
acknowledged in God, but not the least imperfection; therefore he is one, for
that is perfection, neither is he alone, for that is impertection; and hence he
enjoys plurality without diversity, that is, Trinitatem in vnitate. Trinity
in unity. Secondly we find a shadow hereof in man himself, who has one
soul with three distinct powers, understanding, will and memory; some what
resembling one nature in three distinct persons. Harken a little to S. Bernard
of the four Trinities he has found out: Est, quoth he, Triuitaes a qua homo
cecidit, Pater, Filius, and Spiritus sanctus; est Trinitas quae cecidit,
intellectus, memoria, voluntas: and est Trinitas in quam ista cecidit;
impotentia, ignorantia, and concupiscentia. and est Trinitas per quam Trinitas
cadens, resurgit ad Trinitatem de qua cecidit; scilicet, fides, spes, charitas.
There is a Trinite from which man fell, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
there is a Trinity which fell, understanding, memory, and will; and there
is a Trinity into which it sell; imbecillitie, ignorance and concupiscence:
and there is a Trinity by which the Trinity that fell, rises to the
Trinity from which it fell, to wit faith, hope, and chariiie.

Conclude to adore in the spirit of humility, what so far surpasses thy
capacity; rejoice at the incomprehensibilitie of thy God: lastly comfort thy
self with an assured hope of seeing one day the secret of this mystery,
Quando videbitur Deus Deorum in Sion. When the God of Gods shall be seen in
Sion.

3. Consider thirdly the order and manner of the divine Processions: the Father
is, Ingenitus, a seipso, principium sine priacipio; unbegotten of himself, a
beginning without a beginning; the Son is genitus, principium a principio;
begotten, a beginning from a beginning; the holy Ghost is procedens, spiratus a
Patre and Filio. Proceeding, breathed from the Father, and Son. For the
Father with one indivisible act of his understanding comprehending his own
essence and being, forms and produces within himself a most perfect and
complete conceit and image of himself, and this is named and truly is, his
only Son, Spendor gloriae and figura subsiantiae eius, verbum and sapientia
Patris. The brightness of his glory, and the figure of his substance, the
word, and wisdom of the Father. Next the Father with infinite love
affects and imbraceth this his Son, neither can the Son do less, then
repay his Father with the like love, having all what he is from him: and so by
this mutual reflection of love one upon the other, they produce jointly a
perfect and notionall band of love, called the holy Ghost, communicating unto
him their own entire divinity and essence. Neither does this order of
processions cause any inequality, or prioritie betwixt any of the divine
persons; for first, all having the same individual divine nature, must have
also the same divine attributes, indistinguished from the said nature; and so
there can be no inequality: next the Father from all eternity knows
himself, and from the samr eternity produces his Son: again the Father and
the Son from all eternity love one the other, and so from the same eternity
produce the holy Ghost: but in eternity there can be no prioritie or
posteriority of duration, therefore all are jointly coeternall.

Conclude to employ thy whole understanding and will in the contemplation and
love of this most high and sacred mystery.

4. Consider fourthly the properties and notions of every one of the divine
Persons* The first Person is called Father; A quo omnis paternitas in caelis
and in terra nominatur; of whom all paternitie in heaven and in earth is named;
who says of himself by his Prophet; Nunquid ego, qui alios parere facio,
ipse non pariam? Shall not I, that make others to bring forth children, my
self bring forth: and again; Filius meus es tu, ego hodie genui te: thou art
my Son, I this day have begotten thee: to wit vnehangeable hodie or this day
of Eternity: who can contemplate either the incomprehensible manner of this
generation, or the infinite love he bears his Eternal Son? The second
person is called Son, Vnigenitus qui a Patre procedit: the only begotten,
who proceeds from the Father: o how many vvayes is he Unigenitus Patris? the
only-begotten of the Father? first because he neither has, not can have any
other Son, and this he has without any mother, begotten solely of himself:
secondly because he is not Quomodocumque image and figura Patris, a mere image
and figure of the Father, as other Sons are, but the same individual
substance and being with his Father, which no other Son can be: thirdly
because he is Unigenitus in sinu Patris, the only begotten Son in the bosom
of the Father, that is, never departing from his Father, as others do, but
remaining always intrinsecally within his bosom; and so the only beloved
and only joy of his Father. The third person is called holy Ghost, proceeding
from the mutual love of the Father and Son; and so the only spirit and
breathing of both: the only Sanctus or holy, as proceeding by love, the only
spring of all holiness.

Conclude with all the joy of thy soul for the bliss and essential content,
that these three divine Persons take in one the other: beg of the Father to
adopt thee for his Son: of the Son, to choose thee for his brother: and of
the holy Ghost, to be his spouse.

5. Consider fifthly the words of S. John: Tres sunt, qui testimonium dant in
caelis, Pater, Verbum and Spiritus Sanctus, and hi tres vnum sunt. There be
three, which give testimony in heaven, the Father the word, and the holy
Ghost, and these three be one. A three fold testimony has the holy Trinity
given of it self: the first in the Creation of the world, and especially of
man, Quem secit ad imaginem and similitudinem suam; whom he has made to his
Image and likeness; in whom, as it were, he has stamped an abridgement of
himself. But the second is yet more clear and feeling, by his grace in the
hearts of faithful souls; Qui credit in filium Dei, habet testimonium Dei
inse: who beleiueth in the Son of God, has the testimony of God in
himself: o what signs or testimonies does God impart to his beloved of his
greatness, sweetness and divine beauties? o how happy is that soul, which can
confidently say with the Apostle; Spiritus ipse testimonium reddit spiritui
nostro quod sumus filij Dei! The spirit himself gives testimony to our
spirit, that we are the Sons of God. The third and last testimony is given
and reserved for the blessed in heaven, Ubi videbimus eum sicuti est: and hi
tres vnum sunt: where we shall see him as he is: and these three be one: one
and the same being; and the same testimony in all the three vvayes of creation,
sanctification and glorification.

Conclude to comply with the second part of the text: Et tres sunt qui
testimonium dant in terra, spiritus, aqua and sanguis: and hi tres vnum sunt,
there be three which give testimony on earth, the spirit, water, and blood;
and these three be one, that is, give testimony and acknowledgement to God of
thy duties and obligations to him, first by the spirit of love and gratitude
for all his benefits; next in the water of humility and thy own annihilation
in presence of his greatness and majesty: lastly in the blood of penance and
sorrow for all thy sins, with which thou have displeased him: Et hi tres
vnum sunt; and these three be one; that is, to unite and make thee one with
thy Lord and God.

6. Consider sixthly, or draw rather and frame unto thy self, to the imitation
of these divine processions, a method and form of mental prayer and
contemplation. First God the Father comprehending his own essence, produces a
most perfect conceit and image of himself, which never fades, but lives
ever in his breast and understanding: so must we first draw a proper and
perfect image of our Lord God in our understandings, and with all care and
diligence preserve it fresh and entire. Next the Father and the Son loving
one the other, produce the holy Ghost, the tie and knot of their love; and he
also ever remains within them, without all change or separation: so must
we stir up within our selves the affection of love toward the divine
sweetness and goodness, whose image we have; and in these two acts of the
understanding and will consists all contemplation and prayer, the highest
reach of Christian perfection: hence the Spouse says: Inueni quem diligit
anima mea, I have found whom my soul loves; towit by comtemplation: Tenui
eum, I have held him, towit by love: Nec dimittam; nor will I let him go;
because these acts should ever continuc without the least interruption, that
may be, our frailty and weakness considered. Finally as the holy Ghost is the
joy, bliss and content of the Father and the Son: so from these two acts now
mentioned, follow all the rest of inward joy, peace, content, and whatsoever
can make us happy in this world.

Conclude to embrace this Otium Mariae, Mary's contemplative vacation, if thou
have not yet begun it; and if so, take up new courage in the prosecution of it:
for believe it, Vnum est necessarium, one thing is necessary, that is
permanent and stable; all whatsoever else, Transit and defluit vt aqua. Maria
optimam partem elegit. Passes and runs a way like water. Maria has
chosen the best part.

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION. Of the Solemnity of Corpus Christi.
1. COnsider first, those words of the Evangelist S. John; Jesus cum dilexisset
suos qui erant in mundo, in finem dilexit eos; Jesus whereas he had loved his,
that were in the world, unto the end he loved them: that is, Vsque ad
consummationem saeculi, even to the consummation of the world. The condition
and property of true lovers is, to be and live always with their beloved; and
nothing is so sad and unwelcome, as a heavy farewell and parting one from the
other. Our sweetest Jesus, the truest and most refined lover that ever was,
having lived with his disciples thirty three years; and finding it now most
necessary for their good to depart from them by his death and Ascension; opened
and reuolued the deepest treasure of his wisdom to invent a way, how
notwithstanding to remain with them really and personally to the end of the
world; so to make his words good, Ecce Ego vobiscum sum vsque ad
consummationem saeculi. Behold I am with you even to the consummation of the
world. This he performed by the institution of the most holy Sacrament of his
precious body and blood: and by leaving power in the Priests of his Church to
continuate and do the same to the end of the world. O love (may I say so?)
Vltra terminos amoris! beyond the limitts of love! o invention. Vltra limits
sapientiae? beyond the limitts of wisdom! to go away, and yet remain, to
be absent, and yet never more present! o most divine and sweet contradictions?
divine for the power, sweet for the manner, viz: of bread and wine, our daily
food, facill and every where to be found, and not at Terusalem only, or on
mount Thabor, as in his life time. Now we need not lie at his feet in the
house of the proud Pharisee, as poor Magdalen, but take him confidently with
us unto our own homes, and there treat and discourse with him at our full.

Conclude, and begin to open thy heart, to entertain thy love. Invent some
way how to remain ever with him, and the way is, a loving memory of him.

2. Consider secondly the words of Consecration; Hoc est Corpus meum; hic est
Calix sanguinis mei. This is my body, this is the chalice of my blood. By
which words are not only signified or figured but also truly and really
caused, and as J may say, produced under the Species or accidents of bread and
wine, the true and natural Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, God
and Man: and this, not by pieces or parts, but wholy and entirely under both
and either of the kinds. Neither may we doubt or ask how this is or can be
done, no more than how the heavens and all other creatures have been made of
nothing; for such things as these are not Obiectum rationis, the object of
reason, but Mysterium fidei, a Mystery of faith, relying upon the unlimited
power and truth, of our omnipotent God, Cuius dicere, facere est; ipse dixit
and facta sunt: whose speaking is his operation: he said, and they were made:
and no marvel; for if the words of men do fully signify the thing they aim
at, grant but one degree more of perfection to the words of God, as in all
reason we must, and we shall find, that his words do also Facere quod
significant. Make what they signify. This being so, ponder the treasure thou
have found, towit all that is Jesus Christ; that is true God, and with him the
whole Divinity and the three Persons of Father, Son, and holy Ghost; as also
true man that is, the fountain and vvell-head of all grace and glory: in
brief, Omne bonum tuum ereatum and increatum, all thy good created and
increated, reduced and concentricated into a point, fit for the narrowness of
our breast and soul.

Conclude with a most strong and lively act of faith, grounded first on thy
own humility, and next on the omnipotent word of thy Savior; Nil hoc verbo
veritatis verius. There is nothing trver then this word of truth. Neither let
thy heart lie frozen before so great a fire of love.

3. Consider thirdly somewhat more in particular the contents of this most B
Sacrament: first there is the exterior and visible Species or appearance of
bread end wine, that is, the sole accidents and qualities of them without
their substance; and this may be compared Ad primum gradum Entis; cuius est
esse tantum. To the first degree of an entitie, which is nothing else but to
be. Next, there is the true flesh and blood of Christ, framed by the holy Ghost
and borne of the Virgin Mary; not visible, but hidden under the vailes of bread
and wine: and these have likeness to the second degree Quorum est esse and
viuere. Who has life added to their being. Next is that most pure and noble
soul of our Savior endowed with all the gifts of nature, grace, and glory:
and this has analogy to the third degree; Quorum est esse, viuere, and
sentire, who with their being enjoy a sensitive life. Adding more over,
Intelligere per participationem. An understanding by participation. Next is the
Godhead or Deity, an eternal, immortal and subsistent being, the supreme and
highest degree of Purum intelligere, of most perfectly understanding, to which
noe degree of perfection or being can be added. And yet this is not all; for
with the Deity comes inseparably, first the sacred Person of the Son in an
hypostaticall union to his humanity, and with him the Persons of the Father
and holy Ghost. Per circumincessionem: by circumincession: and all these
visible only to the eye of faith. Ecce talis est dilectus meus, totus
desiderabilis; and ipse est amicus meus, filiae Jerusalem. Behold such is my
beloved, totallie to be desired: and he is my friend, ye davghters of Jerusalem.

Conclude with all the amazement of thy soul to see how the order of things
is inuerted for thy sake: that whereas man and all things else were originally
in God; now God and all things else are in the breast of man, Per Iesum
Christum qui est benedictus in saecula. Through Jesus Christ who is blessed
for ever.

4. Consider fourthly some circumstances that concurred in the Jnstitution of
this holy Sacrament; and first these two of the time and place, when and
where it was instituted. The time was, Pridie quam pateretur, seu in ipsa
nocte qua tradebatur. On the day before he sufferred, or the very night he
sufferred. O my soul behold thy swetest Jesus beset and rounded with a double
enemy, Foris pugnae, intus timores; without, combats: within, fears; his
heart overwhelmed with fear and anguish of the torments, ignominies and death
now at hand: his enemies, the Priests and Princes of his people, nay Judas his
Apostle, all conspiring, contriuing and preparing for his death, even then,
vvhiles he is preparing for them and the whole world a sweet and heavenly
banquet of his own precious body and blood, full of celestial sweetness and
delight: Haec sola est illa charitas, quam aequae non potuerunt extinguere nec
flumina obruere. This only is that charity, which waters could not
extinguish, nor rivers ouerflovv, The second is the place, towit Coenaculvm
grande stratum, A great chamber, adorned, large, and spacious; a perfect type
not only of the holy Church, but also of every Christian soul, fit to
entertain ^er Savior: she must be spacious as the heavens, Dilatione
charitatis; in the extent of charity; she must be adorned Supellectile omnium
gra^^arum; with ornaments of all sort of graces; then will her Spouse come Et
caenare cum illa; and suppe with her; then will he appear to her In noua
resurrectione^; in a new resurrestion; then will the holy Ghost descend upon
her, Tanquam ignis; as fire; then, Mansionem in illa facient Pater, Filius, and
Spiritus sanctus. The Father, Son, and holy Ghost will make aboile with her.

Conclude to prepare thy soul in this sort, whensoever thou art to
communicate; next, then to adhere with more diligence and fervor to thy
Savior, when either inward temptations, or outward afflictions shall most
invade thee; that thou may say with confidence; Quis nos separabit a
charitate Christi? who will separate us from the love of Christ?

5. Consider fifthly how our Savior being set at table. Accepit panem in
sanitas ac venera^ biles manus suas; and, eleuatis oculis in caelum, gratias
egit etc. He took bread in his holy, and venerable hands; and lifting his eyes
to heaven, he gave thanks etc. where every action, and every motion is a new
mystery: for first the taking of a loaf into his hands, nay both his hands,
fignifieth three things unto us; first that no less power then his full
omnipotence was necessary for the work he intended to do; secondly that it
was a gift of so ouerflovving liberality, that he could give no more, and
therefore, it filled both his hands: thirdly that in this gift, he gave us
Omnes labores manuum suarum; All the labors of his hands: towit the whole
treasure of merits which In sudore vultus sui, in the sweat of his brovv, he
had been gathering for us the space of three and thirty years; all which he
put as svveet ingredien's in this banquet. Again he lifted up his eyes to
heaven, to let us know that this Panis or bread was vene caelestis, and
desce^dens de calo; trvlie heauenlyo, and descending from heaven; not as the
dry Manna of Moses, that came only from the lower clouds, but as the true
bread of Angels, nay of God himself: for on the table of glory and beatitude,
no other bread is set, then that of the divine essence, really contained in the
holy Eucharist: so that the common and daily bread of God, Angels, and men is
become one and the same. Thirdly Gratias egit: he gave thanks: for who but he
was ever able to do it sufficiently? yet that we might also do it to our
power he would have it called Eucharistia, the Eucharist, that is
Thanksgiving.

Conclude with all the thanks thy soul can yield to thy God and Savior, and
as he has given himself totally to thee, to return him Totum pro toto, all
for all, thy body and soul and whatsoever thou have; but let it be freely and
frankely, as he has done for thee; not as we use to do, by halfes as afraid
to ouer-doe; Hilarem enim datorem diligit Deus. For God loves a cheerful
giver.

6. Consider sixthly, how, Benedixit deditque discipulis suis, dicens, comedite
ex eo omnes, bibite ex eo omnes. He blessed it, and he gave it to his
disciples, saying cate ye all of it, drink ye all of it. Our B. Savior to
give a happy and prosperous beginning to the use of so divine a Sacrament, did
cat and drink first himself of the consecrated bread and cup: rejoice my
soul, that once at least it has been received and treated equally to it is
vvorth and dignity. Then he communicated all his Apostles, even Judas the
Traitor: o what new light, what new heat in their breasts, did these poor
men feel! with what reverence, devotion and humility did they receive and
vvelcome their beloved master in their hearts! o how did S. Peter cry out,
Tu^es Christus Filius Dei viui? Thou art Christ Son of the living God? and
how did the beloved disciple melt away in the love of Jesus, now, Vice vers^,
recumbentis super pectus eius! Likewise leaning upon his breast! Only the
most unhappy of men, Judas, remained blind, frozen nay more hardened and
obdurate than before, and went presently forth to perfect his wicked treason:
o my soul, Vide paris sumptionis, quam sit dispar exitus? See what a
different end has the receiving of the same Sacrament? And learn hence, that
although our Savior exclude none, not the greatest sinners in the vvoald, from
this banquet; but says to all sorts, Comedite and bibite ex eo omnes; eat ye,
and drink ye all of it; yet, according to his Apostle, Qui manducat and bibit
indigne, iudicium sibi manducat and bibit. He that eats and drinks
vnvvorthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself.

Conclude therefore, when thou go to this holy Sacrament, to search and
cleanse all the corners of thy heart, least any Traitor lie hidden there: and
then come with confidence of a kind vvelcome, and a most loving entertainment
from the Master of the banquet; for Deliti^cius sunt esse cum filijs hominum.
His delights are to be with the Sons of men.

THE FIFTH MEDITATION. Of the use and fruits of the holy Eucharist.
1. COnsider first, how as by Baptism we receive our spiritual being and
generation, and by Confirmation our full growth and increase; so by the holy
Eucharist, our spirituell food and nourishment. The two first are but once
received, because our being or generation is but one; and augmentation cease
after we arrive to our full pitch and growth: but Nutritio durat toto tempore
vitae, nutrition dureth all our lifetime, and by consequence so must the use of
this most holy Sacrament. Now as in our corporal nourishment, we find first
the food or aliment, next the body that receives it and is fed by it, and
thirdly the Calor naturalis, or natural heat, by which the nourishment is
perfected and completed: so in this our spiritual nutrition we find, first
our heavenly food, the precious body and blood of the Son of God: next our
poor, feeble and hungry soul; thirdle that Calor calestis, heavenly heat,
that is, the pure and ardent love of God; by which this most sweet and
celestial nourishment is brought to perfection: for our spiritual life and
and perfection consisting in the union with our God and Savior. and love being
our only knot and tie with God, it follows, that our spiritual life and
increase of perfection consists and wholy depends of love. Finally as
Calor naturalis, natural heat does convert the aliment into the substance of
our body, and is it self also conserved and fomented with the same food; so
this sweet heat of love does not only perfect our spiritual nutrition, but is
it self thereby most of all fed and increased; Nihil enim magis inflammat
amorem quam praesentia Christi realis; For nothing more inflameth love, then
the real presense of Christ; and this new fervor or increase of love is the
proper effect of this holy Sacrament.

Conclude to preserve in thy soul this precious heat of love, without which
this holy Sacrament has small operation: and thank thy Savior for his love,
in giving no less then himself to be thy soul's food.

2. Consider secondly the difference betwixt corporal and spiritual
nutrition; for in corporal nutrition the Color naturalis, natural heat does
change and convert the food and aliment into the being and substance of the
body, that receives contrariwise, that the soul, which is nourished, is
changed and converted into the food, she receives: and the reason of this is,
because love, which here is Calor nutritiuus; nutritive heat, has this
nature, Vt rem amantem mutet and transformet in rem amatam; that it does change
and transform the lover into the thing loved; so that, to whom soever we
give or confer our love, we transfer therewith to the same our heart, our
will, out soul; and all that we are or have, is totally given up to our
beloved. See then, o Christian soul, the happy change, thou make in
receiving thy Savior with love; where, Exuendo veterem hoeninem cum actibus
suis, vere induit Ghristum, putting of the old man with his acts, he does
trveli^ put on Christ, putting of thy ill habits and affections to sin and
all terrene and wordly dross, thou art wholly converted into the likeness and
form of Jesus; so that thou may well say with his Apostle; Viuo Ego, iam non
ego; viuit vero in me Christus. O Sacramentum amoris and charitatis! I live,
now not I, but Christ lives in me. O Sacrament of love and charitte! what
can there want in this baoquet, where Summum bonum, our chiefest good, is the
meat and drink; where a poor yet humble soul is the guest; where divine
love, sent down from the breast of the holy Ghost, is the Steward or rather
the cook that dresseth and sawceth all according to our palate?

Conclude two things; the first is, to cleanse thy soul of all cold, hard, or
tepid affections; they hinder all good digestion: the next is, to vvarme and
mollify before hand the vessel of thy heart with the fire of love: this
done, fear not, thy food shall do thee good, Viues, viues and non morieris.
Thou shall live, thou shall live, and thou shall not die.

3. Consider thirdly, how the conversion of the bread and wine into the boly
and blood of Christ, is a most clear sign and type. how a Christian soul by
the use of this Sacrament is converted into the very soul and divinity of
Christ. For first, as the bread and wine is substantially and totally
converted into the body and blood, so as nothing of them remains unchanged:
even so a Christian soul is totally converted into her Savior, her heart into
his heart, her will into his will, nothing now remaining of her properr
will, proper love, proper sense; but all changed into his will, love and
sense: a happy and blessed transsubstantiation. Secondly as the substance of
the bread and wine being changed, there remains yet the outward appearance
of both as formerly; so, though the inward substance and affections of our
soul be changed into Christ, yet outwardly we appear as other men, by our
corporal conversation with them. Thirdly as the bread and wine are dignified
and exalted by their conversion the most that may be; for what greater dignity
in heaven or earth, then to be really changed into the most glorious and
immortal body and blood of Jesus Christ, true God and man? So a devout soul
signified by the bread, receives the greatest dignity that can be imagined; the
body is made most pure, chaste and subject to the soul; and the soul is as it
were wholy deified in Christ and so the whole man is raised to the highest
degree and step of perfection in this world.

Conclude to open all the veins, that is, powers of thy soul, that this thy
conversion and union with Christ may be complete and entire; and this cannot
be otherwise done, than by the heat of love and devotion toward this divine
Sacrament.

4. Consider fourthly, how the other Sacraments, as for example Baptism and
Confirmation, are no longer Sacraments, than they are applying and performing,
but the holy Eucharist is, as I may say, a standing and permanent Sacrament,
whether it be received or no. The first reason of this, no doubt, is, to
signify unto us, that the other Sacraments are only as chanells and brooks
by which Gods grace is derived into our soul, and so have their effects no
longer then they are in running and flowing; but the holy Eucharist is as a
standing Ocean, fountain or vvell-head of all graces and perfections
Complementum charitatis, the complement of charity, containing in it self
Jesus Christ, God and man, De cuius plenitudine accipimus omnes. Of whose
fulness we have all received. The second reason is, because in this
Sacrament more especially than in others, our souls are converted into Christ
and united with him; now whereas this conversion and union is perfected by
the heat of love and devotion, it is most requisite, that our devotion be
vvarmed, and our love quickened before we come to the receiving of it; that
so our spiritual refection and nourishment may be more full and ample: which
love and devotion of ours can have no sweeter motive, nor object more
inflaming, than is the real and permanent presence of our most loving Jesus,
the most true friend and tender spouse of our souls, that ever was; whose
saying was; Ignem veni mittere in terram, and quid volo nisi vt ardeat? I came
to cast fire on the earth, and what will I but that it burn.

Conclude as often as thou come to holy Communion to vvarme thy soul first at
the presence of this great fire, by pondering the great mysteries contained
therein; but most of all the love and sweetness of him that stands there
expecting and inuiting thee, with; Veni sponsa mea, ascend in palmam and
apprehende fructus eius. Come my spouse, Go up into the palmetree, and take
the fruits thereof.

5. Consider fifthly for the complement of all Christian perfection, that this
holy Sacrament does, not only contain and signify the natural body of
Christ; but also his mystieall one, of which he is the head, and the faithful
are his members: hence it follows, that who so receives this Sacrament, is
united by love, not only to Christ, as hitherto has been considered, but also
with all good Christians in the perfect bond of charity, loving every one as
himself, and we know that In duobus his tota le^^ pendet; On these two
depends the whole law; to love God above all things, and our neighbor as
our selves. This is clearly signified in the composition of the materials of
this Sacrament: for of many grains of wheat is made one loaf of bread, and
of many grapes one cup of wine: so likewise of many Christians one society in
Christ, and one mystical body: where the knot and tie is no other then true
heavenly love, uniting all to Christ, as members to the head, and every one to
an other as members of the same whole, under the self same head, hence is the
participation of this Sacrament called Communio, quasi communis vnio membrorum
cum Capite and inter se. A Communion, as it were a common union of members
with their head, and among themselfes. Est itaque hoc Sacramentum imago,
signum, mysterium, vnitatis, pacis, concordiae, amicitiae and verae
fraternitatis: Sacramentum omnis dulcedinis, omnis bonitatis, perfectionis and
virtutis Christianae. This Sacrament therefore is a resemblance, sign and
mystery of unity, peace, concord, friend-ship, and true fraternity. a
Sacrament of all svveetenesse, all goodness, perfection, and Christian virtue.

Conclude first with most humble and hearty thanks to thy Savior for so
sweet an antidote against that common canker of our corrupted nature, hatred
and envy of one an other: next conceive in thy breast an ardent desire of this
double-branched love of God and thy neighbor: never approach to this holy
banquet without it, least thy sad lot be, Eijci in tendebras exteriores. To be
cast out into the utter darkness.

6. Consider sixthly, how Ex carne and anima fit homo, sed caro est propter
animam; man is ^nade of flesh and a soul, but the flesh is for the soul. For
the soul cannot here subsist and live without flesh and blood, as the saying
is: ponder therefore the different fruit she reapeth by her union and
fellowship with the flesh of our first Father Adam, from what she enjoys
by the union with the flesh and body of Christ. She has a double union with
the flesh of Adam; the first is natural In compositione totius; in the
composition of the vvhols; and hence she reapeth that bitter vvormevvood of
original sin, Semen mortis aeterna; the seed of everlasting death; together
with the stinging netles of concupiscence and passion, Fomes peccati: the
nourishment of sin; the other union with the same flesh is voluntary, by
delighting and consenting to the lustful and beastly acts of such a
corruptible flesh. But the union that a soul has with the flesh of Christ,
can only be voluntary and free, not natural; yet such; as fill and penetrates
the pores of the soul far more than does that of nature. By this union does
the soul enjoy all the graces and privileges, which we have hitherto
considered; o what comparison is there between these two fleshes of Adam and
Christ? that is the flesh of a sinful creature, this of the natural Son
of God: that generated in a most beastly manner; this in the most crystal
womb of a virgin, by the hand of the holy Ghost: that a killing and
all-damning flesh; this a healing, viuificating and saving flesh: from that
finally comes Omne malum, all evil, from this Omne bonum. All good.

Conclude to bid adieu to old Adam Et concucupiscentijs eius; and his
concupiscences; and to unite thy soul to the flesh and body of Jesus Christ
thy second and saving Adam: make up this happy marriage with humility, purity
and love: let this be thy Triplex nodus the three fold knot of love, which no
force or malice shall ever dissolve.

7. Consider ^euenthly, how there are in all but two prime bodies or fleshes,
to wit that of Adam and that of Christ, most opposite one to the other, both
in themselves and in their effects: the flesh of Adam, like seed sowed in a
field, causes first the division and natural multiplicity of souls; for
according to the distinction of bodies does God create distinct souls: next by
being corrupted in it self, it causes corruption in our souls, first that
which we call original; next, that which we call concupiscence or
passion, from whence besides other vices, flows that common discord, hatred
and enmity, we bear one to an other: hence spring those two so much to be
lamented divisions, the one from God by sin, the other from our neighbor by
hatred; and consequently all the evils, we groan under; for all which we
are beholden to the flesh of our first Adam. But on the contrary the most pure
and celestial flesh of Christ, remains ever one, without any division or
multiplicity: and so is able according to the union, our souls can have with
it, (which is only that of will and affection, not that of nature) to reduce
them all to a perfect unity and identity both with God and among themselves;
with God, because all are united to Christ, our true God; among themselves,
because all meet in that common union with the flesh of Christ, which is the
union of love and mutual charity, Apex and cumulus omnis boni. The highest and
most abounding perfection of all good.

Conclude to renounce for ever the vicious union thou have hitherto had with
the rotten flesh of Adam; and combine thy soul, of her self immortal, to the
pure and immortal flesh of thy Savior; whose fellowship thou vvilt find
far more sweet and delightful.

8. Consider eighthly this Granum sinapis, this mustard seed, this little flesh
of our Savior to what bigness it grows an increases; Ita vt fiat arbor
and volucres caeli habitent in ramis eius, So that it becomes a tree, and the
birds of the air may dvvell in its boughs, that is, pious and devout souls,
may altogether by the union of love feed and be satisfied with so heavenly
food. The first union therefore which is made, is with the flesh and blood of
Christ, now glorious, immortal and viuificall; but because his soul, the
most glorious creature that ever was, is by its natural union conjoined to
his flesh and blood, the next union of a devout soul is with the radiant and
Deificall soul of Christ. Again, the second Person of the B. Trinity together
with the Divine nature is by hypostaticall union ever united to his body and
soul; and by consequence the devout soul also must be united to the same
Person and Divinity: finally because where soever the divine nature is with
any one of the Persons, there the other two must also be; it follovveth that
the pious soul enjoys also the other two Persons, that is the whole B.
Trinity: and all this by the first and immediate union, she has with flesh
of Christ. O happy creature, that can scale so easily this Jacobs ladder; In
cuius summitate Deus consistit; on the^op of which God all mighty sits; and
mount this height of Tabor, Ibiqueue caput inter nubila condere! And there hide
its head among the clouds!

Conclude whensoever thou appearest before this Arc of the Testament, to
prostrate thy soul in adoration before such high and hidden mysteries; and
whensoever thou communicatest, mount thy soul with all speed and swiftnes of
love thorough all these degrees of unions, till thou come to the top of Sion,
Vbi Dominus videt and videtur. Where our Lord, sees, and is seen.

THE SIXTH MEDITATION. Of the holy Eucharist, as it is a Sacrifice.
1. COnsider first, how a Sacrifice is an oblation of some pleasing thing
offered to God almighty, by which we reverence and worship his supreme
excellency and Majesty. The passion and death of our Savior Christ was a
perfect sacrifice, most pleasing to God, and fully satisfactory for all the
sins of the world: but that is passed and gone, though the virtue and
efficacy thereof remain for ever, because Christ rose again, Et viuit
Sacerdos in aeternum secunditm ordinem Melchisedech: And lives a priest
forever according to the order of Melchisedech: now, as things passed have no
other being or permanence than that of memory and representation; so the
passion of our Savior remains with us in a pious memory only, and In re
aliqua eiusdem repraesentatiua; in some thing representative of it. And this
must be also Sacrificium memoriale, a memorial Sacrifice. An oblation pleasing
to God, and satisfactory for our sins; by which we perform our homage to
the divinity, and really apply unto our selves the whole treasure of Christ's
merits. But behold now and admire the sweetness of our Jesus; o mellifluous
Savior! he will have nothing be this sacrifice but himself and his own real
presence; for he knew, that nothing could so please his Father, as himself;
nothing so satisfy for us, as himself; nothing so preserve among us his death
and passion as his ever real presence with us in the holy Eucharist, which so
is become our daily sacrifice Et memoriale sempiternum. And everlasting
memorial.

Conclude with most humble thanks to thy Jesus, and begin now to offer him to
his Eternal Father, after an other fort of devotion than hitherto thou have
done: learn also of him, to perform all thy duties to God, by thy self, and
not to shuffle them of to others.

2. Consider secondly those words of Christ; Hac facite in meam
commemorationem; do this for a commemoration of me; that is, in memory of my
death and passion: hence it is that although the Sacrament be but one, yet in
the Mass, the blood and body are consecrated a part, each one by it self; not
so that one remains really separated from the other, for In sanguine est and
corpus and in corpore sanguis, and vtr^bique totus Christus: in the blood is
the body, and in the body the blood, and in each is Christ wholly: but so, as
by consecration they are represented apart, to express how the death of our
Savior: being violent, consisted In separatione corporis and sanguinis, in the
separation of bis body and blood, that is, Animae, his soul, quia anima in
sanguine est. Because the life is in the blood. Now as by the consecration of
his body and blood apart are expressed substantially the passion and death of
Christ; so by the other ceremonies of the holy Mass are represented the
circumstances of his passion; as by the holy vestments of the Priest, his
Cross, foolscoat, bands etc. by the Offertory, his free oblation, he made of
himself to his heavenly Father; by the many Crosses the Priest makes, his
wounds, scourging and crowning; by the mixtion of water with wine, the
blood and water that flowed from his side etc. O how our most louiug Jesus
desires to live with us, fresh ever in our hearts and memory! and why,
think you, but for our only good as well knowing, how much it imports our
salvation, not to forget our Savior?

Conclude to carry ever his death and passion before thine eyes, but especially
when thou hear Mass behold him (and it is no fiction) mounting on the
Cross, bleeding and dying for thee; believe it, this is the only way to
repay, if possible, some drammes of that love, he has showed thee.

3. Consider thirdly; that as our Savior came not only to redeem us out of
the Devils slavery, but also by his doctrine and example to teach us the way
to heaven; so in this holy Sacrament and Sacrifice he renews not only the
memory of his death and passion, but also the example of all his heroicke
virtues; and so never cease to meulcate unto us those his words: Exemplum
dedi vobis, vt quemadmodum Ego feci, and vos factatis. I have given you an
example, that as I have done, so you do allsee. Know therefore that
whenever his precious body and blood is offered upon the Altar to his
Eternall-Father, there is jointly represented first, his infinite zeal and
fervor of his Fathers honor and glory, together with his vvonderfull
obedience to all his commands: next his strange love to man, for whom he
would royntly dye, and yet not dedepart from him: no love yet ever reached
hitherto; other lovers desire to be always with their beloved, and at last
the utmost, they can do, is to dye for them and so leave them for ever: but to
die and yet remain, Priuilegium est amoris Christi non dabitur alteri. It is a
privilege of Christ's love, that shall not be granted to any other. Thirdly
are represented for man's example his purity, sweetness and humility: and so
daily he cries unto us; Discite a me, quia mitis sum and humilis cord: learn
of me, because I am meek and humble of heart: O my soul, hear and learn this
daily lesson of humility and meeknes toward thy neighbor, Et inuenies
requiem animae tuae. And thou vvilt find rest to thy soul.

Conclude as often as thou do communicate, or hear mass, to refresh thy
soule-vvith the memory of these thy Saviors virtues: so shall thou the better
imitate daily his love to God and man, his obedience; his humility etc.

4. Consider fourthly, how this holy Sacrifice has three special and proper
effects: the first is that of a plenary satisfaction for all the sins of the
world; no less then had the very death and passion of Christ: the second is
that of impetration or obtaining of all sort of benefits from God, both
temporal and eternal; both corporal and spiritual, for our selves and all
others: the third, but the first in acceptance and esteem with God, is the
effect of Gratiarum actio, or thanksgiving for all the benefits received of
his divine liberality; hence is this sacrifice called Eucharistia, Eucharist,
that is, Bona gratia, good thanks, or Gratiarum actio: thankes-iguing: Our
sweetest Jesus knew very well, that nothing was more acceptable to his heavenly
Father, nor more profitable to us, then an humble gratitude for his blessings;
for gratitudes alone does keep, as I may say, Gods hands open, and our souls
most capable of new bounties: but seeing again and pitieing our case, as
having of our selves nothing, but sheep, calnes and other such trifles to lay
on our Altars; poor trash, God knows, if we consider either the benefactour
or his benefits; to remedy this, and to take this shame out of our faces, JESUS
himself would be our sacrifice, our Oblatie pacifica and munda, our clean
and peaceful oblation, in thankes-giueng, not only for all other benefits
whatsoever, but also for it self, the greatest of all, Et memoria omnium
mirabilium Dei, and the memory of all Gods wonders.

Conclude to make good use of so rich treasures: offer daily for all these
three ends, but most of all in thanksgiving; but let thy heart and soul go
with thy oblation; Vt respiciat Deus ad Abel and munus suum: that God may have
respect to Abel, and to his gift.

5. Consider fifthly, and take at once a view of all what has hitherto been
said of this divine Mystery: and all may be reduced to three heads, according
to the threefold obligation we have to God, our neighbor, and our selves: our
duty to God consists in honoring and wor^hipping him; and this, we have
seen, is done more by the offering of the holy Eucharist, than if heaven and
earth were joined in one holocaust an hundred times over; an^ so it is called
Sacrificium oblationis, purum, piacidum and placatiuum. A pure, pleasing, and
pacifying sacrifice of oblation. Our duty toward our neighbor consists in
love, union and charity with him; and for this, there is no such Philtrum, no
such loue-cake, as this heavenly banquet Sacramentum Communionis, cordium
vnitiuum, odiorum expulsiuum. A S^^rament of Communion, uniting hearts, and
^pelling hatred. Our obligation to our selves consists in our spiritual
health, nourture, and vigor; and what food, I pray, can procure us this, like
to the body and blood of the Son of God: Viaticum refectionis, ne deficiamus
in via. The refreshing vvayfare, least we should faint in the way. O most
mellifluous JESU! what more could thy wisdom invent, thy power perform, or
thy goodness pour upon us? o wordlings, come hither a while, Uidete and
gustate quam suauis est Dominus JESUS, see, and taste how svveete is our Lord
JESUS.

Conclude thou also with a threefold resolution; the first; to offer daily
this holy Sacrifice to the honor of God: the second, to keep union and charity
with thy neighbor; and the third, to give thy soul her daily allowance of
this heavenly bread, at least in desire and spirit. Finally to come ever with
the fire of love in thy bosom, Quia neque sine igne fit holocaustum, neque
nutritio sine calore. Because noe holocaust is offered without fire, nor is
nutrition without heat.

THE FOVRTH PART, OTHER MEDITATIONS belonging to the Unitive way.
ALL Christians know and in general terms most willingly acknowledge, that
they are bound by the laws of nature and of Grace, to love their Lord God
above all things; to fear and honor him, to believe and trust in him; and
finally to praise, glorify and exalt his name above all: that therefore so
real obligations of man vanish not away in lip-language, but be reduced into
a-reall and sincere practice, as they ought; these following Meditations shall
give the true grounds, motives and fruits of all and every one.

THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of the obligation of love, which Man owes to his God.
THe motives we have to love God above all other things, are three the first,
his own vvorth, beauty and perfection; the object of love: the second, the
infinite benesits we always receive from his gracious hand the third, the
frank, free and bounteous love, which he discovers in the benefits he
bestows: all these we have particularly considered in the last part, and in
the life of Christ. Now therefore we will only apply these motives to man,
and show that they concern and oblige him, more than all other creatures; even
in those benefits which are common to both.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. How far man is obliged, to God, for himself and all
other creatures.
1. COnsider first, how man excels all other creatures from the heavens
dovvnevvard, not only in that he has an higher degree of being or perfection
than they have; but also that he alone sees, understands, and knows,
what, and from whom, and to what end, both he and they have whatsoever they
enjoy; which none of all the other creatures do understand or know. Out of
this follow four degrees of man's excellency above other creatures, worthy of
our consideration: the first is, that man only knovveth and clearly
perceives both the gifts and perfections he has in himself, and also those
of all other creatures besides: the second, that he only knows, that, what
he has in himself, he has not from himself; the like of other creatures,
that they have nothing from themselves, nor yet from Man; but that both have
received all from an higher Lord and Benefactour; and this none of them know.
The third, that he alone can seek out, find and know this so good and liberal
a Lord, which none of the rest can do. The fourth; that he alone, having
found this Lord, can remain ever with him, offer him due thanks and
gratitude; and finally, by lone make him his friend and perpetual companion,
which none of the other creatures can ever reach unto.

Conclude to open at length thy eyes to see and ponder these great privileges
thou enjoyest above other creatures: next, to be ever most humbly grateful to
thy Creator for them.

2. Consider secondly, that to find out the just measure of obligation, that
follovveth in man out of the prerogative of knowledge which he has above
other creatures, we may ponder these three heads or motives; towit, the
benefactour, the benefit, and the Receiver: for according to the greatness of
the benefit, the franknes, of the giver, and the necessity of the Receiver,
does increase proportionably the greatness of the obligation, when and where it
is known and understood. To begin therefore with the greatness of the benefit
received, we find it two fold; the first is, that of the creation of the
whole world and of all creatures in it; the next is, what God has bestowed
upon man in himself. First therefore consider all the degrees of perfection
dispersed throughout the whole world from the lowest to the highest; and we
shall find man only and alone bound to God for them all; and that for two
reasons; the one, because God having made all for his own honor and glory,
and the creatures not being able to pay him that tribute as not knowing either
what they have or from whom they have it, as man does; it follows that man
only is bound to thank him for all: again, all what the creatures have,
they have it more for the service of man than for themselves; Omnia onim
propter hominem, because all things are for men; if so, then man surely is
more, nay only, bound to God for what the creatures have only for his use.

Conclude to make a right use of thy dominion over the creatures, that is,
order them so to thy own commodity, as thou direct vvithall both them and thy
self to the honor of God the giver.

3. Consider thirdly more in particular, how all creatures are serviceable and
subject to man, according to that, Omnia subiecicti sub pedibus^ius. Thou have
subjected all things under his feet. Man consists of body and soul: first
therefore for his body and present mortal being, look about thee, and see all
conspiring to thy subsistence and service; some as altogether necessary for thy
being, others for thy profit, others for thy recreation and delight, others for
thy instruction and example; finally, all so absolutely for thee, that thou
can have no being without them; nor they any being at all, were it not to
conserve and cherish thy being. O man, make use here a little of the talent of
knowledge thou have above them; and thou shall perceive one general cry or
voice of them all to man: Accipe, Read; take, restore: receive, enjoy and make
use at thy pleasure of the service and homage, we offer thee; but then; Read
debitum, restore thou what is due, and repay the tribute of gratitude; not to
us; for what we do is of force and necessity, and so not vvorth thanks; but
there above to him, who most freely and frankly has bestowed us and our
services upon thee. The Master is only obliged to be thankful, for what
another bestows on his servants, because what is done to them is for his
only respects and service.

Conclude never to set thy affection on the creatures, thy servants; but let
thy eye and heart ever bend upward to the first source and spring of all: and
resolve to imitate, not the muddy hog, but the thankful hen, lifting up her
head to heaven for every drop of water she drinks.

4. Consider fourthly, how the rest of Creatures present also to the soul of
Man most eminent services and commodities: we may reduce them to two heads,
the one of learning or knowledge, the other of joy and content. For the first,
we find by experienco, that all our science and knowledge in this world,
whether speculatiue or practical, is drawn from the natures and qualities of
creatures: and above all, that knowledge and feeling we have of our greatest
God and his perfections, whence have we it, but from the contemplation of
Creatures, mounting by little and little from these low valleys, to the top and
Non plus vltra of that incomprehensible Majesty? Hence follows the second
spring of joy and content, which our soul cannot but conceive, when she
considers, first, the great dignity and excellency, she is possessed of above
all other creatures; next, the nobleness of her last end and Summum bonum,
chiefest good, as not consisting in the muddy deligts common to brute beasts;
but in the radiant splendours of the Divinity: and lastly the great esteem her
Creator has of her, in ordaining all creatures to her sole service and
delight: so that the vastnes, beauty and light of the heavens, the earth and
sea with all that is in them, had never been but only for man.

Conclude to calculate and cast up, if thou art able, the greatness of thy
obligation to thy most bountiful Creator: and thou vvilt find it in the
extension equal to heaven and earth; but in the weight and measure
correspondent to the love and esteem thy Creator has of thee, which is
infinite.

Consider fifthly, how if this greater world created for man, draw such an
obligation upon him, what shall we think, his own Microcosme will do, so
rare an abridgement of his wonders, so complete a model of the Divinity it
self? Observe first the rare structure of his body, the statelines, the
proportion of every member, more then Geometrical; the b^^uty of hi^ face, the
majesty of his forehead, the splendor of his eyes; the eloquence of his tongue
etc. next, the three degrees of being, life and sense, how they are in another
sort dignified in him Per coniunctionem ad partem superiorem, by a conjunction
to his superior part. Than in other common creatures. But of his soul,
spiritual, immortal, divine, what can be said or thought? who, like an
absolute Queen and Empress, sitting in the royal seat of her Understanding
and Will, commands not only the outward world, but also her domestic
family both of the vegetative and sensitive part, with that sovereignty as none
but God has greater. O ponder a little the Eagle eye of her Understanding, the
uncontrollable Velle and Nolle, volition and nolition, of her will: finelly,
how all creature^ are joined to man, and man to God by these two powers; so
that man alone is the Nexus, and Vinculum, the knot and bond of all created and
increated being.

Conclude with astonishment of all thy powers, to see what thou have
received; then resolve never to stoop thy soul to any creature, unless it be
to raise and return it in an oblation of gratitude to thy Creator: o let not
thy free-vvil be enthralled by any, but by the love of thy God.

6 Consider sixthly the condition and nature of the Benefactour, who has
bestovved all the world on man, and man on himself: and thou shall find the
first root and origin of all to have been noe other, than his pure love,
magnanimity, and natural liberality; o who can fathom all the dimensions of
this allactiue, and all-producing Love? if we look on it is substance, it is
God himself, every way infinite and immense; if on it is duration, it reaches
Ab aeterno in aeternum: from all eternity to all eternity, if on it is
extension and circumference, it graspeth the whole, both greater and lesser
world; finally all that can be called Ens creatum, a created thing, are but
effects, signs, and small streams of this Ocean. If we reflect on the nature
of this divine flame, it is most pure, sincere, and liberal; no precedent
motive could raise it, being in it self before all things; no hope of proper
interest could draw it is intention, being in it self Ens independens nec
indigens aliquo. Independent, nor vvanting other. Finally, observe the order of
it is progress; it first began with man, and fetching a compass thorough all
other creatures comes with them all back again to Man; placing man only
Principium and finis, The beginning and end, of all his wonders. Behold at
lenght, o Man, to what an height thy obligation is mounted as high as the
Godhead it self; then tell me, Quomodo retribues Domino? how vvilt thou make
retribution to thy Lord?

Conclude with an humble and perfect gratitude, to close up the circle which
God has begun; that is, as he by love has made all creatures for thee, and
thee the Lord and Gran Seigner of them all, so resolve thou to return both
them and thy self by love and gratitude to the honor of thy Creator.

7. Consider seauenthly the poor and low condition of the Receiver, that is of
Man. To do a courtesy for one that stands in small need of it, may be kindly
accepted for the good will of the giver only, but otherwise not much esteemed;
which yet, were the receiver in necessity of it, would deserve another sort
of respect and gratitude. So then it is, God the giver is no way bound, but
most frankly and freely gives what and where he pleases; but poor man
stands in such extreme necessity, first of having, and then of keeping what
he has; that, as at first he is Prorsus nihil, mere nothing, without the
bounty of his benefactour; so would he without the same continual influence
and conservation soon return and vanish into his former nothing. Be not
therefore obstinately blind, o Man but see and acknowledge this thy
fundamental duty and obligation, ingrafted in thy very being, and written in
the book of Nature; to which the whole universe and all creatures give
testimony, that Ex part Dei, of God side all is a free and liberal donatiue;
but Ex part tua, of thy side, all is a mere and pure necessity, as well
what thou art in thy self, as what thou enioyest from the rest of creatures
lift not then any more thy head against God, with those ungrateful vipers who
say, at least in their herts, Manus nostra excelsa, and non Dominus fecit haec
omnia: Our mighty hand, and not the lord has made all those things: but
rather.

Conclude most humbly with, Omma fecisti in nobis, Domine; Thou have made all
things in us, o Lord; and so settle once for all in thy heart a true and
rational feeling of thy duty to God, for the whole world and thy self: the
only motive to perpetual gratitude, and the only antidote against pride.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. What Man is bound to return to God for all his
benefits; to wit, Love.
1. COnsidr first, how having evidently concluded the obligation and debt of
man toward God for all his benefits received, it follows now to seek out,
what it is that Man is bound by the law of gratitude to return unto him, in
recompense and requital for all; for sure it is, that, whereas an obligation
requires a retribution, at least of gratitude, Man being so much obliged and
knowing himself to be so, must of necessity have somevvhat where with, in
some proportion at least, to satisfy his Creator; for otherwise, both the
obligation were void and of none effect; and man would live in continual
anguish, as knowing himself most obliged, and yet no way able to show
himself grateful. Again, it is certain, that what he returns must be a
thing of his own; and, as we say, his proper stock; that is, in his own
free power, disposing and command; otherwise it would not be a free offer; nor
acceptable to his Lord: what thing then must this be? it cannot be this
outward world, nor any of the creatures in it; for these may by violence be
taken and wrested from him, and so not freely at his disposal; the same may
be said of his body and all his members, nay the same of his soul and all her
inferior senses? only therefore his Liberum arbitrium his free will can by
no force be taken from him, that is, Ipso inuito, against his will subjected
to any command; whose first act and, as I may say, eldest daughter being Love,
this is the Jewel or Oriental pearl which man may and must offer in
gratitude to his God.

Conclude with thanks to God, for the finding a Jewel so acceptable unto
him; and begin from henceforth to make the daily offering of Love unto him;
but see that it be entire and sincere.

2, Consider secondly the worth and value of Love in the sight of God, and how
well he rests content and satisfied therewith. First, Love Perse and sine
omni alto, alone without any thing else, is ever pleasing and acceptable; in
so much, that noe man, how rich and full soever, refuses to accept and embrace
any man's love that shall be sincerely offered him; nay, whatsoever is offered
without love or the appearance thereof, is no way grateful or acceptable to
any man. Secondly, the gift of love is only free, frank and liberal, and all
other gifts are styled so, only from the love and good will, with which
they are presented. Thirdly, all those that love, desire nothing so much as to
be loved again; nay indeed they desire nothing else; hence they grieve, pine
away and die, if they obtain not that. See then, o my soul, the singular
esteem and desire God has of thy love: he is full in himself of all bliss,
Et bonorum tuorum non egens; and needing none thy goods; yet he is, as it
were, a petitioner to thee for thy love; Fili, praebe mihi cer tuum: Son,
gine me thy heart: and, as one louessick, desiring nothing but to be loved
again of thee; his will and pleasure is, that thou imitate him in nothing but
in Love, and what follows from love; his other attributes he reserueth to
himself, this one of Love he will have common and mutual: with Love alone he
acknowledges himself fully satisfied for all his benefits: finally to Love
alone he gives this privilege, to do what thee pleases, Ama, and fac quod
vis. Love and do what thou wills.

Conclude with great joy of heart, that thou have found out so precious a
levvell as Love; so properly thy own, so acceptable to God, so satisfoctory
for all his benefits: resolve to set all other things aside, and employ thy
self wholly in this oblation of Love.

3. Consider thirdly the qualities and conditions, that this Love must have, to
be pleasing and acceptable; which may be gathered, first from the Love that
God bears to Man: next from the service which the creatures yield him. God
therefore loves man above all creatures; nay properly speaking, he loves none
but Man; since, for man alone he made all: so must Man love God above all, or
rather God alone; for from God alone, and none other, he receives and holds,
what he has. God has subjected the obedience and service of Creatures to Man
alone; so let Man dedicate his whole love and service to God alone. Finally
God's love to Man is infinite and continual; so must Man's love to God be
with proportion, Ex tota anima and omnibus viribus. With thy whole soul,
and with all thy strength. Now for the creatures; as they offer to Man the
best they have; the heavens the best of their influences, the earth the best of
her fruits, the beasts, the best and utmost of their labors and endeauours: so
ought Man offer to his God the best and utmost of his service, that is a Love,
pure, active and constant. Creatures serve man by day and night, in hot and
cold, fair and foul vveather, and that sincerely without deceir or self
respect: so must Man love and serve his God, in what condition soever he be,
sick or well, poor or rich, purely to please and content him.

Conclude to learn and practice this lesson of Love; learn from God a love;
ardent, liberal, and noble: learn from the creatures, a love, humble ready
and sincere: learn finally from both a love of one only, towit of God, who
ever craves Amorem integrum, entire love, without consortship of any.

4. Consider fourthly, how man can have no excuse not pretext from complying
with his obligation of Love: for first the free will of man is equal and the
same in all; that is, absolutely her self above all command or power
whatsoever; she can neither be forced, nor yet hindered from affecting and
loving, what and whom ^he pleases; nay she always is in love of some thing
or other; and why then should not this be of her God only; whom, Ex tustitia
and iure naturae, out of justice, and right of nature. She is bound to love,
and who only is in himself worthy of her love? surely noe business, noe
time, noe place can exempt her from loving, she being ever her self in all
business, time and place. O my soul, think a little on this, and call home at
length thy wandering love unto it is proper center. Secondly, in all other
occupations either of mind or body, there happens pains, labor, toil, and
at length tediousness and vverisomenesse: and for this it is lawful to admit
of interruptions and vacancies; Neque semper arcum tendit Apollo. Nor does
Apollo always bend his bovv. But in Love all happens the quite contrary;
so far is Love from pains, labor and tediousness, that her prime and
indivisible companions are, joy, content, liuelines, and infatigablenes: never
was it heard of a true lover wearied or tired out: nay, Love alone it is that
makes all other difficulties easy; and all pains seem pleasures, all
torments roses: what then, o Man, can now excuse thee, but thy own
ingratitude and sloth, from loving thy God with fervor and perseverance.

Conclude with new admiration and gratitude, to see the immense sweetness and
benignity of thy God who, having obliged man so far above his ability of
requital, yet for all obliges him to the easiest thing of all, to wit, Love,
and to nothing else: o for love or shame, return him what he desires.

5. Consider fifthly the surpassing bounty and benignity of our good God: his
only desire is, that man would love him; for this he bestovved on him all
that is created; for this he follovveth him, as J may say, day and night; for
this he vvooeth him by all means imaginable, without ceasing or tiring: and
for whom all this? Cui bono? for whose good? for his own profit or
commodity think you? o nothing less; he is Ab aeterno from all eternity
enery way full, Et non eget nostris; and needs not any thing of ours: for
whom then, but for man^ alone? so that this very love, so much sued for by
God, redoundeth wholy and solely to the profit, honor and commodity of the
same Man. Come hither all you, whom nothing but proper interest and lucre can
move and draw; here is a new way of gaining Mill per centum, a thousand the
hundred, most easy and yet most pleasing to both parties. The service of
creatures is profitable to Man for his bare being and subsistence in this life;
which, as on their part it is forced and commanded, so on man's side it is so
necessary as that without it he presently leaves to be and dies: but the
service of Love, that Man does unto God, or rather unto himself; is free,
frank and noble, yet gives to Man his well being for this life, and that to
come; and without which he utterly, nay eternally dies. Finally whatsoever
either God, the Creatures or Man does, is all for the good and profit of Man
alone, Ver^ grandis Monarcha cui totus famulatur orbis. A great Monark in deed,
whom the whole world serves.

Conclude therefore ever to love, if thou mean to live, begin hence forward
this new way of trading, to get thy best living by loving; more easy and more
honorable than some, that get it by playing: finally offer thy God peculiar
thanks and gratitude.

6. Consider sixthly another most admirable effect of this love which Man
owes to God; which is the uniting of all other creatures unto the same God:
for first, all other creatures both in heaven and earth, are by their natural
service and obedience to man wholy for him and united to him; next Man is, or
at least should be united to his God by an humble and constant love: whence it
follovveth clearly, that all creatures also are in and by the love of man
united and conioined with God, the Finis and Summum bonum, the last end, and
final good of all things: Ponder here, o Man, both thy dignity and also
obligation; God has made thee the end of all his creatures, all being created
forthy service: then again, he has appointed thee for the sole mediator
betwixt him and his creatures, to reunite them by love unto himself, their
first beginning: noe small dignity. Next thy obligation, is, to keep and
conserve with all thy power this knot and union of all other creatures with
thy self to God; for so thou shall first, abundantly satisfy the creatures
for the service they do thee; next, repay God almighty for all his benefits;
and finally, preserve the order of the whole universe, which consists in
this progress and combination of creatures with themselves and their God. O
the force and prerogative of Love! The love of God was the first and sole
cause of all things; and nothing but the Love of Man can orderly reduce them to
God again.

Conclude to keep this chain unviolated; let not God and the whole world
complain of thee, for the sole breaker and interrupter of so beauteous an
order, least both God and his creature^ rise up against thee, as their common
enemy.

7. Consider seventhly, that although Man owe love to none but to God, as
having received nothing from any but him yet there is another love or respect
due to his creatures, merely because they are his and belonging to him; so
subordinate and derived from the first Love, that it may be rather called an
extension of the same Love, than another distinct: now as the perfectest of all
God's creatures is Man, in who as in fine and soft wax is most lively
imprinted the very image and likeness of the Divinity, in the height of his
understanding, liberty of his will, and the treasure of his memory; so Man
alone above all is to be honored, respected and loved, merely and solely
because he is the image of God. Hence it follows first, that because this
image of God is the same in all men, as well others, as our selves, pesants as
Kings, foes as friends etc. therefore we are bound to love and respect all
alike, our neighbor as well as our selves, poor as rich, foes as friends;
for there can be noe just difference of affection, where the motive is and
can, be but one, to wit the image of God: and if any other motive or respect
be pretended, it will prove false and injurious to God, as not derived from
him. It follows secondly, that the obligation we have to love our neighbor
as our selves, is in the same rank with our obligation to God; that is, in
the rigor of justice and the law of nature, and not a thing of ceremony or
courtesy, as most men think.

Conclude seriously to comply with this thy obligation better than hitherto;
and resolve to love thy neighbor Non lingua, sed opere and veritate. Not in
word only, but in work and in deed. Let not any vvrong he can do thee,
strike out of thy memory the Image of God he bears; o never dare, with the
vvrong of God to revenge thy self on Man.

8. Consider eighthly, how God and the creatures do show us the order and
manner, the love of our neighbor must observe. God has imprinted
indifferently in all men his likeness and image: again he loves all men with
an equal and common love, because they bear his image: finally he bestows
his benefits equally, Es pluit super iustos and iniustos. And rayneth upon
just, and unjust. So must one man honor love and assist an other equally,
indifferently, and alike, In quantum est imago Dei. In as much as he is the
Image of God. Secondly, the creatures serve and obey all men equally and
without exception; the sun, the moon, the stars, the elements, the trees,
the beasts make no difference betwixt Pope and Clarke, Prince and pesant, rich
and poor; shall then Man alone make a distinction or inequality in his fellow
and brother, where God and the Creatures find none? o for shame and the honor
of our nature, the shape and picture of the God head, let us honor, love and
respect one an other, with an equal and mutual correspondence; so grateful
to God, so comely and decent in it is own nature, and of so great honor and
commodity to Man himself. For what greater honor, than for all men to love
one the other? and what greaten commodity to all mankind than what this so
strong a knot can and will afford? if Vis vnita be fortior, if united force be
the stronger, noe doubt but the union of love and true amity is Fortissima and
inuincibilis. Most strong and invincible.

Conclude to embrace and conserve true amity with all; but above all, in a
Community; o what a comfortable sight it is to see a community in peace and
concord? where enery one gives due respect and honor to his betters, equals
and superiors: let not vain pretenses of right or vvrong ever drive thee to
disturb a common peace.

THE SECOND CHAPTER, Of the qualities and effects of Love.
LOVE being the tribute we must pay unto God, let us consider next the
nature, conditions and effects of this love, by which our souls may be the
more enamoured with its beauty, as also fly and abhor the more its deadly
and greatest enemy, to wit, proper love; whose deformity also shall be known
by the effects.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of the nature and conditions of Love, both good and bad.
1. COnsider first, that, (as we have already concluded) there is nothing
left us in this world, that we may truly and freely esteem or call
our-owne, but Love; for whatsoever else besides Love, that we seem to have,
is not truly in our power, or at our disposing; but may be taken from us, and
disposed of against our wills. Hence it follows first, that if our. Love be
good, all that we have of our own is good, and consequently we our selves
are good: but if our Love be bad, then all that we have is bad, and we also
with it. Secondly, our Love is all our stock; then, if we bestow it on any,
we give him all that we have; and if we lose it, we lose all we have,
and are undone; and then we lose our Love, when we bestovv it vnvvorthily,
and on them to whom it is no way due. Thirdly, if all that we call good and
virtuous is nothing else but good Love, that is, Love well bestovved; then
surely, that man is truly virtuous, whose Love is good and well bestovved;
and if all our tuillbe love ill bestovved, then he is absolutely ill and
vicious, whose Love is so. O the great force of Love, which alone, and
independing of the whole world, can make us good and bad, virtuous and
vicious happy and miserable!

Conclude to look on Love, as on the tree in Paradise, Scientiae boni and
mali; of the knowledge of good and evil; or rather Vitae and mortis. of life
and death: and look in time about thee, on what object thou do cast thy
love; esteem no more thy self nor any other, but according to the quality of
your loves.

2. Consider secondly, how the nature and property of Love is, to conjoine,
unite, nay change and convert the Lover into the thing loved: for Love is a
gift freely and frankly be stovved on whom we please, and as long as we
please; so that our love is now totally his, to whom we have given it; a
thing now under his dominion and command: now if Love carry the will with
it, and the will command the whole man as it does; it follovveth immediately,
that the will also and the whole man is solely and totally his, whom he
loves, at his command and disposing; and this subjection is so much the
greater and more durable, in that it is not by violence or force of any, but by
a free and voluntary transaction or gift, and so not to be taken of by the
command or force of any; but only when love and the will it self pleases:
yet, as long as she is a servant, she of necessity vveareth the livery of her
beloved: so that the love or will, which loves earthly things, be comes in
her self earthly; if carnal, bestiall and superfluous things, ^he becomes
also carnal, bestiall and superfluous; finally if our love be of men, it is
humane; if of Christ, Christian; and if of God, it is divine.

Conclude hereafter to bestovv thy love on some noble and worthy object; for
of all miseries and fooleries none is so great, as for one to cast himself
voluntarily under the dominion of a base companion for his mate and fellovv.

3. Consider thirdly, that Love is due to noe creature whatsoever, but only
to God almighty; and this is evident, first, because by Love we are changed
into the thing loved; he then that loves things inferior to himself, as are
all the things of this world, debaseth himself most unworthily, contrary to
the nature of all other creatures, who evermore adhere to the perfecter, and
strive to advance themselves: whereas therefore none but God can any way
perfect or better our will, surely none but he is worthy of our love.
Secondly, our will, and with her the whole man, by love becomes a servant
and subject to the thing beloved; but it is contrary to all reason and justice,
that any subject himself either to his inferior or equal, but only to his
better, and consequently only to God by love. Thirdly, love requires love,
which none can return us so truly, so to our advantage, as the infinite
sweetness of our loving God; what then do we so hunt after barren and
deceitful loves and friendships, and omit the source and origin of all true
love, ever open and ever crying unto us; Fili. praebe mihi cor tuum? Son,
give me thy heart:

Conclude, but with a strong and manly resolution, never to stoop any more
thy love to any creature; but to mount it up, and six it only in the Creator,
be sorry therefore, and from this present, retract all leagues of love and
friendship with creatures, and make a new and firm one with thy God.

4. Consider fourthly, that as the thing chiefly and principally loved can be
but one, so true love in it self can be but one; yet so, as that from this one
and head-loue do flow and depend all other desires, affections and loves of
our souls, as so many boughs or branches from one stock; so that, if our
first love be good and virtuous, all the rest of our affections are good also
and virtuous; but bad and vicious, if the first love be so. Moreover, our first
love takes after the nature of the thing first beloved, being, as we have
said, converted and changed into it: hence it follows first, that if our
first love be of God, she becomes most high, beauteous, rich and constant; God
in himself being so: but if it be of any creature; then she is low, poor,
frail, inconstant, never content, never secure; for so are all creatures. It
follows secondly, that if God be her best beloved, then she becomes most
generous, ample, and common; loving all creatures alike for his respect,
because they are his and loved by him: but if any particular creature be her
darling, then she is poor and narrow-hearted, full of selfe-respects, private
interests, and by-intentions; for such are all creatures.

Conclude again, to fix thy love on God alone, that so it may be sweet in it
self for thy own soul, and for others common and profitable: o free thy
self from the slavery of a base and abject love, what soever it cost thee;
mark how-thou hate in others a narrow-hearted mind.

5. Consider fifthly, how there can be but two things chiefly and principally
loved; towit, either God, or some creature; and of creatures it must be that
which is most united and conioined with us, that is our selves, and our own
proper will; and this love is called proper love, a capital and declared enemy
against the Sacred and Eternal Deity. For first, a will forsaking God and
placing her love in her self, makes her self the but, the first and last
object of all her thoughts, words and deeds; and is in this a traitor to
God, and sacrilegiously snatcheth from his head the crown of his Deity; for it
is God's privilege only, to love himself, and to subsist in the pleasure of
his own will. Secondly the will that loves her self, loves all other
things for her self only, subiecteth all things else to her own pleasure
honor and glory: which is an other sacrilege and theft; for God made all
things for his own honor only. O horrible monster of proper love, Qui
exaltat se super omne quod dicitur Deus, aut quod colitur! which exalts it
self above all that which is called God, or which is worshipped! but alas,
she will never carry is so; for the true God will, as he pleases, take his
own revenge, and hurry her into eternal oblivion.

Conclude with trembling and fear, to see how easily vvordlings contemn and
tread down God almighty's sole prerogative; and that for a little interest, a
beastly pleasure: resolve thou never to be any more so audacious; but fight on
thy God's side against so-soule a monster.

6. Consider sixthly, that as the love of God is the ground and origin of all
goodness content and happiness; so the love of our selves is the ground and cause
of all wickedness, discontent and misery. For the love of God makes a soul
holy, humble, benign, and quiet; but proper love makes her irreligious,
proud, cursed and turbulent. The love of God is like to him, bounteous, ample
and generous: but proper love is miserable narrow and base-hearted. The love of
God makes the soul free, exempt, and above the command of all her
fellow creatures; but proper love makes her a slave, and subject to the lowest
and vilest of creatures. The love of God enricheth the soul with a thousand
constant and stable Jewels; but proper love with nothing but fume and vanity.
The love of God enlightneth the soul to see and apprehend clearly, both what
her self is, and what her God, and all other things are: but proper love
blinds so all the senses, that nothing appears as it truly is. O poor
vvorldling, raise up thy head out of thy own bosom, and look toward heaven,
Vbi pulchritudo est and satietas aeterna. Where is beauty and eternal
satietie.

Conclude to cast this viper, this refined poison out of thy heart; and
cordially to embrace the love of thy God: hereby thou vvilt please God more,
then if thou should raise the dead to life; and thy soul will soon feel
the difference betwixt this sweet and sour love.

7. Consider seuently how the love of God is most honored, and praised of
all; but proper love most odious and hateful to all: the reason is manifest;
for the love of God is one and the same in all those that love God, and so by
it all are united with God and amongst themselves, by the conformity of their
loves and the unity of the thing loved: so all must needs be peace, concord and
content among them; all, mutual love and joy, for the common prosperities of
one another. But on the contrary, the object of proper love is different in
every one, for that every one loves himself chiefly, and other things no
further then they conduce, to their own commodity, content, or honor: the
loves therefore, and consequently such lovers, must be as different as their
objects beloved; that is every one for himself; and so can hang no otherwise
together then Samsons foxes, by the tail of some interest or pleasures; which
once loosened, all falls to confusion, jarres, vvarres, and endless strifes,
every one standing a loofe from the rest, and upon the guard only of his own
honor and profit: and so opposing, envying, and wresting from others by right
or vvrong, what he can, o what can there be amongst such, but a hellish hatred
and malice?

Conclude as thou hopest for a heaven both in this and the next life, to love
thy God. Ex tote cord, and ex tota anima: From thy whole heart, and from thy
whole soul, and as for proper love let it be in thy self, as it is in
others, the object of thy hate: and know, that if ever thou concur to the
breaking of peace, it is out of self-love that enslaueth thee.

8. Consider eighthly, that although self-love be such a monster; yet one
excellent lesson may be drawn from it; which is, the manner and order how
we ought to love God: for observe what method a self lover uses in loving
himself, and the same a true lover must keep in loving of God. First then, a
selfe-louer loves and follows solely his own will and pleasure, and no
man's else; so must a true lover follow the will of God, and no other.
Secondly, a self louet seeks and cherishes no man's honor but his own,
prefers it before all others, and would have all men honor and respect him
only: in the same manner must a true lover exalt and procure God's honor by
himself and others, and hate all honor that is not consistent with God's
honor; abate and destroy it. Thirdly, a self lover seeks his own praise
and fame, that all speak well and none ill of him; so a true lover must seek
Gods praise only, inuit, all ^o his praises, and not suffer with patience
the least word spoken against him. Finally, a selfe-louer expects that men
love not only him, hut all that belongs unto him, his cat, his dog: so must
a true lover love not only God, but all that is God's also, that is all his
creatures in their rank and place, as they appertain to God.

Conclude to learn and practice this pious lesson: look ever upon thy own
heart, and what thou find there pleasing to thee, transfer it all and pass
it over to thy God: this may seem but little for him, but J vvish all would
give him that.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the fruits of good and bad Love, both in this and in
the next world.
1. COnsider first, that as every tree or plant bears and yields a
different fruit, according to it is kind; so the two prime loves of God and our
selves planted in our hearts, like trees in a field, must needs bring forth
their different fruits; and that as contrary and opposite as they themselves
are. The last and final fruit that accrueth to man out of all his labors and
endeauours in this world, can be no other than joy or sadness: for all other
effects pass away, and these only remain; it is joy, content, and quietness of
heart, that man seeks for, in all his labors, and having found it, rests
himself there and seeks no further but it is sadness, grief and affliction of
mind he flies from with all his might. Now sadness is an ill fruit, and so
cannot proceed but from an ill tree, that is, from self love; and joy, being a
good fruit, must spring from the good tree of the love of God. See my soul,
what follows hence; the fruit is like the tree, that is, joy like to the
love whence it proceeds: true love is like to the thing loved, that is, like
to God; and hence true joy must be like to God, that is immortal, most
copious, most beauteous and most sweet.

Conclude Seminare semen bonum in agro tuo, to sovv good seed in thy field, as
thou hopest for a ioy^ull harvest; o plant in thy heart, and preserve with the
morning and evening watering of prayer, the fair plant of the love of God; Et
dabit tibi fructum suum in tempore s^o. And it shall give thee its fruit in
its time.

2. Consider secondly the happiness a true lover of God enjoys in this world:
true Love and true Joy run on Aequis passibus; with aquall paces; first
then, as the Love of God is pure, holy and divine; so is the Joy, full of pure,
holy and divine delights and pleasures. Secondly, Joy, flowing from Love, is
the life of man, Nulla enim vita, vbi nullum gaudium; For there is no life,
where there is no joy; all that man seeks for, is joy and content, and
having found that which is true, flowing from true love, he rests and
feeds on that; Gaudium enim dilatat cor, nutrit and delectat. For joy
dilates, nourishes, and delights the heart. Thirdly, as true love is only
and totally inwardly in the will and heart; so is true joy, and consequently
the true happiness of man consists in the inward content of his heart and
will; and this joy, like his love, can never be taken from him by any force,
being supported by the liberty of his will; and so he may be ever joyful and
content, if he please. O worldlings, what seek you in outward riches,
honors, pleasures? content? Non est, vbi quaeritis; intus est non foris. It is
not where you seek it; it is within not without. Fourthly, as Love
extends it self from God to all his creatures for him; so does also joy: and
hence does true joy multiply and increase as fast as men do: so that all is
joy, Intus and foris; within and vvithour, all mirth; no envy, hatred,
jealousy, or debates among true lovers.

Conclude, as thou hopest for any true happiness in this world, to foster and
cherish in thy heart the true and sweetest love of God. Believe the Prophet,
and thou shall find him to say true: Videte and gustate, quoniam suauis est
Dominus. See and taste, for our lord is svveete.

3. Consider thirdly, that joy, the fruit of true love, must be in the next
life in it is height and full perfection; the law of true love is, that the
lovers conceal and hide nothing from each other: as therefore the true loving
soul has in this life discovered and opened her self totally to her beloved.
Et effudit in conspectu Dei animam suam; And has povvred out her soul in the
sight of God: and God has as yet showed himself unto her in the cloud only
of faith, or the like; so he by the laws of love, must open himself clearly
unto this loving soul in the next life, that being the Terminus and non plus
vltra end end utmost of all her desires and actions. The loving soul therefore
seeing God clearly with his radiant perfections and attributes, shall there
arrive to the height of her love, for Bonum quo magis cognitum, eo magis
amatum; good the more it is known, the more is it loved; and consequently to
the height of her joy and final content, for joy follows the proportion of
love. Finally, the clear sight of the Deity being unchangeable, the love is
also immovable, and by good consequence, the joy perpetual and secure; Et hac
est aterna felicitas, anima mea. And this, my soul, is eternal felicity.
See, o my soul, and admire the soaring vving, and sharp eye of this Eagle
Love; she never stops, till she enter and discover the bosom of the Deity.

Conclude to pour out thy heart here to thy God in a true, fervent and
constant love: take heed no creature have any share in it, as thou hopest to
have God totally in heaven: know, the law of love is, Totum pro toto. All for
all.

4. Consider fourthly, bow, as next to the love of God is the love of our
neighbor like our selves; so, next to the joy the love of God produces in us,
is the joy the love of our neighbor causes; and because we love our
neighbor as our selves, it follows that our joy of his bliss is equal to
the joy of our own. See then and conceive if thou can o my soul, the
multiplication and reciprocation of our joy in heaven; where every one is to
have and eniy the joys of all the blessed, both Angels and men, according to
the measure and extent of love, which is to all and every one. This is what
the Prophet promises us: Tunc videbis and afflues, and mirabitur and
dilatabitur: cor tuum. Then shall thou see, and abound, and thy heart shall
marvel and be enlarged. There is yet one tortent more of joy and delight, Quo
inebriabimur in domo Dei, with which we shall be inebriated in the house of
God, which is this. All the Blessed do love God infinitely more than
themselves or any other; and consequently rejoice in his bliss without
comparison more than in their own or of all the rest; and because all are
united by love and joy to God, they all meet and concur in one an other's
joys intrinsecally in the very God head; where after a wonderful manner they
see, love and enjoy one the other: Nec datur plus vltra. And this is the utmost.

Conclude to practice here the love of thy neighbor; and to rejoice here at
his good hap, both spiritual and temporal; that so thou may here begin thy
heaven: and let thy love of him be purely for God, and in God; for so will all
turn to thy own bliss and joy.

5. Consider fifthly, how our good God is a most true lover, and so according
to the Psalmist Voluntatem timentium se faciet, and deprecationem eorum
exaudiet. He will do the will of them that fear him, and will hear their
prayer. The happy soul: finding her self in the Ocean, of bliss, to which
love has brought her, casts down her eyes upon her old companion, her body,
nay and upon all the inferior globe, which have served her as foot steps to
raise her to that height; and vvishing them well and also happy in their
degree, God almighty presently grants her desire, and will in due time raise
them both to a perfect consistence of happiness; that is, the body shall be
reunited to the soul, not as now, gross, mortal, seoble; but immortal,
strong, and beauteous; a decent tabernacle for such a foul: and the whole
universe shall be clothed in a livery of parmanent verdure, delight, pleasure,
beauty and brightness In sacula saeculorum, and erit Deus omnia in omnibus. For
ever, and God shall be all in all. View now and admire, o Christian soul, the
golden and precious chain of Love; by love all things received their being and
conservation; by love they all wheel about, and at length return to their
first origin; by love they all have eternal joy and bliss in him, every thing
according to it is capacity: Cui sit aeternus honor and gloria. Amen. To whom
be everlasting honor and glory Amen.

Conclude to buy this Oriental pearl of Love, whatsoever pains and charges
it cost thee. O make thy self with men and all other creatures happy in this
world and in the next; o let none be miserable, if thou can help it.

6. Consider sixthly on the other side, the fruits that proceed from
self-love, which sure must be opposite to the fruits of true love. And yet
we must grant that self-love yields also a certain kind of joy or
content; for whosoever obtains the honor, the pleasure, or commodity he
loves, must needs take some content and joy; and this it is that makes men so
merry, laughing, and iouiall: but alas, if we look into the inside of it,
we shall find it a painted joy, and a true sadness. For first, this kind of
joy is never obtained but with infinite toil, disgust, nay damage of others,
and the ruin of our own souls; whereas true joy costeth no pains, is sweet
to others, and profitable to our selves. Secondly, this joy, being gotten, is
most opposite and injurious to God; fot to rejoice in a sin committed is
worse than a simple love of it; nay it is an absolute and final contempt of
God: and can this be to any soul a true comfort? Thirdly, this joy is most
short, frail and unconstant; nay sure not to hold long, but to end in eternal
misery and sadness: so that, contrary to true joy, it is hateful to God and
man; and brings with it, or leaves behind it, a true, bitter and
everlasting grief and sadness. O worldlings, reflect a little on your broken
sleeps, and daily thoughts; and sure you will confess your joys to be mere
butterflies.

Conclude to vndeceiue thy self and friends at much as thou can; open thy
eyes, and be not taken with so foolish and bitter a bait: but resolve to lay
the axe at the root and cut of self-love.

7. Consider seuently, that if true love have for it is fruit after this life,
eternal joy and content, surely self-love must, on the contrary, have
eternal sadness and anguish. And this anguish shall be twofold; the first, such
a soul shall be totally and eternally deprived and dispossessed of whatsoever
she desires and longs for; what delights, honors, commodities she enjoyed
here, are now left all behind; and yet she longs more than ever for them; but
in vain: again, the true good and happiness, for which she was created, she
then will see most clearly and desire most vehemently; and withal she sees
her self eternally deprived of it, and that by her own fault only. O most
wretched creature, that shall never more enjoy any glimpse of either true or
false good! Secondly, she shall be forced to have all that is most odious,
adverse and grievous to her: and first, for her eternal habitation, a
darkesome and stinking dungeon must be her house; her companions and
play-fellowes, no better than devils; the element she must live in, fire and
brimstone; her food, the worm of her guilty conscience etc. and all this for
ever, whether she will or no. O most sad and sullen condition, Vbi nihil adest
quod vult anima, and nihil deest quod non vult! where nothing is present, that
the soul would have, nothing vvanting which it would not have!

Conclude with new hatred to the viper of proper love, that at length deuoureth
even that poor and painted joy, which was at first proffered and promssed: o
turn in time thy thoughts and affections to that good which will never fail
thee.

8. Consider eighthly, how both God and all creatures will take full revenge of
self-love in the next world O what torments will the omnipotency of an
offended God heap upon such a soul, which here so scorned his offers. so
slighted his goodness, so abused his benefits, so contemned his menaces and
threats; and yet knowing for certain, that he could and would revenge
himself to the full: finally, which here, by loving, esteeming and preferring
her self before her Creator, labored all she could to snatch from his head
the crown and prerogative of the Deity, and usurp it to her self! o how will
he hurl her down into an abyss of eternal contempt, shame, dishonor, under
the center of the earth, where all the world shall trample and kick at her
Insaecula saeculorum; for ever without end, where all the creatures will
rise up against her, Et pugnabunt contra insensatam, and will fight against
the senseless, to revenge both their Creatour's vvrong and their own, in
abusing them for her own pleasure, against her and their Creatour's will and
honor. Who can apprehend the confusion it will be, never more to hope for one
good look from her Creator nor any creature; nay nor for one thought of her
self, which shall not afflict and torment her?

Conclude to abhor such a monster, as is self-love; and with all thy force
to love, serve and obey thy Creator; and to abuse none of his creatures; but
to direct thy self and all to his sole service and honor: God is Patiens
redditor, a patient revvarder, that is, most terrible, if finally contemned.

9. Consider ninthly, how these two Capital loves, of God and our selves, have
for their last and final effect two Kingdoms or Cities, founded by them, and
inhabited by their Clients and followers; but more contrary and opposite in
situation and condition than are the North and South poles; or, as the phrase
is, as distant as heaven and hell, being indeed no other than heaven and hell:
and this is most conformable to the divine justice and equity, that such deadly
enemies should be separated one from an other without any commerce or
communication for ever, because they are never to be reconciled: and then,
where must the true lovers of God be, but with him in those highest Palaces
of heaven, above all creatures? and where selfe-louers, but by themselves,
under ground, trodden down, and oppressed by all creatures, vvronged by them?
True lovers, whose love is large, mounting, heavenly, deserve no less than
those vast and high orbs for their habitation; and selfalouers, whose hearts
are narrow, low and obscure dungeons. Now as for the condition of these Cities,
let it suffice Quod in vna est omne and purum bonum sine mixtura mali; in
altera omne and purum malum sine mixtura boni, in saecula saeculorum. That in
the one is all good. without the least mixture of evil; in the other all evil
without the least mixture of good, for all eternity.

Conclude, and make now thy choice which of these Cities thou desire to be
made free denison of: but resolve this also, that having once made thy choice,
thou take and keep the right way unto it; let no company, kindred or respect
divert thy steps; say always. Haec est via, non illa. This is the way, not
that.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of Man's obligation to fear, honor, and praise God.
AFTER the obligation of Love, which is the first of passions, follow many
others, of fear, of honor, of praise etc. all which Man is bound to pay and
offer to God only, and to noe other creature; much less to himself;
although, as in Love so in these also, all the profit and commodity will
redound to himself only.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of the fear and reverence Man owes to his Creator.
1. COnsider first how God, being the great Artificer or work man of both the
bigger and lesser world, has made nothing in vain, but all for some
particular end and service: that is, all other creatures for the service of
Man, and man immediately for his own service; for nothing mediateth betwixt God
and Man, he being God's image and likeness hence it follovveth, that, as
whatsoever inferior creatures have is all for Man's use, so whatsoever Man
has above them, must be dedicated to Gods's service; and what is that but all
the good acts of his will and understanding? so that vvhatsoouer he is able to
do by any of these, he is bound to offer it continually all to his Maker: why
therefore has he vnderdanding, unless if be to contemplate his Creator? why
a free will, but to love his maker? has he the power to praise or extol?
surely he can so justly praise none, as his own Lord and Father. Can he give
honor or glory to any? and can he then omit to honor and glorify his God, the
Primum principium, the prime source, of all his good? can he rejoice in the
good of any, and not in the good of his Sumiuum bonum? his chiefest good?
Finally, whom can a creature fear but his Creator; or whom can a child
reverence and respect, but his Father?

Conclude to employ all these faculties and acts otherwise than perhaps thou
have hitherto done or thought on: labor to reduce, as far as in thee lies,
the order and happiness of our earthly Paradise; that is, reduce thy superior
part to a perfect obedience, and fear of God; and thy inferior part with
other creatures will soon do the like to thee.

2. Consider secondly that although all other affections follow that of love,
so that giving our love to God, we cannot but give him all the rest; yet
there is an especial reason and motive for every one apart. For first, the
object of love is goodness in it self, and communicated to others; both which
being proper to God alone; he alone is to be loved of all; and most of Man,
who knows this. Secondly, the object of fear is power and dominion; God
then being an omnipotent Lord, and the only Lord of man, it follows that Man
need fear none save God; but fear him continually. Again honor is due to
excellency, and praise to vvisdome and prudence; God then being the source of
all vvorth and dignity, and his wisdom being the producer, and providence
the supreme Governor of all things but especially of Man; sure man is bound by
these titles to honor and praise God above all things. The like is to be said
of faith, grounded on verity, which in God is supreme, Neque fallitur aut
fallit, Neither is he deceived, nor does he deceive, and so an infallible
credit is to be given him by man. Neither ought his hope to be less than
undoubted and certain, having for it is ground a power, a knowledge, a goodness
every way infinite. Finally, all the good affections we can imagine ought to
be referred solely and ever to God.

Conclude, as in thy love so in all the rest of thy affections, to regard and
respect none but God: so shall thou find a happiness in this world: see what a
dignity it is to acknovvledge none over thee but God; and what is greater then
to be under him.

3. Consider thirdly, that as love is the first of all affections so without
love none of the rest, are either acceptable to God, or delightful to the
heart that offers them; so that who fears without love, does it with
pain and sadness, and who honors without love, is but a flatterer; and
neither such fear nor such honor is grateful to God: and the reason is,
because as nothing comes of freely and frankly but love, so nothing can be
acceptable but love, or for love. Let us see then how Love and Fear differ,
and yet with all agree and help one the other. Love is frank and free,
without force and coaction, and consequently ever with Pleasure and delight;
an absolute and all commanding Lord: but fear of it self is the first, that
is the lowest of slaves, alvvayes forced, ever in pain and anguish: again,
Love by it is freedom begins with God, and spreads her vvings over all
creatures for him; but the fear of God stands in awe of him only, and of
no other. Yet they meet together and concur in this, that love sweetneth
fear and makes it free, that is, filial; and fear tyeth and fixes love
fast to God: so these are the two chains that link and fasten a soul to God
both strongly and sweetly?

Conclude to embrace and practice this so sweet and filial fear, and shake
of that other servile one, fit for slaves not children of God: say ever with
the Prophet; Exultate Domino eum tremore; rejoice to our Lord with trembling;
exult with love, and tremble jointly with fear.

4. Consider fourthly, that as from the love of God there follows a holy
fear of him, so also from self-love there arises a fear as bad as it; yet
with this difference; that the fear of God is alone, that is, he that fears
God fears him only, and nothing else either in heaven or hell; but having
his eye ever upon his Lord and God, how to please and content him, as for all
things else, he treads them under his feet, and is moro fearful to them then
afraid of them; and this is easily to be perceived in the very countenance of
those that serve God. But ala^s a selfe-louer, what is it that he fears not?
first his own perdition and damnation; next death, that dreadful monster, the
nighest step to hell; then plagues, wars, sicknesses, the harbingers of
death: next, all sorts of distempers in the weather, as hears or colds, storms
at sea or land; every infirmity of his body, loss of his goods, noise of an
enemy: finally, every shadow of danger, o what frights it puts this poor
wrech into? Et est vita eius pendens ante oculos eius: And his life is hanging
before is eyes: so that in stead of one fear of God, which he rejects, he
is ever assaulted with a thousand most ghastly and ugly fears, and is become
the gally-slaue of every the least and vilest creature.

Conclude to deliver thy self from the thraldom of worldly fear, which
brings so many and daily frights with it; and embrace the fear of God
only, which love sweetneth, and makes free and delightful: Timeat anima mea
Dominum; and confige timore tuo carnes meas. Let my soul fear the lord; and
pearce my flesh with thy fear.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the honor, glory and prai^e Man is bound to give to
God.
1. COnsider first, how God almighty has made the world and all therein,
principally for his own honor and glory, and secondarily for the profit and
vtility of Man: for Man being poor and needy can receive daily more and more
increase and perfection: but God, being every way full and complete in him
self, cannot increase any other way then in outvvard fame honor and
renown; and as, all other creatures serve Man's profit and commodity, so
ought Man to serve God alone in the propagation of his honor and fame. The
honor of power is to do things most povverfully; and hence Man
acknowledges God to be omnipotent, Qui operatur omnia fortiter: who works
all things mightily: the glory of wisdom is to order things most vvisely,
Et quia Deus disponit omnia suauiter, And because God disposes of all things
svveetely. Man styleth him infinitely wise: the renown of goodness is to
disperse gifes and benefits most frankely, freely and abundantly; and, because
God does this beyond all measure, Pluens super iustos and iniustos, rayning
upon just, and unjust, Man cannot but exalt him with the titles of most good,
most liberal, most magnificent. This all creatures do in their dumb
language, but Man alone must supply for all knovvingly and lovingly.

Conclude to esteem the great favors God does thee, first in making the
whole world for thy commodity; next in appointing thee to be the spokes man
for all other creatures, and the sole orator, and dinulger of his name and
praises.

2. Consider secondly the strict obligation that Man has to honor and praise
God, more than all other creatures have. God, as is above said, has made all
for his own honor and glory, this is the end and aim of all his works;
honor therefore and glory is due unto him from his creatures; which duty noe
creature knovving and understanding but Man, it follovveth that man alone for
himself and others is bound to honor, praise and extol the name of God,
with all the power of his heart, and upon all occasions to procure that other
men do the like, in their life, works and words; for this honor of God is he
bound to forgo friends, fortunes, nay life it self, rather than sufler it to
be blemished in the least point. Nor let man fear to be a loser hereby; for
that our good and liberal God annexeth ever to his own honor the profit of
man; and with the same proportion that man multiplyeth and increases the
honor of God outwardly amongst men, does God increase and confer his real
gifts and blessings on Man, Learn, o my soul, this new way of thriuing, so
little practiced in the world; leave the chadow, and take hold on the
substance.

Conclude to be hereafter most careful to propagate Gods honor; and to be
most tender of his good name; o suffer not any, either in earnest or jest, to
disparage in the least point the honor of God, Christ, his Church, or of any
thing that belongs unto them; but oppose them whatsoever they b^e.

3. Consider thirdly, how if the duty of Man be, as it is, to labor and
procure in all his actions the sole honor and glory of God, what an enormious
sin is it, to endeavor the contrary; that is to neglect and contemn the
honor of God, and to seek for and hunt after his own proper honor, fame and
esteem? and yet what other do the ambitious and proud vvordlings day and
night, by sea and land, and by all the vvayes their proud and restless hearts
can invent? on this are their hearts wholy bent; this is all their employment,
not only to make themselves their own Idols, but also to persuade, nay force
all others to praise, honor and adore them only: in which what do they
attempt less than lucifer, to snatch the diadem of glory from the head of
their Creator, and place it on their own, and say in their hearts and deeds,
Ascendam in caelum and similis ero Altissimo? I will ascend into heaven, and I
will be like to the highest? Nay the ambitious man, if he examine his heart
well, will find there such a fury of pride, that to prefer his own Puntillo,
he will not only give way, but even be well content, that Gods honor and
reverence be publicly, and most outragiously beaten down and trodden under
every Villains feet.

Conclude with due horror of so great a crime; and then admire how Christians
can dare to venture on such a blasphemy: reflect also somewhat on thy self,
and I fear thou vvilt hardly defend all thy actions so clearly as thou may
say. Innocens ego sum. I am innocent.

4. Consider fourthly the damages and hurts, that an ambitious man incurreth
by seeking his own honor, and preferring it before Gods. For first, he
breaks and confounds the natural and settled order of the whole Universe,
in drawing all other creatures to honor and exalt him only; and so to decline
from the honor of God; for which only they were all created and ordained.
And this is the root of all the confusions in the world, and makes it next
neighbor to hell; Vbi nullus ordo sed sempiternus horror inhabitat. Where no
order, but everlasting horror inhabiteth. Next it leads him to his own
utter perdition and ruin; for whereas God has reserved all honor and praise
for himself, and has allotted to man his share of profit, and commo^ity;
foolish man by intrenching upon what belongs to God loses also all, that
might be his own; for by affronting and putting himself in this distance
with God, he depriueth himself of all, that he might otherwise receive from
Gods favor and goodness; that is, of all that is any way good: and what then
remains for him, but all that is evil, blindness, misery, and endless
destruction?

Conclude to be a vviser Merchant, then to destroy the whole universe, and thy
self with it; give to God and to his creatures their due, that is, honor him
in all, and then be confident that both they will willingly serve thee: and
God no less bless, nay honor thee too.

5. Consider fifthly, how the vain glorious man builds the honor he
pretends upon the flitting sand of his own nothing, Nisi quod acceperit; but
what he has received; and being void with in of real virtues, yet hunteth
after the fume and vvind of other men's opinions; and so in fine can be compared
to nothing better, then to an empty bladder, filled with the breath of an
other man's mouth; which is again as soon emptied, as at first filled: not
observing, poor wretch, how in the Interim he loses Oleum and operam, his
labor; for let him never hope to be able to erect and establisst his own
honor in opposition to Gods honor: alas what can Nothing do against
omnipotency? no, no, here is verisied litterallie that saying; Accedet homo ad
cor altum, and exaltabitur Deus; man shall come to a deep heart, and God shall
be exalted; man may grow proud in his heart, but in the end only God shall be
exalted; for he only can and will sustain his own honor and glory In
saecula saculorum. Amen. And what then remains for the proud man's lot, but
eternal confusion, ignominy and shame? for as he, that honors God, shall in
the end be eternally honored by him; so he, that here seeks no honor but
his own, shall be eternally confounded, shamed and affronted; neither shall
all the fire of hell ever purge him of it.

Conclude with a final and settled resolution. utterly to renounce self love
and self honor, as the vipers, that consume the bowels of our soul:
whensoever others shall praise thee, or when thy own heart shall approve thy
well doing; pause not there, but presently with a quicknes of spirit say; Non
nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam. Amen. Not to us, o Lord,
not to us, but to thy name give the glory. Amen.

AN APPENDIX. Of the state and vocation of a Scholar and Priest Missionary, or
Seminarist.
IT is common and natural to all men, to praise and set out their own trade
and profession, whatsoever it be; and the reason is, because no man will be
thought by others to have made his choice of the worse. Hence are those as
vain, as endless disputes even among the professors of spiritual
perfection, which of them may in right challenge the precedence, Hic pugnant,
hic praelia miscent; here strifes, there contentions; fighting for the sound or
shadow, and letting sink the substance and obligation, as it is much to be
feared. Wherefore omitting all strife of comparisons, let us nakedly and humbly
consider a little the state, condition, and obligation of those that study and
are bred up in our English Seminaries, and are from thence sent in Apostolical
Mission for the conversion of their poor Country; and to this have obliged
themselves by a vow ratified with a solemn oath Coram Deo and hominibus.
Before God, and men. For this alone is the foundation, institution and practice
of all our English Colleges, beginning from that of Doway (the Mother of them
all, and the very first after the Council of Trent) to this of Lisbo her
youngest child and daughter.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. Of the excellency of learning and condition of a
Scholar.
1. COnsider first, how learning being the ornament of the mind, must as far
exceed all other qualities or faculties of the body, of beasts or of other
creatures; as the mind or soul of man surpasses them all; which is without
proportion. Hence it is that scholars have the preeminency above all other
sort of men; for there is no man, but laughes at a fool, how rich so ever; and
in his heart respects a scholar, though never so poor, admires his
discourses, and willingly submits his judgment to a scholars opinion;
looking on him as on a creature of a higher rank or Species: this made Seneca
say: Philosophiae etiam apud pessimos honor est nunquam tantum conualescit
nequitia; vt non philosophiae nomen venerabile and sacrum maneat: Philosophy
is honored even by the vvorst: neuer-doth wickedness so much prevail, that
the name of Philosophy should not be sacred and venerable: and the Poet; that
Sapiens vno minor est love, dives, liber, honoratus. The wise man is inferior
to none but Jupiter, heis rich, free, and honored by all. Princes Governors,
and Magistrates are thought to know more then other men; and if they be so,
they are truly esteemed; otherwise not: hence Plato thought learning as
necessary for a Prince, as is the soul for the body. Neither regularly can a
scholar be poor, in case he seek after riches and contemn them not; for
surely he has a great advantage over others in the Theoricke; so that a little
industry suffices to make the practical complete.

Conclude to thank God Almighty with all thy heart for placing thee in the
rank of scholars and resolve to be constant in it; let not idle and flitting
fancies of, J. know not what, cast thee down below thy self; a fevv years
will serve to place thee In apice humanitatis. In the full height of learning.

2. Consider secondly the true happiness and content a scholars life has above
all others: look about the world a little and observe the restless toils,
clamours and miseries of all other occupations, trades and callings from the
highest to the lowest, from the King to the cobbler: every one complains of
his state and calling, and wishes he had undertaken some other: only the
scholar knovveth no other, with which to change, if he have but tasted a
little of the quietness and sweetness of his own; being most free from that
common plague, called proper interest, the source of all contentions and
miseries. The pleasure of learning is most pure and Ethereall; most constant,
gathering strength with her increase: finally most secure and honorable,
without any danger of foul diseases, blemish of fame, or breach of
friendship: whereas all other pleasures are gross, tumultuous and fordid,
most short and frail, soon cloyng the appetite, Et nauseam prouocantes: and
provoking loath somenesse: and lastly all of them most hurtful to the body,
dangerous to our credit; and all most incompossible with true friendship, the
only jevvell of this mortal life: and yet hardly sound in her own purity
and luster but amongst scholars:

Conclude to enjoy the fullnes of happiness, that God has cast into thy hands;
and pity rather then envy those, who like blind moles lie rooting up the
pleasures of corpulent dregs: ply hard the cultiuating of thy mind; that thy
delight may ever go increasing think not of change, till others assure thee,
of a condition better then thy own; that is, change never.

3. Consider thirdly the admirable excellency and prerogative of sacred
Divinity. All other arts and sciences are either speculatiue or practical; but
Divinity is both together; her speculatiue part rayseth, or rather ingulfeth
and drovvneth the understanding in the hidden mysteries of the Eternal Deity;
and lodged as it were In sinu Patris, in God the Fathers bosom, pleases her
self in the search of those inconceivable Processions; where to lose her
self, is her greatest delight and her best knowledge. Hence she takes her
slight with more ease thorough the whole created machine, with the
beginning, causes, government, effects and final period of the whole
Universe. O, quid magis animum trahit, quam tanta veritas? O what more
allureth the mind, then so much verity? Her practical part, does regulate
and order all the actions, operations and courses of man's life, from the
highest to the lowest; none escapes her: she setleth and secureth the
mysteries of our Faith, she teaches how to bridle our passions; how to
comply with that our threefold duty, toward God, our neighbor, and our
selves; finally she alone makes a man free and exempt from subjection to
others, in all what belongs to a man O sapientia Altissimi, O vvisedsme of
the highest, how well did Solomon prefer thee before Kingdoms, silver, gold,
precious stones and health it self? Diuinum lumen, and caelestis ardor. Divine
light, and heavenly brightness.

Conclude with humble thanks to the divine mercy, Quae eduxit te de tenebris
in admirabile lumen suum: which brought thee out of darkness into its
admirable light. The more thou art exalted, the more humble thy self, least
thou offend against the first principles of this science; towit; Solus Deus est
Eus a se, omne aliud ab illo. Only God is from himself, every thing else from
him.

4. Consider fourthly the dominion and command, that sacred Divinity has over
all other estates, arts and sciences whatsoever; all stoop to her, all
consult with her, all expect her definitive sentence; expecially in matters of
greatest importance and highest consideration. Of her do Kings and Princes
learn Quid licitum, quid honestum, what is lavvfull, and what is honest, in
their politic affairs of peace or war; o and how secure and glad are they, if
the consent of Divines favor their designs? Next the Civil Magistrate and
Lawyer consult with the Divine upon the meaning, understanding and application
of the first and head principles of the laws, which they profess. The same
passes with Masters of familyes, Citizens, Merchante etc. from hence do they
learn their obligation toward their parents, wives, children, fellows and
servants: hence must Merchants fetch that golden Rule of Aequum and Iustum,
right and reason, which so much concerns their eternal salvation, in that
most dangerous and ticklish occupation they profess. This makes sacred
Divinity an absolute Lady and Princess of the life of man; and the Professors
thereof how poor soever, yet truly esteemed, honored and reverenced.

Conclude to employ this Donum Dei this Gift of God to the good of all men, for
which end he has bestowed it on thee. Take heed thou deceive not poor
souls, which shall ask thy counsel, by thy malice or ignorance; for if they
perish by thee, their blood will be required at thy hands.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Of the state and dignity of Priesthood.
1. COnsider first that the excellency of a Religious state has been, these
last ages, so much samed for the only state of perfection; that the Uulgar
sort now a days, and some ignorant persons in particular, dare prefer it
before the most holy state and function of Priesthood; to the great dishonor of
Christ and his Ministers; and contrary to the sense of the Catholic Church
with all her Doctors, and Divines as well Religious as Secular; who all teach
and acknowledge Statum Sacerdotij sublimiorem esse statu Religionis; The state
of Priesthood to be an higher state then that of Religion; and to the proof of
this does S. Thomas allege these words out of S. Denis: Monasticus ordo
debet sequi Sacerdotales ordines and ad eorum imitationem in diuina ascendere:
The Monastical order must follovv that of Priesthood, and by imitating it
increase its devotion. S. Ignatius also says; Sacerdotium est apex bonorum
omnium quae sunt in hominibus: siquis ergo Sacerdotes inhonorauerit, Deum
inhonorat, and Dominum Iesum Christum primogenitum omnis creaturae. Priesthood
is the highest of all perfections which are found amongst men: whosoever
therefore shall dishonor a Priest, dishonors God, and our Lord Jesus Christ
the firstborn of all creaturs. For which this general reason may at present
suffice; that the power and function of Priesthood is the greatest upon earth;
as being over the body of Christ, both natural and mystical: and its state is
also made perpetual by a Sacramental Character; which Religion has only by
a solemn vow; and for spiritual. Hierarchicall power, she has no more of her
self and without privilege, then a Laike; and so is both vvayes far
inferior to Priesthood.

Conclude, if thou have lived hitherto in the common ignorance of the vulgar;
to open a little thy eyes and look with a better aspect upon holy Priesthood;
and prepare thy heart with humility to make further search into the great and
divine mysteries inherent and annexed unto it.

2. Consider secondly; and before we enter into further particulars, ponder
and imprint in thy mind these words of the mellifinous S. Ambrose, and be
confident that in him speak all the rest of the Fathers. Audite me, quot he,
beatissimi Patres, and si dignum ducitis, sanctissimi Fratres: audite mestirps
^euitica, germen Sacerdotale, propago sanctisicata, Duces and Rectores gregis
Christi; audite me rogantem vos, pariter and timentem; and henorem Sacerd^talem
demonstrare volentem; vt cum honorts vobis praerogatiuam monstramus, merita
etiam congrua requiramus; dignum enim est, vt dignitas Sacerdotalis prius
noscatur a nobis, and sic deinde seruetur a nobis. Hear me, you most happy
Fathers, and my most holy brothers, if you think it meet: hear me ye
leuiticall stock, ye priestlie race, and sanctified lineage, ye Guides and
rulers of Christ's flock; hear me asking you, as well fear full as desirous
to declare unto you Priestlie honor; that when we demonstrate unto you the
prerogative of that honor, we likewise require proportionable merit; for it
is fitting, that the dignity of Priesthood should first be known by us, and
so then be conserved by us. Thus far his prologue; then thus he goes on.
Honor igitur and sublimitas Sacerdotalis nullis poterit comparationibus
adaquari: si Regum sulgori compares, long erit inferior, quam si plumbi
metallum ad auri fulgorem compares; quippe eum ^^ideas Regum and Principium
colla submitti genibus Sacerdotum Nibil est in ho^ saeculo excellentius
Sacerdotibus, si quod sumus professione, action potius quam nomine
demonstremus, vt nomen congruat actioni, actio respondeat nomini: ne sit nomen
in ane, and crimen immane; ne sit honor sublimis and vita deformis, ne sit
deifica professio and illicita actio. The honor therefore and dignity of
Priesthood can with noe comparisons be paralled: if you compare it to the
splendor of Kings, that is more inferior to it, then is lead to Gold; since
you may see Kings and Princes necks subject to the knees of Priests. Nothing
is there in this world excelling Priest, if we demonstrate by action rather
then name what we profess, that the name may agree with the action, and the
action, coresponde with the name: least the name be bare, and the crime great;
least the honor be high, and the life deformed, least the profession be
Godly, and the exercise of it uncomely. Where observe, that the holy Saint no
sooner begins to set out the dignity of Priesthood, but speaks presently
of the obligation annexed unto it: whence.

Conclude with no less fear then esteem of so great and divine a dignity;
for Hoc medio tutissimus ibis: In this middle way thou vvilt go safe: by fear
and humility thou may temper the soaring height of Priesthood: which as S.
Chrysostom says; Peragitur in terra, sed in rerum calestium classem
referendum est, it is performed on earth, but is to be referred to the class of
heavenly things.

3. Consider thirdly, how Sacerdos est medius inter populum and Deum; the
public Mediator and Ambassador betwixt God and Man; offering up to God the
common vows, sacrifices, and petitions of the people; and again bringing
down from God upon the same people all heavenly blessings, favors and graces.
The first part of his office, towit, Vt constituitur pro hominibus in ijs quae
sunt ad Deum, vt offerat dona; As he is constituted for men in those things
which are in order to God, that he might offer their gifts; inuolues two
principal dignityes, the one is of a public Master and Doctor, to teach the
people their duty, service and Religion toward God; for Labia Sacerdotis
custodient scientiam, and legem requirent ex ore eius: the lips of the priest
shall keep knowledge, and the law they shall require from his mouth: by this
title he surmounteth all other Professiours of what sciences or arts soever.
The other dignity is, that a Priest is Princeps Sacrorum, the disposer of all
holy things. Ordering and commanding all that belongs to the rites and
ceremonies of the common Religion; which authority as far surpasses that of
Kings and civil Governors, as does the obligation of the people toward their
God exceed that toward their kindred or country; which has small proportion.
Moreover the Priest's business is to treat De bonis and malis animae, of the
good and evil of the soul, as sin and grace for the present; and of heaven
and hell, glory and damnation for the future Eternity. O stupid peruersity,
that can compare any worldly dignity or authority with Priesthood! thou
may as well compare a moment of our time with Eternity.

Conclude to honor a Priest from thy heart; and how high soever thou art in
the world, acknowledge him above thee: and how wise soever thou seem harken
to his advice, in whatsoever belongs to God.

4. Consider fourthly how a Priest by the second part of his office, towit, as
he is Gods great Administrator and di^pensator mysteriorum Dei, the
administratour and dispensour of the mysteries of God, distributing to all the
world the treasures and riches of heaven; bears with him an unspeakable
authority and excellency, so far above the rest of men; as that the vast
Ocean does not more exceed small ponds or lakes in abundance of waters; nor
the sun more dazell a wax taper in brightness; nor the whole Element of Fire
more overcome our poor sparks or coals in the vigor of heat; then does this
supreme dignity and prerogative of Priesthood surpass all other sublunary
Power whatsoever: for what are humane Potentates, but commanders of some
poor parcel or corner of the earth, in things of these inferior and
material Elements etc. but Priesthood is an universal command and supremacy
over the whole earth, Quanta quanta est; how great soever it be: and in
matters of Eternity and immortality, above the whole sphere of Nature; and
reaching down unto us Plenitudinem Diuinitatis, the fulness of the
divinity, as far as the passion of the Son of God and the effusion of the
holy Ghost can pour upon us. Quaenam obsecro, quoth S. Chrysostom, potestas
hac vna major esse queat? Pater omnem potestatem dedit Filio; caeterum video
eandem ipsam omnifariam potestatem a Deo Filio Sacerdotibus traditam. What
power, I pray you, can be greater then this? the Father gave all power to the
Son: yet I see that same universal power to be given to priests by God the
Son.

Conclude with due admiration of the dignity, thou art called unto; but yet
faint not, fear not; Deus qui vocauit, idoneum faciet: God who has called
thee, will make the fit: only give thy self up wholy into his hands; and
then commit thy self and all to his divine sweetness.

5. Consider fifthly Duas illas claues Sacerdotij, that double power of
Priesthood over the Natural and Mystical body of Jesus Christ. That a poor,
silly, nay sinful man, Eo ipso merely that he is a Priest, can and does,
when and as often as he please, with four words call down from the right
hand of his Father, the Eternal Son of the Omnipotent God of heaven; have
and keep him in his power, in his hands, in his breast; deliver him, to whom
he please, though to the Jews again; and to vhom he please, deny him, though
the Angels should desire him: and how? Obediente Domino voci and dispositioni
hominis; Our Lord obeying to the voice, and disposing of man; so that the
heavens vvi^l sooner fall, then he fail, in this his obedience. O most great
and good God! whence comes it that a slave so commands his Lord? what has
^aysed him so high, or brought thee so lovv? Obstupescite Caeli super hoc. Be
astonished ye heavens upon this. The Virgin Mother had the privilege but once to
conceive him in her purest womb; being notwithstanding such a Lady as she
was: and J and thou, being such wretches, as we are, can (let me once say so)
command him every day. O see, not Men, Kings, or Monarchs: but the Thrones,
Powers and Principalityes of heaven fall prone at the feet of a Priest;
whether more to adore their God in his hands, or the Priestly power it self;
truly I cannot so easily resolve: Est enim splendore illorum quiddam
rutilantius, imperio potentius, ordine excellentius, and Diuinitati vicinius.
For it is some thing more bright then their splendor, more mighty then their
power excelling each their order, and nigher to the divinity.

Conclude with a total confusion and rapture of thy soul: but stay not
there; look upon the heavens, the Angels, the Virgin Mother; hope at least to
imitate their purity: turn then to the Son of God; and see if thou can be
ever any more proud or disobedient to thy Superiors.

6. Consider sixthly the other power of Priesthood over Christ's Mystical
body; the power to wit of forgiving or retaining the sins of the whole
world. O Christian and true-belieuing soul; wonder now no more, that the holy
Scriptures give to Priests the titles of Angel, Sons of God, nay of Gods;
Ego dixi, Dij estis: I said, you are Gods: for whereas now every Priest
does really and efficaciously forgive sins, whensoever he says: Ego te
absoluo; I absolve thee: and again, N^mo potest dimittere peccata nisi solus
Deus; None can forgive sins, but only God. O what follows less but that
Sacerdos est Deus. A Priest is a God. Behold now this secondary and delegated
Godhead, sitting in his judgment seat over causes, not of hay and straw or
such like trifles; no nor of this temporal life; but of the eternal life and
death of the soul; what treasons she has committed against her Creator,
injuries against her neighbor, or indignities against her own worth: and this
not by doubtful or obscure Probata and allegata; Probations and allegations,
but by Simplicem and claram intuitionem conscientiarum: A simple and clear
beholding of their consciences: O stupendum! O vvonder to, see, Princes,
Politicians and priuy-counsellers come creeping on their knees, to discover to
a poor Priest the most hidden secrets and mysteries of their Arts: Et quod
Sacerdos aperit, Deus non claudit, nec aperit quod Sacerdos claudit; sed calum
tradidit in manus eius. And what a Priest opens God does not shutt, nor open
what a Priest shulteth: but has delivered heaven into his hands. And will
any man that believes and considers this, esteem any other dignity, or
fear any other power but this? sure no man is so mad.

Conclude thou to inuoke all the powers of heaven and earth to praise that
great God, Qui dedit potestatem talem heminibus, who gave such power to men,
look out for knowledge, prudence and charity; Vt sacias iudicia iusta and
recta coram Domino. That thou may do just and right judgments before the
Lord.

7. Consider seventhly the great obligation a Priest has to sanctity and all
sort of virtue; which by good consequence must be according to the degree he
has received of dignity and excellency, which as we have seen, is the
greatest upon earth: and according to the strict account that will be demanded
of him, which also will be the greatest amongst men; the greatest therefore
above all other sorts of men, must be the sanctity, virtue and purity of a
Priest: correct therefore in thy self and others, that most commonly received,
yet most erroneous conceit, that secular Priests are not bound to seek
perfection, but only religious men; so cry the ignorant sort, but no man of
learning or understanding dare affirm it: read Molina Tract. 2. de Sacerd.
where out of S. Chrysostom he brings the comparison betwixt a monk and a
Priest: Monachorum certamen ingens and labor multus est; verum si confer qui
volet instituti illius sudores cum recte adminictrato Sacerdotio, certe tantum
esse inter illa dua discrimen reperiet, quantum est inter priuatum and Regem.
The exercise of monks is great, and their labor much, but if any one would
compare the labors of that institution with rightly administered Priesthood,
truly he shall find as great a difference betwixt those two, as is betwixt
a Private man and a King. Nay he places the sanctity of a Priest amongst that
of Angels: Necesse est Sacerdotem sic esse purum, vt si in ipsis caelis
collocatus, inter caelestes illas virtutes medius staret. It is necessary that
a Priest be so pure, as that if he were placed in heaven he would stand in
the midst of those heavenly virtues. The same teaches S. Denis with all
the Fathers and Doctors. Whatsoever holiness therefore can be required in
living men, the first and most obliged unto it, is a Priest; and of this assure
thy self.

Conclude on the one side with great fear of thy self; because as a holy
Pope says: Vtiissimus computandus est, qui est honor praestantior, nisi etiam
praecellat scientia and dignitate: He is to be thought most vile, who
excels in honor, unless he likewise excel in knowledge and vvorth: yet on
the other side be confident in God almighty; Non deserit nisi prius desertus;
he leaves not, unless he be first left, but gives always grace according to
the charge, he imposes.

THE THIRD MEDITATION. Of the state and obligation of an Apostolical or
Missionary Priest.
1. COnsider first, that Missionary or Apostolical Priesthood is the highest
dignity upon earth; whose end being the conversion of souls, is in part the
same, for which the Son of God became man, and for which the twelve Apostles
were by him dispersed over the whole world: and, as the Cardinals De
propaganda fide have declared, Est praestantior fine Religionis; Is excelling
the end of Religion; who give also the reason; Nam inter diuina opera
diuinissimum est ad salutem animarum cooperari. Neither can any man with
reason doubt hereof; who considers that divine charity is the form and life
of every spiritual state and profession; that is, love of God and our
Neighbor: both which loves the state of Mission does require in the highest
degree; hence our Savior demanded thrice of S. Peter, Amas me? love thou me?
and then, Pasce oues meas. Feed my sheep. For the first part of his function
is. Euangelizare, to Euangelize, that is, to be the head and master of
contemplatiues; the second is, Gubernare animas; to rule and govern souls;
that is, to teach the ignorant, and correct the faulty: Nullum, quoth S.
Gregory, Deo omnipotenti est tale sacrificium, qualo est zelus anima rum: There
is noe such sacrifice can be offerred to the omnipotent God, as is the zeal of
souls: Neither fear that preaching or teaching does any way hinder the
contemplative part; Non enim impedit, sed extendit charitatem: For it does not
hinder, but extend charity: witness the Apostles, who ever joined Mary and
Martha in one.

Conclude to humble thy soul before God for calling thee from nothing, to be a
pillar in his Church, and a champion in his battles: whet up thy courage,
preserve and increase in thy heart this divine flame of charity; and let thy
works and fingers Stillare primam myrrham eius. Distill its principal myrrh.

2. Consider secondly, how many ties and obligations thou have, to go on in
the enterprise begun; to wit, the conversion of thy Country: the first is, that
thou have obliged thy self unto it, by a firm and solemn oath, which is
stronger then a vow, used by Religious men; for as much as this kind of oath
includes both a promise, which is the substance of a vow, and also the
calling of God for a witness; and God himself has often used to confirm his
own promises with an oath, so to make us esteem them the surer and stronger.
Thy second obligation is of justice, first on thy own side for having received
thy breeding and education in virtue and learning, upon the condition and
contract of assisting the conversion of thy country: next on thy countries
side, which is in a spiritual extreme necessity and in imminent danger of
eternal damnation unless thou and such others assist her; if then for a
temporal necessity of our Parents we may and ought to forsake all other
obligations to relieve them, how far more are we bound to prefer the
spiritual necessity of our country before all other vows, whatsoever are
incompetent with it? Neither think that because thou art bound to this by
oath and justice, thou do therefore less out of charity, as some sophisters
talk; for the order of charity is, to be greater there, where justice and
duty urges most.

Conclude as thou art the first in strictnes of duty and justice, so to let no
man go before thee in the great work of thy country's conversion: beg daily
of God Zelum animarum: the zeal of souls, consider sometimes how much God
valueth a soul, Ita vt Vnigenitum daret. So much that he would give his
only-begotten Son.

3. Consider thirdly the conditions and difficulties of thy state; and deceive
not thy self; it is not to return into thy country, and to live among thy
friends at thy ease and content; nor to have all things provided to thy hand as
in Colleges; no nor to be supplied in thy necessityes out of the common
stock, as the Religious are; but to live in perpetual hazard of thy life and
liberty from the laws and Ministers of thy native soil; ever most ready to
surrender both Pro Christo and amico: For Christ and thy friend; next for thy
personal necessityes, to find thy self all alone, wandering from place to
place without any certain abode to put thy head in; o how many slight
putt-offs, or at the best, dry vvelcomes art thou to meet with! how many
pretenses of dangers and fears will again hasten thee out of doors! none
but who have had the experience can truly conceive it. Finally if thou come
to want thou must even sit down with it, for ought J know; and practice that
poverty, which others profess, and feel not; but are on all sides assisted,
respected an honored; nay will be the first shall work thee out of harbor,
if good luck have any way accommodated thee.

Conclude not to be dismayed for all this; Sed scias viam vitae te ingredi; but
know that thou enters the way of life; was not this the life of the
Apostles and of Christ himself, Qui non habebat vbi reclinaret caput? who had
not where to repose his head: o resolve to think nothingh honorable, nothing
Apostolical but this way; least thou hazard the honor of Christ and his
Apostles, who know no other: let others talk as vain gloriously as they
will, all will prove but vvind.

4. Consider fourthly the great difficulty of this entreprise of souls: the
charge is twofold; De malis bonos facere; and iam factos conseruare: to make
good men of ill, and to conserve those that are m^^e: o what an impossibility
is it, to persuade vvorldly and carnal men to forsake their sensual pleasures
for others, not only invisible, and to them merely imaginary or
fantastical; but also quite opposite and destructive of those, they do
surely and quietly enjoy! guess somevvhat, by the stiffnes we see men have in
a preconceiued opinion, though purely speculatiue, and no way concerning their
good or harm. Again the means we use, are not abundance of miracles as in
the Apostles time, sufficient to strike and mollisy the hardest hearts; but
reasons very speculatiue, and authorities of no credit with them: neither are
those we must deal with, rude and simple people, whom at least a fair
flourish or discourse might allure; but most subtle, crafty and beaten to all
thy arguments; and who from their mothers breast, are taught and forewarned
not to believe a Papist nor Priest, for that they are impostars, and deceivers,
nay murderes, traitors etc. o what hope, what help in such an encounter?
truly none but from God and confidence in him. Now having by Gods mercy gained
any to the truth; to conserve them in it, is the second task, as hard as the
former; for all the laws of thy country both Civil and Ecclesiastical are
strongly against both thee and thy Conuertit's, threatening utter ruin and
death to both: neither have thou any means left thee under heaven, but what
is purely spiritual or I^ soro interno c^nscientiae: In the secrecy of thy
conscience: a slender thread to hold so great a weight

5. Consider fifthly, or rather make a strong and final resolution with thy
self out of all the points hitherto pondered; first to make a true and settled
esteem of the Estate and vocation God has called thee unto, to wit of a
scholar, Priest and Missionary; that there is none in the whole Christian
Church more worthy, more honorable, or of more perfection; as has been showed
in particular; and whatsoever other men pretend or talk, preserve thou this
certainety in thy breast: but by, no means be contentions with any; it cannot
but break peace and charity. Next resolve, Honorare officium and dignitatem
tuam; to honor thy office and dignity; that is, setting all other cares,
thoughts and employments aside, to apply thy self wholy, Quantus quantus es,
as far as thy abilities permit thee, to get here in the College those two
talents of virtue and learning, so precisely necessary for thy state, and the
work thou aymest at: O miles Christi, o soldier of Christ, be not deceived
with flatteryes; be not tired with prayer and study; be not dismayed with
the poor and small difficultyes, that can here happen unto thee: alas they are
not so much as flea-bites to what poor worldlings groan under; or to those
which thou thy self must hereafter encounter with. Get what learning thy
ability and industry can bring thee to; in thy prayers and Meditations be
assiduous and permanent; and in them aim ever at the love of God and thy
neighbor, that Gemma caelestis, that Donum Spiritus Sancti super omnia dona.
That heavenly Gemme, that gift of the holy Ghost which is above all Gifts.
Finally in all things obey thy Superious, keep peace with thy fellows, what
soever it cost thee; and whatsoever thou see good and virtuous in others,
strive upon occasion to imitate it; but what thou see amiss, let it be to
thee a warning to avoid the like. Haec si feceris, habebis multa bona, and in
futuro vitam aeternam. Amen. This if thou vvilt do, much prosperity shall
thou have in this life, and in the future life everlasting. Amen.

A CONCLUSION FOR THE WHOLE YEAR. How to examine our progress and renew our
purposes and resolutions.
COrpus, quod corrumpitur, aggrauat animam and deprimit sensum multa
cogitantem; The body that is corrupted burdeneth the soul, and presses down
the understanding that thinks many things; the bad inclinations of our
frail nature lie heavy upon our souls, and draw them still downwards; if we
strive not often times to lift them up by maine force of resolution. For this
purpose, besides our daily exercise, and aspirations, which are as short
flights of our souls; it is m^st requisite once a year at least to make a
serious and general survey of our spiritual profit and progress; and then to
renew all our good desires and purposes, that so with new life and courage we
may, Procedere de virtute in virtutem vsque ad montem Dei: Proceed from virtue
to virtute even to the mountain of God, least on the contrary by sloth and
negligence we suddenly tumble down to our first state, or rather into a
far worse: for spiritual falls have this property, that they cast us
always lower, then was the state from which we ascended up to devotion.

These must begin to be read on the 26. of August at night.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. How to examine our spiritual progress.
1. COnsider first, and call to mind the protestations or at least good
purposes thou made at thy first coming or dedicating thy self to the service
of thy Lord God: the first was, utterly and for ever to detest and abhor all
kind of mortal sin: the second was to dedicate thy body, soul, heart and
all that thou have to the love and service of God: the third was, that if it
should happen unto thee, to fall into any sin or ill action, te procure
immediately to rise again by Gods grace: all most worthy and noble
resolutions. But to whom are they made? to whom were they offered? to no
other then to the Eternal God of heaven, thy Sovereign Lord and Maker; in the
presence of the most B. Virgin Mother, and the whole Court of heaven, both
Angels and Men; with the solemnity that is there wont to be Super vno
pecca^ore paenitentiam agente. Upon one sinner that does penance. O my soul
remember with love and gratitude, with what sweetness thy God did prevent
thee, and call thee out of a country drowned in sin and heresy; and leaving
millions behind, as good or better then thy self, made choice of thee to be
his child and darling; and that in thy young age before sin and the world
had taken possession of thy heart: ah what felicity is it, to learn quickly,
that which we cannot know but ouerlate?

Conclude with humble thanks to thy good God for so gracious a favor, and so
timely a calling thee to his service: pity and pray for those, that are yet
behind, that the same mercy may touch them which has be fallen thee most
happily.

2. Consider secondly the effects, which by Gods grace this vocation has
already wrought in thee; and I doubt not but thou shall find a change and
alteration remarkable in thy soul, comparing that which now thou art, with
that which thou have been In diebus illis: here to fore: do thou not
account it a singular felicity and honor to know, how to talk familiarly
with thy God by prayer? to have an enflamed affection, or at least a great
desire of the love of God? to have appeased and pacified many a troublesome
passion, which did before vex and torment thee? to have avoided many sins
and scrupules of conscience? to live fenced, and as it were hedged in from the
dangers and occasions of sin, never vvanting to those poor souls, that live
abroad in the vvide world? and in a word, to have so frequent use of the most
holy Sacraments, Penance and Eucharist; by the former healing up the old soars
of sins, and vviping away the daily spots that may defile thy garment: by
the latter uniting thy self to the sovereign vvellspring of euer-during
graces? o my soul these are great and inestimable favors: Et grandis mutatio
dexterae excelsii. And a great change of the right hand of the highest.

Conclude and cry out, Non moriar sed viuam, and narrabo opera Domini: I will
not die, but live: and I will tell the works of our Lord: resolve to be ever
humble and grateful to thy swetest God: nothing else but ingratitude can now
hinder thy final felicity: take heed of taking any part of this honor to thy
self; but think ever, what thou were before God called thee, and account
that thy own.

3. Consider thirdly, and in particular examine how thou stand affected
toward God, thy self, and thy neighbor: and first toward God: how do
thou now look upon a mortal sin? have tbou conserved a firm resolution
never to commit any, whatsoever it should cost thee? happy soul if, thou do
so; for hereon is settled the foundation of a spiritual life. Next, how does
thy heart bear it self toward venial sins? it is true, we cannot but now
and then fall into them; but let that never trouble thee; unless thou bear a
special inclination and habitual delight to any in particular; for that must
be rooted out Again, how affected toward the commandments of thy God? do
thou find them delightful, sweet, acceptable as thy Savior has promised? o
Christian soul, he that has his mouth in taste, and a good stomach, loves
wholsome meats and rejects the contrary. Finally, how do spiritual
exercises now savor unto thee? do thou love and esteem them? do they not
trouble and discontent thee? art thou glad or sorry, when upon a lawful
occasion they must be omitted? to what sort of exercises do thou find thy
self most inclined? and if any in particular dislike thee, examine the cause
and root of thy dislike; and cut it off.

Conclude with humble thanks to God, for what thou find thy self amended
in; acknovvlelge his only mercy for the cause: and, on the contrary side,
confess vnsainedly thy self for the sole author of all that has been done
amiss, and of thy small progress in virtue.

4. Consider fourthly and examine how thy heart remains affected toward God
himself* takes it pleasure in the remembrance of God? feels it a sweet
delight in calling him to mind; as David did; Memor fui Domini, and delectatus
sum? I was mindful of the Lord, and was delighted? do thou find a
certain promptnes and facility in thy heart to love God? and a particular
savor in this his love? does thy heart recreate it self in meditating upon
the immensity, bounty and sweetness of almighty God? do thou amidst thy
business willingly admit a thought of thy God, when it comes? o these are good
signs of a true lover. Again, do thou find in thy heart a true desire of
the outvvard glory of God? and art thou ready to do somevvhat for his honor
and worship; for we know, that Probatio amoris est exhibitio operis. The
trial of love is in deeds. Do thou love to talk of God, to discourse of
his wonders, to praise and extol his attributes? for whom can a lover talk
of but of his best beloved? Finally, which is the finest touchstone of true
love, have thou suffered any thing patiently for God? have thou left any
affection, or renounced any delight for God's sake? o see in particular, what
thou have in all this time forsaken for the love of God? and bless him for it.

Conclude according to the state thou find thy soul in: but ever with
beging of pardon for thy ordinary backwardnes in all these points? offer him up
afresh thy heart, to the end he may be the sole Master and Lord of it Insaecula
saeculorum. For ever and ever.

5. Consider fifthly, and observe how thy heart stands affected toward
Jesus Christ, true God and man; have thou a right esteem of his greatness? and
do thou feelingly apprehend what mean those his words. Data est mihi omnis
potestas in caelo and in terra? all power is given me in heaven, and in earth?
that he is sole and absolute Sovereign of life and death; heaven and hell?
that he is the source of all God's blessings upon us? and that nothing, comes
from God the Father, but Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Chriflum? through our Lord
Jesus Christ? I doubt not but thou beleeuest all this, but do thou feel it
Practice Practicallie in thy heart: and not, as worldlings do, look upon it
as a thing a far of, or in the air? Next, take thou pleasure in thinking
on his sweetest life and bitterest death? if thou have not this, thou art noe
true lover of Jesus; but show only a fair out side toward him. Again,
what reverence and respect do thou bear toward thy good Angel and the
rest of the Saints of heaven? but above all, to the Virgin Mother of Jesus?
do thou heartily honor her as she deserves? do reverence to her images,
and to her name, when thou hear it? do thou place great trust and
confidence in her intercession? ^ut above all do thou endeavor to imitate
some of her virtues, her purity, her humility, her ardent love toward God?
Pac hoc and viues. Do this and thou shall live.

Conclude with an act of heroic love toward Jesus Christ, and begin now to
love him afresh; for so good is he, that he will presently meet thy love with
his, and a thousand blessings more: and forget no more his Lady Mother, but
offer thy self unto her for her meanest, but most humble servant: this done,
fear no more, Seeurus eris. Thou shall be secure.

6. Consider sixthly, and examine how thou have gained upon thy self. and
first how does thy soul stand affected toward the vanities of the world?
can thou find in thy heart to forsake them all for God's sake? do thou find
thy self In preparatione animi in a readiness of mind to leave earth for
heaven or this world for the next, at what time or hour it shall please God
to call thee hence? feel thy pulse well in this point. Next, do thou keep
due order in the love of thy self? that is, do thou love thy soul better
than thy body? do thou take as much pains to get virtue as temporal
commodities? heavenly glory, as transitory honor? have thou a tender care to
help and cherish thy poor soul, when she is spiritually sick or
distempered? o forsake her not in that case, call for the physician and apply
speedy remedies; eternity depends on her health. Again, how do thou esteem
thy self? better or worse than others? to appear as nothing before God, is no
great matter; for what is a fly to a mountain, or a drop of water to the
Ocean? but to think equals our betters, and desire that others should think
the same, that indeed is a point of heavenly courage. Finally, how do thou
use to talk of thy self in company, and of thy deeds? I suppose modesty will
not let thee praise thy self downeright; but on the by, or at least giving
some occasion for others to praise thee; look well into this, and if thou be
free, Perfectus es, thou art perfect, praise God for it.

Conclude to humble thy self before God and man in all thy words and actions:
to have a care also of thy soul, the fairest pearl upon earth; let others
trim and foster their carcasses, but let thy sole care be to adorn and
beautify thy soul in the eyes of God and men.

7. Consider seventhly, and search all the corners of thy heart, what
disposition thou find there toward thy neighbor whom God commands thee
to love as thy self; that is to wish him the same happiness in this and the
next world, as thou do to thy self; not for this or that private respect,
or more to one than the other; but to all equally, and for one and the same
respect, because they are all created to God's image, and redeemed with his
precious blood. See now how thou do comply with this precept: art thou kind,
courteous, and friendly to all? do thou wrong no man in thought, word, nor
deed? in thought, by rash judgments, contempts, groundless suspicions? in
word, by detractions, calumnies, harsh language? in deed, by wronging his
person, friends or estate? O quis est iste, and laudabimus eum? fecit enim
mirabilta in vita sua. O who is this, and we will praise him? for he has
done marvelous things in his life. But above all, how do thou comply with
that new precept of our Savior, Diligite inimicos vestros etc. Love your
enemies etc. this, this is the touchstone of a true lover; if thou find some of
thy companions troublesome, harsh, intractable, can thou yet affect them as
well as thou do the rest, who are loving, courteous and gentle toward thee?
o if thy heart can truly say, Yes, how happy art thou? and yet know that till
thou can say so, thou art no true lover, neither of God nor of thy neighbor.

Conclude with great humility, seeing how far of thou yet art from true
perfection: inuoke the grace of God almighty, and the intercession of the
Uirgin Lady Mother and all thy Patrons, for the gaining of this spotles pearl,
the true love of God and our neighbor.

THE SECOND MEDITATION. Motives for the renewing of our good purposes and
resolutions.
1. COnsider first the fairenes and beauty of thy soul; whose understanding
roundeth the whole world with an Eagle's eye, and thence mounteth higher
unto the invisible being of Angels, and never cease till she reach unto the
unspeakable and incomprehensible nature of the Godheed; losing her self at
length in that deepest, but also sweetest Ocean of Being* Besides this, she
has a free will, so absolute a Lady and Princess, that no power in heaven or
earth can make her stoop or incline where of her self she lists not; and
yet so soaring, that the Divinity it self escapes not her embraces; for by
love she reaches unto God, and tyeth up with him the true knot of everlasting
friendship. But above all ponder the capacity and vastnes of an humane heart,
whose desires nothing under God can fill up and satisfy; whose flight can
find noe footing but in the Arc of Eternity: for tell me thou riotous soul of
our Solomon, have thou ever found a full and permanent content in the height of
all thy earthly delights? alas! hear her weary and tired voice, Vanitas
vanitatum, and omnia vanitas and afflictio spiritus. Vanity of vanities, and
all is vanity, and affliction of spirit.

Conclude to lift up thy soul to her natural pitch; show her that she is
immortal and heir of eternity, and teach her to direct her course that way:
o my fair and lovely soul; thou can understand and love God himself; why
then do thou entertain thy self in things inferior to God? thou may
pretend eternity and heaven for thy inheritance; why then do thou hunt after
moments and molehilis.

2. Consider secondly that only virtue and devotion can make thy soul to rest
content in this world, o what excellent beauty is in them? make a comparison
betwixt the lovely virtues, and the hideous vices that be contrary to them:
what sweetness is there in patience, compared to revenge? in meeknes, in
respect of anger and frovvardnes? in humility, in regard of pride and ambition?
in liberality, compared to couerousnesse and nigardise? in charity, compared
with envy? in sobriety, in respect of intemperance etc. Virtues have this
excellency, that they fill the soul with an incomparable delight and
sweetness after she has practiced them: whereas vices leave the soul
exceedingly vvearied, tired and molested. And why endeavor we not then to
obtain these pleasures, that have no gall nor bitterness mingled with them? He
that has but a few vices, is not content with the delights they bring him;
and he that has many, is ouerburdoned by them, rent in sunder by their cross
and opposite inclinations; and finally, Lassatus in via iniquitatis: vvearied
in the way of iniquity: but he that has a few virtues, has a great deal of
content in them; and by a sympathy and connection of them; the more his
contentment is, the more his virtues increase. O devout and virtuous life, how
lovely art thou? how honorable? how delectable Super omne aurum and topazion?
above all Gold and topazius? without thee good is evil, and all pleasures
bitter unquietness.

Conclude to embrace a virtuous life for it is own sake, that is for the honor
and content she brings with her: proclaim a public hatred to all sorts of
vice; and be not ashamed to profess thy self a servant and champion of
virtue, as thy only Mistress; cry always to God with the Samaritane: Domine
da mihi bibere de hac aqua, saliente in vitam aeternam. Lord give me to drink
of this water springing up unto life everlasting.

3. Consider thirdly the examples of God's Saints of both sexes and all
conditions: what is it, that they have not done, and suffered for their love
and devotion to God? look upon the invincible Martyrs; what torments have
they not conquered and scorned, for the maintenance of their faith, and
performance of their loyalties? but above all, those fair and flourishing
Ladies, vvhiter than lillies in purity, more blushing than roses in charity,
some at twelve, others at thirteen, fifteen and twenty; see how they
endured a thousand sorts of Martyrdomes, rather than to renounce their sacred
resolutions not only in profession of faith, but also in the preservation of
their virginity, and the exercise of other virtues. O good God, what
constancy, to our both comfort and confusion, has that frail sex showed in
these occasions? Again, see the millions of glorious Confessors, as well in
Cities and the throng of worldlings, as in Monasteries and deserts: what
immovable and unconquered patience have they showed? how did they embrace
their purposes of sanctity without exceptions or reseruations, and went with
them without any tediousness or faintnes? neither think that they were by
nature Angels or Seraphins, so to excuse thy self: no, no, they were frail,
mortal men as we are: they did all for the same God and by the same virtues;
and we have the same Sacraments and helps, that they had.

Conclude then to reassume a new courage and firm resolution in the service
of God and the vocation thou art placed in: when any storm arises against
thee, lift up thine eyes to heaven, and see the valor of those troops before
thee.

4. Consider fourthly the unspeakable love, wherewith Jesus Christ our Lord
suffered in the world so much, especially in the garden of mount Oliuet and
the bitter place of mount Caluary: all that love of his was for thy sake; by
these many pangs and torments he obtained of God the Father good purposes and
holy resolutions for thee: by the same afflictions did he moreover purchase all
things else necessary for thy soul, to maintain, nourish, strengthen, and
bring unto full growth and perfection all thy resolutions. O see how the dear
heart of our Lord Jesus beheld thy heart from the tree of the Cross and there
in a manner fell in love with it; and for love of it obtained for thee all the
good that ever thou had, or ever shall have; and amongst the rest, these good
resolutions. O holy resolution! how precious and nobly borne art thou, being
daughter to such parents, as are the love and passion of thy sweetest Savior?
o how carefully ought my soul to cherish thee, since thou have been so dear
unto my Jesus? Alas, Savior of my soul, thou did die upon the Cross to
gain me my virtuous resolutions ah, do me the favor that J also choose rather
to die, than to forget or forgo thee or them.

Conclude to do so by the grace of God: look hereafter upon thy good purposes
and resolutions not as on creatures of thy own brain, subject every hour to
new change and mutability: but as on the dearest darlings of thy Sauiour's
breast; and as such esteem, honor and maintain them; Et ducent te in vitam
aeternam. And they will lead thee to life everlasting.

5. Consider fifthly, how as a woman, as soon as she is with child, prepares
her cradlelinnen, swathing bands, and with all bethinketh her self of a nurse
for her child, which she hops to bring forth, although it be not yet come
into the world: even so our Lord Jesus, having his goodness pregnant and, as it
were, great with child of thee, pretending to bring thee forth to salvation,
and to make thee his daughter and heir, prepared upon the holy Rood of the
Cross all that was necessary for thee, and for thy salvation; that is, all
the ways, all the graces, all the favors, by which he conducteth thy soul,
and will bring it at length to perfection. Ah my God! how deeply ought we to
imprint this in our memory is it possible that I have been loved, and so
sweetly beloved by my Savior, that every step of his life and passion, even as
he went to mount Caluary, sweating and fainting under his heavy Cross, even
then he went bethinking himself of my good and of every one of these little
occasions by which he has drawn me unto him? how much ought we then to
esteem and how carefully to employ all this to our own benefit and commodity?
neither was this care of his for thee in general or In confuso; but so
particularly, as though there had been no other soul in the world to take
care of: this made his Apostle say, Ipse dilexit me, and dedit semetipsum pro
me. He loved me, and gave himself for me.

Conclude to be ever very vigilant and careful to attend, entertain, and
follow every illumination, in spiration or motion to good, which thy Jesus
shall dart into thy bosom: and crave hearty pardon for thy negligence hitherto
in this point, which imports as much as the beginning of all our good.

6. Considet sixthly with an especial pondering and gratitude the first
spring and original source of all thy good, temporal and eternal; to wit,
the infinite and eternal love that thy Almighty God bears toward thee: for
thou must know and for certain believe that long before our Lord Jesus Christ
as man suffered for thee upon the Cross, the divine Majesty did forecast thee
in his all-seeing knowledge, and loved thee infinitely in his sovereign
goodness. But when, my soul, began this so great, so constant, so ancient a
love? sure long before J was for it gave me my first being; and so it is most
free and frank, without any desert of mine: again, long before earth,
heaven, Angels and all other creatures; for being shut up in the breast of
God, it must be of equal durance with him; that is every way as eternal as
he himself is. O antiqua veritas quam sero te cognoui! o aeterna bonitas, quam
sero te amaui! O ancient verity, how late have I known thee! o eternal
goodness, how late have I loved thee! This love then of God it was, that
from all eternity was preparing, first my being, and then all other graces and
favors conducing to my well being and future salvation: among which the
first were holy inspirations, and by them pious purposes and resolutions to
good: without which nothing goes forvvard In vitam aeternam. Toward
everlasting life.

Conclude to make great esteem of thy good purposes, as coming from the
fountain of goodness: know that all the world is not worth one soul, and a
soul is vvorth nothing without good resolutions; leave not then one good
resolution for all the world. Lastly repay, how late soever, that love of thy
sweetest God with one dram of true love.

7. Consider lastly and making a sinall conclusion for the whole year past,
and a strong resolution for the year to come; think and say; o most amiable
resolutions! you are to me the beautiful tree of life, which my God has
planted with his own hand in the midst of my heart, and my Redeemer has
watered with his precious blood, to make it fructify: rather will J suffer
a thousand deaths than endure that one of you should be hindered. Neither
vanity, nor delights, nor riches, nor sorrows, nor tribulations, shall ever,
by God's grace, be able to pull me from my holy designs and purposes. O my
good Lord, is it thou that have planted this tree of good resolutions, and from
Eternity kept it in the bosom of thy fatherly providence, to place it at
length in the garden of my soul? o how many souls are there which have not
been favored in so high a degree? and how then shall I be able to humble my
self profoundly enough under thy mercy? o beautiful and holy resolutions? if
I keep charity, you will save me eternally: if you live still in my soul, my
soul will live in you: live then for ever my good resolutions, as you were
eternally in the mercy of my God, live and remain eternally in me, and I in
you. Amen Jesus.

This done, deliver up, consecrate and sacrifice unto God thy heart, thy soul,
thy will, with protestation, that thou vvilt never ask or demand them again,
but leave them entirely and eternally in his holy hands; inuoke his grace to
seal up the contract: beg the assistance of the B. Virgin, thy Angel, holy
Patrons etc.

Here and the Meditations for the course of the whole year.

MEDITATIONS FOR PARTICVlar Recollections according to the order and custom of
the College.
FIrst for Priests, who are to be sent away in Apostolical Mission; for their
three days Recollection, may serve the Meditation already set down folio 448.
of the state and obligation of an Apostolical or Missionary Priest.

Secondly; for the Divines, who go to take holy orders; for their three days
Recollection may serve the Meditation already set down fol. 442. of the state
and dignity of Priesthood.

Thirdly for those Scholars, who in the Vacancies, holy week, or any other
time shall voluntarily make a Recollection; no certain points can be set
down; but they must be left to their own choice, with the advice of their
Ghostly Father. who, according to the necessity and profit of every one, may
appoint fit and convenient Meditations out of some part or other of this book.

Fourthly for those, who come to be admitted into the College, for their
three days Recollection, may serve these six following points or
considerations.

A MEDITATION FOR SCHOLARS that come to be admitted.
1. COnsider first, that God almighty created thee, as all things else, of
nothing; not for any need he had of thee, or commodity by thee, but only to
exercise and declare his bounty in thee: and this he has done in a most ample
manner, making thee capable of his grace and glory; and therefore he has
enriched thee with understanding to know him, memory to be mindful of him,
will to love him; finally, with interior and exterior senses, to feel, see
and enjoy his benefits; of which the whole world is full, and for all which
thou art bound to praise him and serve him. The end therefore of thy Creation
being to serve God in this world and to enjoy him in the next; reflect a little
upon thy self, how thou have complied with the first part of serving God:
upon what thou have hitherto busied thy understanding, thy memory, thy will,
with all the powers and senses of thy soul and body: how little or how much
thou have performed herein thy own conscience well examined will tell thee:
but surely the common course of most men in the world, is so to live as though
they knew not by whom, nor for what end they were created; unless it were to
enjoy these present pleasures, and to set up their final rest in this world;
to heap up riches; build fair houses and vvallow in sensual pleasures.

Conclude with most humble thanks to the Divine goodness, first, for creating
thee to so noble an end; secondly, for giving thee this opportunity to see and
review thy actions and obligations: resolve hence forward, to reject and
despise all thoughts and actions that conduce not to this end of serving God:
finally offer one hearty prayer to God for poor and blind worldlings.

2. Consider secondly the enormity of sin and terror of death. Nam per
peccatum mors: For by sin comes death: sin is a more ugly monster than the
Devil, and far more hateful to God: It was sin only that threw the
Angels out of heaven, man out of Paradise and both into hell; it was sin only
that made the Son of God give up his secred breath upon the Cross; finally
it is sin that will at length consume the whole world with fire and
brimstone. This being most true, see now how long it is since thou have begun
to sin; and how ever since thou have increased them against God, thy
neighbor, and thy self: sweetest God, that I cannot present thee one day of
all my life, in which I have not offended thee! not one of the powers of my
soul, or senses of my body free from the guilt of Sin! not one of thy
benefits, inspirations or Sacraments, but J have abused and turned against
thee! After sin comes death, impossible to be either prevented or foreseen;
and yet most terrible; first, for being the last period of all that belongs to
this life, and world; friends, riches, honors, pleasures: secondly, for being
the entrance into another world; unknown, unexperienced, and doubtful whether
of bliss or misery: o what gripes will a poor vvorldling feel at that
hour for all that he must leave behind him? and what groans will a sinner
then give for fear of the lot he shall have in the world now ensuing.

Conclude with a true and hearty sorrow and detestation of thy sins past;
with a strong resolution, first to confess, next to amend them all for the
future: again, think often upon death, and prepare thy self for it, how young
soever thou art; for this is the only way to make it easy and tolera^le.

3. Consider thirdly, how, as after sin comes death, so after death comes
judgment, and then either heaven or hell. O the terror of that sentence, I te
maledicti in ignem aeternum! Get ye away you cursed into fire everlasting!
hell is a dungeon in the hollow of the earth, where a double pain shall
afflict the damned; the one is called Paena sensus, the pain of the sense,
which signifies all sort of torments, both interior and exterior, that can
be thought or imagined; heat and cold, tormenting devils, howlings and
gnashings of teeth: the other is termed Paena damni, the pain of the loss of
the sight of God; a torment as far surpassing the former, as God surpasses
all his creatures: and yet, which surpasses all, both these torments are to
be eternal, for ever, without end, as long as God shall be God. O Eternity,
how intolerable, how full of desperation is thy memory to these wretches? But
how sweet, how comfortable to those whose call shall be; Venite benedicti
Patris mei, possidete regnum etc? Come ye blessed of my Father, possess you
the kingdom etc: The joys of heaven none can imagine as they are, but
certain it is that they are every way complete, in body and soul over
filling all with the clear vision of the Deity: where the Palaces are all of
precious stones and burnisht gold; where the lamb of God, Jesus Christ, is
the common light, sending out his bright beams from end to end; where the
Angels and Saints glitter more then a thousand suns: finally, where is Omne
bonum sine mixtura mali. All good without any mixture of evil.

Conclude with detestation of all thy sins, which only can cast thee into
hell; and resolve to embrace virtue, which alone can raise thee to Paradise.
Finally make this solemn protestation. O my gracious God, since it has
pleased thee at the length to recall my wandering steps, and to direct them
into the right way; never hereafter will I turn back to those by-ways;
never here-after will I stray from the true path. Let us go with courage, my
dear soul; let us run toward this blessed country, which is promised us
in the kingdom of heaven: what make we so long in this beggarly country of
Egypt? I will therefore dispatch my self from all such things, as may put me
out of the way, or hinder me in so happy a journay: I vvil cleanse my self of
sin, and then seriously embrace the way of virtue.

Here may enter the General Confession, which is to be made.
4 COnsider fourthly, how learning being the ornament of the mind, must as
far exceed all other qualities or faculties of the body? of beasts or other
creatures, as the mind or soul of man surpasses them all; which is without
proportion: hence it is, that Scholars have the preeminence above all other
sort of men: for there is no man but laughs at a fool, how rich soever; and in
his heart respects a Scholar, though never so poor; admires his discourses
and willingly submits his judgment to a scholars opinion; looking on him as
on a creature of a higher rank or Species: this made Seneca say: Philosophiae
etiam apud pessimos honor est: nunquam tantum convalescit nequitia, vt non
Philosophiae nomen venerabile and sacrum maneat: Philosophy is honored even
by the vvorst: neaver does wickedness so much prevail that the name of
Philosophy should not be sacred and venerable: and the Poet, that Sapiens vno
minor est Jove, dives, liber, honoratus: The wise man is inferior to none but
supiter, he is rich free, and honored by all. Princes, Governors and
Magistrates ar^ thought to know more than other men; and if they be so, they
are truly esteemed, otherwise not; hence Plato thought learning as necessary
for a Prince, as is the soul for the body. Neither regularly can a scholar be
poor, in case he seek after riches, and contemn them not; for surely he has
a great advantage over others in the theorick; so that a little industry
suffices to make the practick complete.

Conclude to thank God almighty with all thy heart for placing thee in the
rank of Scholars; and resolve to be constant in it: let not idle and flitting
fancies of I know not what, cast thee down below thy self; a few years will
serve to place thee In apice humanitatis, in the full high of learning.

5. Consider fifthly the true happiness and content a Scholars life has above
all others: look about the world a little and observe the restless t^iles,
clamours and miseries of all other occupations, trades and callings, from the
highest to the lowest, from the King to the cobbler: every one complains of
his state and calling; and wishes he had undertaken some other: only the
scholar knows no other, with which to change, if he have but tasted a
little of the quietness and sweetness of his own; being most free from that
common plague, called proper interest; the source of all contentions and
miseries. The pleasure of learning is most pure and etheriall; most constant,
gathering strength with her increase; finally, most secure and honorable,
without any danger of foul diseases, blemish of fame, or breach of
friendship: whereas all other pleasures are gross, tumultuous and forbid;
most short and frail; soon cloying the appetite, Et nauseam prevocantes: and
provoking loathsomenesse; and lastly, all of them most hurtful to the body,
dangerous to our credit, and almost incompossible with true friendship, the
only Jewel of this mortal life; and yet hardly found in her own purity and
luster but amongst scholars.

Conclude to enjoy the fullness of happiness, that God has cast into thy hands:
and pity rather than envy those, who like blind moles lie roothing up earthly
dregs: ply hard the cultivating of thy mind, that thy delight may ever go
increasing: think not of change, till others assure thee of a condition better
than thy own; that is, change never.

6. Consider sixthly, or rather conclude out of what has hitherto been
pondered; that, whereas this life is nothing but a heap of miseries, and a
stage of sin, whose final period is an unavoidable death; and the next is
an eternal death in the torments of Hell, or an euer-during life in the
pleasures of heaven; the vvisest way and course will be, to settle once
fo^^^^, this wholesome resolution: first to esteem this world no more than
it is vvorth; that is, as a short, but troublesome and dangerous passage to the
next; and consequently to be most careful, how thou vvalkest; and not to set
thy affection upon any thing in it. Secondly, to make choice of heaven for thy
eternal habitation after this life, detesting the King of darkness with all
his hellish gally-slaues: o pious soul, this is what thy God desires, that
thou would come to dvvell with him, Qui vult omnes homines salvos fieri:
who will all men to be saved: to this does thy sweetest JESUS, with his
Blessed Mother and all the Angels and Saints of heaven, continually inuit and
call thee. Resolve therefore lastly to take the righthand way thither; that
is, the vva^ of virtue and devorion. God almighty has brought thee into the
path; here may thou be endowed with knowledge to see, and virtue to embrace
the means to salvation. Take courage therefore, the way of virtue is not so
hard, as worldlings would make us believe, but full of heavenly svveets. The
rules and observances are but easy and gentle, which thou art to follovv; and
yet well kept, they will bring thee in fevv years to a solid and constant
virtue, and virtue will crown thee in the end with a joyful and
everlasting bliss. Amen.

How to hear Mass well.
Maledictus qui facit opus Dei negligenter. Cursed is he, who does the work
of God necligentlie.
TO hear Mass is the greatest honor and chierest act of Religion a man can
offer unto God; wherefore our best endeavor must be to perform it well and
devoutly.

First then, entering into the Church, after taking of holy water, say:
Introibo in domum tuam Domine, adorabo ad Templum Sanctum tuum, and confitebor
nomini tuo. I will enter into thy house, I will adore at thy holy temple, and
I will Confess to thy name. Then placing thy self in a decent manner, make
thy intention to hear that Mass to the honor of God and of his Saints; for
the good of the Catholic Church, and thine own.

When the Priest comes forth, think thou see our B. Savior going to Munt
Caluary to offer himself for us; for what is done in the holy Mass, is not a
bare figure, but the self same thing, though otherwise represented. Then
either say thy vocal prayers, or else go on answering the Priest: At the
Gospel attend to what is read; and at the end thank our B. Savior for his
holy doctrine, begging vvithall his grace to practice it. From thence till the
Prist come to Sanctus, go on with thy vocal prayers: at Sunctus make thy
Memento with the Priest in this sort. Together with this thy Minister, good
God, I do here offer this holy sacrifice with the intention of my dearest
Savior and his holy Church, to thy honor and glory, of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost; in memory of my Sauiour's humanity and passion; in co^memoration of
the B. Virgin Mother and of the Saints of this day's solemnity; of such and
such my holy Patrons, and of all the Saints of heaven: in thanksgiving for
all thy benefits, satisfaction for my sins, and obtaining of grace to serve
and love thee; (then add thy particular necessities) for my happy death, and
for mercy at the day of judgment: then add for all thy friends, superiors
and kindred; that God for his Sonne's sake and merits will bless and save
thee and all them.

At the Elevation adore thy loving Savior, true God and true Man, there really
and personally present; and exercise the three acts of faith, hope and charity
toward him.

Next follows the Memento for the dead. I offer also this sacrifice to thee,
good Lord, for all that died in the unity of the Catholic Church: then add
thy friends and acquaintance; and all that are dead out of this family.

Then ad^re thy God again with Omnis honor and gloria, all honor and glory
be unto him, and say the Pater noster with the Priest. At Agnus De^ make acts
of sorrow for thy sins in general, and in particularr for those tho^ fallest
most into, with firm purpose to amend. Next say with all humility to the B.
Trinity and our Savior, Domine, non sum Dignus, vt intres sub tectum meum, sed
tantum dic verbo, and sanabitur anima mea. Lord I am not vvorthie that thou
should enter under my roof: but only say the word and my soul shall be
healed. Then make thy spiritual Communion thus: B. Savior, I believe
whatsoever thou do teach me by the holy Catholic Church, my Mother; and I
confess thy real presence in this holy Sacrament; I hope in thee, that thou will save my poor soul, and help me in my necessities: finally I love thee
above all things in heaven or earth; and desire to join my soul and heart
with thee: Veni dulcissime Jesus, and vni me tecum in perpetuum etc. Come
sweetest Jesus, and unite me with thee for ever etc. according to thy
devotion, and these affections that follow for every day.

Lastly, till the end of the Mass give Christ thanks for this benefit, and
for his death and passion here represented: entreat him to assist thee in all
thy actions for the day following; and so, craving first pardon for all thy
distractions and negligences, depart with reverence.

Affections for spiritual Communion.
ON SUNDAY, Vt Deus. As God.
DEus meus es Tu, confitebor Tibi; Deus meus es Tu, and ex altabo te: my God
art thou, to thee will I confess; my God art thou, and I will exalt thee: o
my God, whose habitation is Caelum caeli, and terra scabellum pedum tuorum;
The heaven of heaven, and the earth the footestoole of thy seete; make of my
soul a heaven in purity, charity and beauty; and dwell in me for ever. Amen.
Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui Sancto, etc. Glory be to the Father, and
to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.

ON MONDAY, Vt Rex. As a King.
TV^es ipse Rex meus and Deus meus; adveniat autem Domine regnum tuum: Thou art
my King, and my God; and let lord thy Kingdom come: possess, rule, and
command this poor Castle of my soul, so long held by thy enemy, Domine Deas
meus, ne possideant nos Domine absque Te; O my Lord God, let them not o Lord,
posse^e us without thee; but come, Et statue legem tuam in medio cordis mei,
And imprint thy law in the m^^^e of my heart.

ON TUESDAY, Vt Pater. As a Father.
SI Pater Ego sum, vbi est honor meus? vae filijs sceleratis. If I am a Father,
where is my honor? vvoe be to wicked sons. O Father have pity on this
poor prodigal son, who has spent in riot the substance thou gave him,
sed ibo ad Patrem meum; and saltem a modo dicam; Pater meus es Tu, and Dux
virginitatis moae; nevertheless I will go to my Father; and heareafter at least
I will say; my Father art thou, and the guide of my virginity.

ON WEDNESDAY, Vt Amicus. As a friend.
QVomodo dicis quod amas me, si animus tuus non sit mecum? How say thou
that thou love me, and thy mind is not with me? O Lord, my soul is with
thee; and, Si inveni gratiam in oculis tuis, If I have found grace in thy
sight, give me grace to love all for thee, and thee above all. O amice JESUS,
omnia mea tua sunt; fac vt Tu etiam semper meus sis in tempore and Aeternitate
O Dear JESUS, all mine are thine; be thou allsoe mine for ever.

ON THURSDAY, Vt Medicus. As a Physician.
SAna me Domine, and sanabor, salvum me fac, and salvus ero. Heal me, o Lord
and I shall be healed, save me, and I shall be saved. O good JESUS, be unto me
a JESUS a Savior; Et sana animam meam, quia peccavi tibi: a planta pedis vsque
ad verticem capitis non est in me sanitas^ Heal my soul because I have sinned
to thee: from the sole of the foot unto the top of the head there is no
health in me: purge me from all sin, and preserve me with the antidote of
Grace.

ON FRIDAY, Ut Redemptor. As a Redeemer.
VT servum redimeres, silium tradidisti: Thou have delivered thy son to
redeem a servant: blessed be that goodness, and blessed be my Savior. O free
me from the bonds of my own passions: Confige timore tuo carnes meas; Pearce
my flesh with thy fear; that I may tremble at sin, which has cost thee so
dear.

ON SATURDAY, Vt Sponsus. As a Bridegroom.
ECce spensus venit, exite obviam ei: Behold the bridegroom comes, go ye
forth to meet him: come o sweet spouse of my soul, and delight of my heart,
embrace me; Et iam me nemo despiciat: vere Sponsus sanguinum es Tu m^hi: sea
veniat Dilectus meus in hortum suum; and comedat fructum pomorum suorum. Let
now noe man despise me; a blouddie spouse truly thou art to me: let my
beloved come into his Garden and eat the fruit of his apple trees. See more
of these and the like affections in Molina de Sacerdotio.

Remember to offer one day in the week for a happy death: for seeing we
cannot die twice, it is good to provide for that once.

How to make the daily examen of Conscience.
Verebar omnia opera mea, sciens quod non parceris delinquenti.

I feared all my works, knovving that thou did not spare the offender.

FIrst, thank God for all his benefits, especially for those of this present
day; for thy life, health, sustenance: for all thou know not of, both of
body and soul; and for preserving thee from many sins and other dangers.

Next, recall to mind the actions of the whole day, and what thou have done,
good or bad: then offer all the good to God Almighty; confessing him to be the
sole Author of all that is good: offer him also all the good works and
merits of the whole Catholic Church militant, and the praises which the
Angels and Saints have given him this day: finally offer him with special
devotion the merits and love of our B. Savior JESUS CHRIST.

Lastly be sorry and beg pardon for thy sins, confessing thy self the sole
Author o^ them: detest them for God's love, with a firm purpose of amendment.
Beg of God his pretection for the night coming. Conclude vvit^ a Pater and
Ave in satisfaction.

LaVs Deo, MarIae, and san CtIs cIVs.
FINIS.

