An Advertisement.
AT the earnest request of some Friends I have been prevailed with to publish
this small Treatise, which had been sooner done, had it not been seized in the
Press in the Year 1667; by which the Reader will easily see what a prospect the
Author then had of the Miseries we now groan under, and with what Zeal he then
earnestly labored to open the eyes of Englishmen, against the cursed Plots and
Contrivances of the bloodthirsty Papists.

M. D.
June 18. 1681.
THE INCREASE OF Popery in England, Since the Reformation made by King Henry
VIII.

SHOWING The great encouragement that Priests, Jesuits, and other Promoter. of
that bloody Religion have had from Persons of Power and Authority. The
Discouragements and notorious Hardships, even to Silencing, and Banishment from
Cities and Corporations, that have been the portion of many able and faithful
Protestant Ministers, that have eminently opposed it. With an Essay toward
what may possibly befall the Churches of Christ from the Hellish Contrivances
and Damnable Plots of Romish Emissaries.

With a faithful Extract out of the most Authentic Records of the most
memorable things referring to the Reformation, viz. King Henry VIII. his
Reasons given in his Proclamation for taking away the Popes Usurped Power. His
Protestation against the Pope. His Injunctions to his Clergy. Bishop St phen
Gardener's Oath or Protestation, and his Reasons against the Popes Supremacy in
England. And the public Agreement of the whole Clergy of England, as confirmed
and ratified in the Book called The Bishops Book, published in the Year 1534.

Intended to be published in the Year 1667, but seized at the Press by R.L.S.
and others.

By the late Reverend William Dell, sometime Rector of Yelden in Bedfordshire.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway, 1681.

THE PREFACE.
FOrasmuch as the great and sudden growth of Popery in these three Nations,
especially in England, (which has now for a long time, through the Merciful
Goodness of God, flourished and been happy in the True Reformed Protestant
Religion) is now sufficiently manifest to all who have not either blinded their
own Eyes, or been blinded by Satan. And forasmuch as the means whereby this
great Misery and Mystery of Iniquity has been brought thus far, to this
dreadful and unhappy success, are also as fully manifest, to wit:

First, The great Countenance and Encouragement that this Heretical and Bloody
Religion has had from Persons of Power and Authority, together with all the
detestable Professors and Promoters thereof, Papists, Priests and Jesuits, who
have their daily Councils and Cabals, in the Highest Places, to promote this
great Design of the Devil, and of his Firstborn on Earth the Pope, even to set
up the old Damnable Superstition and Doctrine of that Man of Sin, whom the
Weekly Pamphleteer terms (very devoutly) His Holiness, and yet is no other
indeed and truth, than His Wickedness; the Old Enemy of Christ and his true
Christians and Followers, the Son of Perdition; the Angel of the Bottomless
Pit; the Destroyer and Murderer of Souls and Bodies; the impudent Agent of Hell
upon Earth; the Devils chief Servant and Factor for his Kingdom of Darkness;
the Monster of Monsters, who has abused, abased and vassalized all Christian
Princes, made himself superior to them, yea their very Lord and Master even in
their own Dominions; who has enforced all their People, not only by his
frivolous Excommunications, but also by Fire and Faggot, by Imprisonments,
Tortures and all manner of exquisite Cruelties: (which are the only Weapons of
his Warfare) to bow down to this Beast, and to own him as God, sitting in the
Temple of God, not only directly against God, but most Proudly and Insolently
above him: Who has pilled and polled them of all their Money and Riches (which
is the only Fish this great Fisher of Rome fishes for) who has disturbed,
interdicted, disordered, wasted and overturned whole Empires, Kingdoms and
Nations, at his Wicked Pleasure, and has been no other through all Ages than
Satan's eminent Vicegerent upon Earth. This, this prodigious and unparalleled
Wretch, must now in the midst of three Protestant Nations, be publicly styled
His Holiness forsooth! who only is holy as Satan is holy; for it may truly be
said of him, above any other, He is of his Father the Devil, and of his works
he does. I say the countenancing of this Damnable Religion, and of this
abominable Sect, and of the chief H ad of it, the Pope, is one great cause of
the new Increase of this Catholic Her^si^ amongst us.

Secondly, Another cause is, The open and notorious discountenancing,
discouraging, silencing, displacing and banishing from the Chief Cities, and
Towns in England, all the ab e, faithful, and godly Ministers of Jesus Christ.
Who being the diligent, painful and sincere Teachers of his true Doctrine, set
forth in his Gospel for the salvation of Souls, and for the reducing the lost
Sheep to the fold of the true Shepherd, were the greatest and strongest Bulwark
against Popery in the Nation. For His Wickedness, i. e. the Pope and his Wicked
Followers, knew well enough that Popery could never t^ke root again and prosper
in these Nations, if these Men's Mouths were open. They knew well enough that
their dark Doctrine and Kingdom could never prevail, where the clear light of
the Gospel shines. And therefore they used their chief Artifices and Satanical
Subtilties, to seduce the Secular Authority to run on their Errand, and to do
their Drudgery; even to Suppress, Imprison and Banish These, upon slight and
forged Pretenses, and in their stead to foist in a number of ignorant,
unlearned, loose, worldly, profane and debauched Priests, in every City, Town
and Parish; Men generally, who neither understand the Law nor the Gospel,
neither know God nor Themselves, nor are endued with any sound and serious
knowledge of any th ng; that so these keeping away the Light of the Knowledge
of the Truth from the people, they (poor Souls) might walk in darkn ss, and not
know whither they go, though they should be led into Popery again, which is the
Open, Broad Way to Hell.

Thirdly, Another Cause is, The letting loose the reins to all mann^r of
Ungodliness and Unrighteousn ss whatsoever, that Men, not only without
control, but with countenance, may be as wicked as they can be in the World;
may Whore, commit Adultery, Revel, Drink, Swear, Blaspheme, Reproach the Holy
Word of God, Vilify his Ministers, Abuse and Persecute his People, in the
greatest freedom the Devil can give; whereby Hell is let loose upon Earth, and
the Smoke of the Bottomless Pit, that is, Sin and Wickedness of all Sorts and
Sizes, has filled and darkened the Nation; and Men are gone to the highest
extent of Wickedness that can be practiced on Earth; that if they would be
worse, they must go to Hell in Hell. And that which has had a Stretched-out
Arm to bring about this Kingdom of the Devil amongst Men, is, the frequent
acting and frequenting of Stage Plays, wherein the most Holy and Dreadful Name
of God is prostituted to the Abuse and Contempt of every base Villain; where
the Preaching of the Word and Prayer, the Highest and most Sacred Ordinances of
God, are scorned and jeered in the presence of great Persons, where all Vice,
and Wickedness, and Filthiness are made familiar and pl^asant to the People.
These are the Nurs^ries of Hell, and the Seed-plots of Damnation, whereby most
of our greatest Persons, and of the Gentry are corrupted, and rendered wholly
useless for any worthy or noble employment in the Commonwealth: they being
through their influence become brutish, and without understanding, worse than
the Beasts that perish, and viler than the Earth. For the Pope knows, that as
Christ gathers his Kingdom here in the world, of the Elect and Faithful; so his
Wickedness must gather his Kingdom out of them that perish, who have made
shipwreck of Faith and good Consci^nce, and are thoroughly practiced to commit
all inquity with gr^ediness. And now when Men are brought to this sad pass,
that they are of no Religion at all, but are very Atheists, so that they can
mock at the Name of God, and at his Holy Word, and most Blessed Spirit, then
are they become sit Subjects to receive Antichrists Religion, which can please
them with Organs and Anthems, and with Vain-Shews, Ceremonies and May-Games,
and thereby can stifle their unquiet Consciences: and He by his false Pardons
and Indulgences, can yet drive them more headlong into Sin; bearing them in
hand in the mean time, that though his favor, (which also is to be procured by
Money) though they commit all these abominations, they are notwithstanding in a
fair way to Heaven.

By which Catholic Cheat of his, he destroys innumerable Souls of those whom
God in his just Judgment, because they received not the Truth of the Gospel in
the love of it, has given up to his strong delusions, to believe his Lies.

By these Three Means, besides others, things are brought to that pass, that
Popery is become the only safe and thriving way; and thousands of People whose
Names are not Written in the Book of Life, seeing safety, favor and
preferments attend it, run headlong to it, and greedily take Antichrists Mark
in their Forehead and in their right hand, for the sake of present security and
profit, not considering their latter end. Yea, they are become so thorough and
hearty in this their new Undertaking for the Catholic Cause, that through the
help they have received by Money and Arms, together with their strong
Encouragements from Rome, (which is the chief Wheel in this Motion) they are
now ready at a Day and an Hour, when the Watchword shall be given, (that I may
use their own word of Mystery) To begin their Heats, that is, to rise up and
destroy all that are, or are called Protestants, of what Degree, Condition, or
Sex soever, by Fire and Sword, and other Methods of Destruction; and not to
leave any of their Persons, or so much as their Names, if it may be, to survive
in this Nation. This is like to be their first attempt, and had been put in
Execution before this, if the Lord himself, whose Eyes behold the Nations, had
not most graciously disappointed them. And their second Design, which stands
behind the Curtain, is like the first, to wit, if that succeed, then afterward
to destroy all the English Blood, against which they have the greatest
Antipathy, and to plant this Land with French and other Foreigners, that so
they may thoroughly restore it to its former Popish Splendour, to the great
Satisfaction of all Popish Christendom:

Wherefore (if it be possible) and if it be the good Pleasure of the Lord to
put a Stop, (and Oh that it might be a full Point and Period!) to these Bold
Intrusions of Popery, and to all the Cruel Designs in the Breast of it; it was
thought meet for the common utility of all Protestants and Englishmen, to
represent afresh unto them the Memorable Acts of Henry the VIII. King of
England, for the extirpating the Pope and his Cursed Religion, out of his
Dominion. And what He saw so great cause to reject and cast out as Abominable
and Intolerable, upon such unanswerable grounds as He expresses; sure no man
that is in his right Wits, and of a sound Judgment, has any just ground to
endeavor to bring in again. And this thou thy self, whoever thou art, that art
either in the right Faith of a Christian, or in the right Wits of a Man, wilt
judge, if thou shall wisely and impartially r^ad, and observe what follows.

King Henry VIII. his Proclamation for the Abolishing the Usurped Power of the
Pope; as it is recorded in Fox his Book of Martyrs, Fol. 335. Vol. 2.
TRusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well. The Kings Proclam^tion against the
Pope.
And whereas not only upon good, and just, and virtuous grounds and respects,
edified upon the Laws of holy Scripture, die due consultation, deliberation,
advisement, and consent, as well of all other our Nobles and Commons Temporal,
as also Spiritual, assembled in our high Court of Parliament, and by Authority
of the same, we have by good and wholesome Laws and Statutes made for this
purpose, extirped, abolished, separated, and secluded out of this our Realm,
the Abuses of the Bishop of Rome, his Authority and Jurisdiction of long time
usurped, as well upon us and our Realm, as upon all other Kings and Princes and
their Realms, (like as they themselves have confessed and affirmed;) but also
for as much as our said Nobles and Commons, both Spiritual and Temporal,
assembled in our high Court of Parliament, have upon good, lawful, and virtuous
grounds, and for the public weal of this our Realm, by one whole Assent
granted, annexed, knit, and united to the Crown Imperial of the same, the
Title, Dignity, The Style of Supreme Head annexed to the Crown of England.
and Style of Supreme Head or Governor in earth, immediately under God, of the
Church of England, as we be and undoubtedly have hitherto been. Which Title and
Style both the Bishops and Elergy of this our Realm have not only in
Convocation assembled, consented, recognized, and approved lawfully and justly
to appertain unto us, but also by Word, Oath, Profession, and Writing under
their Signs and Seals, have confessed, ratified, corroborated, and confirmed
the same, utterly renouncing all other Oaths and Obedience to any other foreign
Potentates, and all foreign Jurisdictions and Powers, as well of the said Bishop
of Rome, as of all other whatsoever they be, as by their said Professions and
Writings corroborated with the Subscription of their Names, and Appension of
their Seals more plainly appears. We let you to wit, that calling to our
remembrance the Power, Charge, and Commission given unto us of Almighty God,
and upon a vehment love and affection toward our loving and faithful Subjects,
perceiving right well what great rest, quietness, and tranquillity of
Conscience, and manifold other commodities might insurge and arise unto them,
if that the said Bishops and other of the Clergy of this our Realm should set
forth, declare, and preach to them the true and sincere Word of God, and
without all manner color, dissimulation, and hypocrisy, manifest and publish
the great and innumerable Enormities and Abuses which the said Bishop of Rome,
as well in the Title and Style, as also in Authority and Jurisdiction, of long
time unlawfully and unjustly has usurped upon us and our Progenitors, and also
other Christian Princes; have therefore addressed our Letters unto the Bishop
of the Diocefe, straightly charging and commanding him in the same, that not
only he in his own proper person shall declare, teach, and preach unto the
People, forthwith upon the receipt of our said Letters unto him directed, every
Sunday and other high Feasts through the year, the true, mere, and sincere Word
of God; and that the same Title, Style, and Jurisdiction of Supreme Head
appertains only to our Crown and Dignity Royal. Likewise as the said Bishop,
and all other the Bishops of our Realm, have by Oath affirmed, and confirmed by
Subscription of their Names, and setting to their Seals, but also give warning,
monition, and charge, to all manner Abbats, Priors, Deans, Archdeacons,
Provosts, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and all other Ecclesiastical Persons within
his said Diocese, as well to teach, preach, publish, and declare, in all manner
Churches our aforesaid just Title, Style, and Jurisdiction, every Sunday and
high Feast through the year, and further to monish and command all other
Schoolmasters within his said Diocese, to instruct and teach the same unto the
Children committed unto them; as also to cause all-manner Prayers, Orisons,
Rubricks, Canons of Mass-books, and all other Books in the Churches, wherein
the said Bishop of Rome is named, or his presumptuous and proud Pomp and
Authority preferred, utterly to be abolished, eradicate, and razed out, and his
Name and Memory to be never more (except to his contumely and reproach)
rememb^ed, The Popes Name and Memo^y aboli^^ed.
but perpetually suppressed and obscured. And finally to desist and leave out
all such Articles as be in the general Sentence, which is usual^y accustomed to
be read, four times in the year, and do tend to the glory and advancement of
the Bishop of Rome, his Name, Title and Jurisdiction.

Whereupon we esteeming and reputing you to be of such singular and vehment
zeal and affection toward the glory of Almighty God, and of so faithful,
loving, and obedient heart toward us, as you will not only do and accomplish
with all power, wisdom, diligence, and labor, whatsoever should or might be to
the preferment and setting forward of Gods Word, but also practice, study, and
endeavor your self, with all your policy, wit, power, and good will, to
amplify, defend, and maintain all such Interest, Right, Title, Style,
Jurisdiction, and Authority, as is in any wise appertaining unto us, our
Dignity, and Prerogative, and Crown Imperial of this our Realm; have thought
good and expedient not only to signify unto you by these our Letters the
particularities of the Charge, Monition, and Commandment given by us unto the
said Bishop, as before is specified, but also to require and straightly charge
and command you, upon pain of your Allegiance, and as you shall avoid our high
Indignation and Displeasure at your utmost peril, laying apart all vain
affections, respects, or other carnal considerations, and setting only before
your eyes the mirror of truth, the glory of God, the dignity of your Sovereign
Lord and King, and the great concord and unity, and inestimable profit and
utility, that shall by the due execution of the premises ensue to your self,
and all other faithful and loving Subjects, ye make or cause to be made
diligent search and wait, and especially in every place of your Shirewick,
whether the said Bishop do truly and syncerely, and without all manner cloak,
color, or dissimulation, execute, and accomplish our will and commandment, as
is aforesaid. And in case ye shall hear, perceive, and approvably understand
and know, that the said Bishop, or any other Ecclesiastical Person within his
Diocese, do omit and leave undone any part or parcel of the premises, or else
in the execution and setting forth of the same, do coldly and feignedly use any
manner sinister addition, wrong interpretation, or painted color; then we
straightly charge and command you, that forthwith upon any such default,
negligence, or dissimulation of the said Bishop, or any other Ecclesiastical
Person of his Diocese, contrary to the true tenor, meaning, and effect of the
said Charge by us to him appointed aforesaid, ye do make indelayedly, and with
all speed and diligence, declaration, and advertisement, to us and our Council,
of the said default, and of the behavior, manner, and fashion of the same.

And forasmuch as we upon singular trust and assured confidence which we have
in you, and for the special love and zeal we suppose and think ye bear toward
us and the public and common Wealth, Unity, and Tranquillity of this our
Realm, have specially elected and chosen you among so many for this purpose,
and have reputed you such men, as unto whose wisdom, discretion, truth, and
fidelity, we might commit a matter of such great weight, moment, and
importance, as whereupon the Unity and Tranquillity of our Realm does consist.
If ye should contrary to our expectation and trust which we have in you, and
against your duty and Allegiance toward us, neglect or omit to do with all
your diligence and wisdom, whatsoever shall be in your power, for the due
performance of our mind and pleasure to you before declared in this behalf, or
halt or stumble at any part or specialty of the same; be ye assured that we
like a Prince of Justice will so extremely punish you for the same, that all
the World besides shall take by you example and beware, contrary to their
Aliegeance, to disobey the lawful Commandment of their Sovereign Lord and
Prince in such things, as by the faithful execution whereof, ye shall not only
advance the Honor of Almighty God, and set forth the Majesty and Imperial
Dignity of your Sovereign Lord, but also bring an inestimable weal, profit, and
commodity, unity and tranquillity to all the common State of this our Realm,
whereunto both by the Laws of God, Nature, and Man, ye be utterly bound.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the 9. day of June.
Furthermore, that no man shall cavil or surmise this fatal fall and ruin of
the Pope to have come rashly upon the Kings own partial affection, or by any
sensual temerity of a few, and not by the grave and advised Judgment,
Approbation, and Consent, generally and publicly, as well of the Nobles and
Commons Temporal, as also upon substantial grounds, and the very strength of
truth by the discussion and consultation of the Spiritual and most Learned
Persons in this Realm. It shall be requisite moreover to these premises, to
adjoyn the words and testimonies also of the Bishops own oaths and profession
made to the King, yielding and rendering unto him only the Style of Supreme
Head next under Christ of the Church of England; all other Service, Subjection,
and Obedience to be given to any other foreign Potentate, which should be
prejudicial to the Kings Highness in this behalf being excluded, and that both
frankly and freely of their own voluntary motion, and also upon the faith and
fidelity of their Priesthood, as by their own words and handwriting may appear,
in form as hereunder follows.



The Oath of Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, made to King Henry VIII.
EGO Stephanus Wintoniensis Episcopus, pure, sponte, The Oath of Stephen
Gardener to the King.
and absolute, in verbo Pontificio, profiteor ac spondeo illustrissimae vestrae
Regiae Majestati, singulari ac summo Domino meo and Patrono, Henrico Dei gratia
Angliae and Franciae Regi, Fidei Defensori, Domino Hiberniae, atque in terris
Ecclesiae Anglicanae Supremo immediate sub Christo Capiti, quod posthac nulli
externo Imperatori, Regi, Principi, aut Praelato, nec Romano Pontifiei (quem
Papam vocant) fidelitatem and obedientiam, etc.

Translated into English thus.
I Stephen Bishop of Winchester, do purely of mine own voluntary accord, and
absolutely in the word of a Bishop, profess and promise to your Princely
Majesty, my singular and chief Lord and Patron, Henry the Eighth, by the grace
of God King of England and of France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland,
and in earth of the Church of England Supreme Head immediately under Christ;
That from this day forward I shall swear, promise, give, or cause to be given,
to no foreign Potentate, Emperor, King, Prince, or Prelate, nor yet to the
Bishop of Rome, whom they call Pope, any Oath or Fealty directly or indirectly,
either by word or writing; but at all times, and in every case and condition, I
shall observe, hold, and maintain, to all effects and intents, the quarrel and
cause of your Royal Majesty and your Successors, and to the uttermost of my
power shall defend the same against all manner of persons, whomsoever I shall
know or suspect to be Adversaries to your Majesty, or to your Successors; and
shall give my faith, truth, and obedience, syncerely and with my very heart,
only to your Royal Majesty as to my Supreme Prince. I profess the Papacy of
Rome not to be ordained of God by holy Scripture, Stephen Gardener abrenounceth
the Pope.
but constantly do affirm and openly declare, and shall declare it, to be set
up only by Man, and shall cause diligently other men likewise to publish the
same. Neither shall I enter any Treaty with any person or persons, either
privily or apertly, or shall consent thereto, that the Bishop of Rome shall
have or exercise here any Authority or Jurisdiction, or is to be restored to
any Jurisdiction hereafter.

Furthermore, that the said Bishop of Rome now being, or any that shall succ^ed
him hereafter in the said See, is not to be called Pope, nor Supreme Bishop, or
Universal Bishop, nor most holy Lord, but only ought to be called Bishop of
Rome, and Fellow Brother, (as the old manner of the most ancient Bishops has
been.) This I shall to my power openly maintain and defend.

And I shall firmly observe, and cause to be observed of other, to the
uttermost of my cunning, wit, and power, all such Laws and Acts of this Realm,
how and whatsoever, as have been enacted and established for the extirpation
and suppression of the Papacy, and of the Authority and Jurisdiction of the
said Bishop of Rome. Neither shall I appeal hereafter to the said Bishop of
Rome, nor ever consent to any person that shall appeal to him; neither shall I
attempt, prosecute, or follow any Suit in the Court of Rome, for any cause of
right or justice to be had, or shall make answer to any Plea or Action, nor
shall take upon me the person and office either of the Plaintiff or Defendent
in the said Court. And if the said Bishop by his Messenger, or by his Letters,
shall make any means or signification unto me, of any matter whatsoever it be,
I shall with all speed and diligence make declaration and advertisement
thereof, or cause the same to be signified either to your Princely Majesty, or
to some of your secret Council, or to your Successors, or any of their privy
Council. Neither shall I send or cause to be sent at any time any writing or
messenger to the said Bishop or to his Court, without the knowledge or consent
of your Majesty or your Successors, willing me to send writing or messenger
unto him. Neither shall I procure or give counsel to any person to procure
Bulls, Briefs, or Rescripts whatsoever, either for me or for any other, from
the said Bishop of Rome or his Court. And if any such shall be procured against
my will and knowledge, either in general or in special, or else howsoever they
shall be granted unto them, I shall utter and disclose the same, and not
consent thereunto, nor use them in any case, and shall cause them to be brought
to your Majesty or your Successors.

Furthermore, for the confirmation hereof I give my faith and truth by firm
promise, and in the faith of a Bishop, that against this my foresaid Profession
and Promise made I shall defend my self by no Dispensation, Exception, nor any
remedy or cautel of Law or Example, during this my natural life. And if
heretofore I have done or made any Protestation in prejudice of this my
Profession and Promise here made, the same I do revoke at this present, and for
ever hereafter, and here utterly do renounce by these presents. Whereunto I
have subscribed and underwritten the name both of my self and of my Bishopric
with my proper hand, and thereto also have put to my Seal, in perpetual and
undoubted testimony of the premises.

Given the tenth day of February, Anno 1534, and of our Sovereign Lord King
Henry the eight twenty six. Stephanus Wintoniensis.

The same Bishop of Winchester's Reasons against the Pope's Supremacy.
MOreover the said Gardener in the forenamed Book De vera Obedientia, what
Constancy he pretends, Steph. Wint. a Lutheran in his Book De vera obedientia.
what Arguments he infers, how earnestly and pithily he disputes on the
Kings side against the Usurped State of the Bishop of Romes Authority, by the
words of his Book it may appear; whereof a brief Collection here follows.

IN the process of his foresaid Book, The Sword of the Church how far it
extends.
he alleging the old distinction of the Papists, wherein they give to the
Prince the Regiment of things Temporal, and to the Church of things Spiritual;
comparing the one to the greater Light, the other to the lesser Light, he
confuteth and derideth the same distinction, declaring the Sword of the Church
to extend no further, than to Teaching and Excommunication, and refers all
pre-eminence to the Sword of the Prince; alleging for this the second Psalm,
And now you Kings be wise, Psalm 2.
and be learned ye that judge the earth, etc.

Also the example of Solomon, who being a King, 2 Par. 28.
according to his Fathers appointment ordained the Offices of the Priests in
their Ministeries, and Levites in their Order, Exodus 32.
that they might give thanks and minister before the Priests, after the order
of every day, and Porters in their divisions gate by gate.

And speaking more of the said Solomon he says, 1 Reg. 22.
For so commanded the Man of God, neither did the Priests nor Levites omit any
thing of all that he had commanded, etc.

Besides this, he alleges also the example of King Ezechias, 2 Paralyp. 28.
He alleges moreover the example and fact of Justinian, which made Laws
touching the Faith, Bishops, Clerks, Heretics, and such other.

Aaron (says he) obeyed Moses, Solomon gave sentence upon Abiathar the High
Priest.

1 Macch. 10. 1 Macch. 14.
Alexander the King (in the first of Macchabees) writes thus to Jonathas, Now
have we made thee this day the High Priest of thy people, etc. So did Demetrius
to Simon.

Then coming to the words of Christ spoken to Peter, Matthew 16. Matthew. 16.
upon which words the Pope pretends to build all his Authority, to this he
answers, That if Christ by those words had limited to Peter any such special
state or pre-eminence above all Princes, then were it not true that is written,
Coepit Jesus docere and facere; forasmuch as the words of Christ should then be
contrary to his own facts and example, who in all his life never usurped either
in himself any such domination above Princes, showing himself rather subject
unto Princes; nor yet did ever permit to his Apostles any such example of
ambition to be seen, but rather rebuked them for seeking any manner of Majority
amongst them.

The Kings Style and Title approved by Steph. Wint.
And where he reasons of the Kings Style and Title, being called the King of
England and of France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and Supreme Head
in earth of the Church of England immediately under Christ, etc. thus he adds
his mind and censure, saying, That he sees no cause in this Title why any man
should be offended, that the King is called the Head of the Church of England,
rather than of the Realm of England; and adds his reason thereunto, saying,
If the Prince and King of England be the Head of his Kingdom, that is, of all
Englishmen that be his Subjects, is there any cause why the same English
Subjects should not be subject to the same Head likewise, in this respect
because they are Christians, that is to say, for the title of Godliness, as
though that God, which is the cause of all Obedience, should now be the cause
of Rebellion?

At length thus he concludes with an Exclamation saying, To say (says he)
that a King is the Head of a Kingdom, and not of the Church, what an absurd and
a foolish saying is this?

The King is as well the Head of the Church as of his Kingdom.
And further, adding for example the subjection of the Servant and Wife. If the
Servant (says he) be subject to his Master, or Wife to her Husband, being
Infidels, does their Conversion afterward, or name of Christians, make them
less Subjects than they were before? As Religion therefore does not alter the
Authority of the Master over the Servant, nor of the Husband over the Wife; no
more (says he) does it between the Prince and Subjects.

Paul making no exception nor distinction of Subjection, save only of that
which belongs to God, wills all men to obey their Princes; and what
Princes? Those Princes which bear the sword. And although we are bound by the
Scripture to obey our Bishops and Spiritual Pastors of the Church, yet that
obedience diminishes nothing the chief and head Authority that ought to be
given to the Prince, no more than the obedience of the Servant to his Master,
or of the Wife to her Husband, exempteth them from Subjection due to their
Superior Powers.

And herewithall he infers a principle of the Law; A Rule of the Law.
Diverse Jurisdictions (says he) proceeding from one person do not marry nor
hinder themselves, but rather do confirm and fortify one another.

Again, whereas the Bishop of Rome under the name of Peter does appropriate to
himself the highest place in the Church, for that he is the Successor of Peter.
Thereunto he answers in one word, but in that one word he answers enough
and to the full; I would (says he) he were, Wenchesters with that the Pope
were Peter's Successor.
for so in very deed he might well exceed and pass all Kings and Princes* if
not in preheminency of Dignity, yet in admiration and excellency of Virtue; in
which kind of superiority the Lord Christ would his Apostles and Ministers to
go before all Kings and Emperors in the whole world.

After this, in prosecuting the Argument of Peter's Confession, he argues thus
and says; Argument: The Prerogative was given to him which confessed. Flesh
and Blood in Peter did not confess Christ. Ergo the Prerogative was not given
to the Flesh and Blood of Pet^r.
that as flesh and blood did not reveal to Peter that Confession, so neither
was that Prerogative given to the flesh and blood of Peter, but to the better
part, that is, to the spirit of Peter, which is to mean, in respect of the
spiritual Confession of Peter, and not in respect of any carnal place or
person, etc.

Item, If the Scholar ought not to be above the Master, how then could either
Peter take that upon him, which Christ his Master so constantly did refuse? Or
how can the Bishop of Rome now claim that by Succession, whereof no example is
to be found either in the Head, or his Predecessor before him? For so we read
in Eusebius, both of Peter, James, and John, that they did arrogate no such
Primacy unto them, but were content that James surnamed Justus should be the
Bishop of the Apostles.

And as for the name and signification of the word Primatus, i. Primacy,
Pr^matus or Primacy what it signifies.
if it be taken for the first nomination, or the first place given, so he
grants that Peter had the preferment of the first name and place in the order
of the Apostles; but it follows not, that with this Primacy he had also a
Kingdom given. He says, Confirm thy Brethren, but not thy Subjects.
And though he were bid of the Lord to confirm his Brethren, yet was he not bid
to exercise an Impery upon his Brethren, for so were they not his Brethren but
his Subjects.

Primus Primatus, i. Primacy means as much as the first standing in Vocation,
and is the name of Virtue and not of Power.
That Peter was Primus, that is, first or chief in the number of them which
confessed Christ, it is not to be denied; for first he confessed, first he
taught the Jews, first he stood in defense of the Verity, and was the first and
chief Prolocutor among them; but yet that makes not that he should therefore
vindicate a general Primacy and Rule over all other States and Potentates of
the world, no more than Apelles, because he is noted the first and chief of all
Painters, therefore ought to bear rule over all Painters; or because the
University of Paris is nominate for the first and chief of other Universities,
shall therefore the French King and all other Princes, in their public
Administration wherein they are set of God, become Subjects and Underlings to
that University?

Thus after many other reasons and persuasions contained in the said Book De
obedientia, (for I do but superficially skim over the top only of his
Probations and Arguments) finally in the end of his Peroration he concludes
the whole sum of his mind in this effect; first denying that the Bishop of
Rome had ever any such extern Jurisdiction assigned to him absolutely from God,
to reign over Kings and Princes; for the probation whereof he has alleged
sufficiently (as he says) the examples and doings of Christ himself, which
ought to be to us all a sufficient Document.

And as concerning the term of Primacy, albeit it be used sometimes of the
Fathers, yet the matter being well considered and rightly expounded, makes
nothing for the large Dominion of the Bishop of Rome, which now he does usurp.

Also as for the Prerogatives granted unto Peter, by the which Prerogatives our
Savior would crown his own Gifts given unto him, crowning not the flesh and
blood of Peter, but the mavelous testimony of his Confession, all this makes
nothing for the Popes purpose.

Likewise as concerning the Local Succession of Peter, Succession of Peter.
the Pope has nothing thereby to claim. If he will be Successor of Peter, he
must succeed him in Faith, Doctrine, and Conditions; and in so doing he neither
will, neither yet shall need to seek for Honor, but shall be honored of all
good men, according as a good man should be, and that much more than he being a
good man would require.

Steph. Wint. takes his Vale of the Pope, but not his Vltimum Vale.
And thus Stephen Winchester taking his leave, and bidding the Pope farewell,
ends with a friendly Exhortation, willing him to be wise and circumspect, and
not to strive stubbornly against the truth. The light of the Gospel (says he)
so spreads his beams in all men's eyes, that the works of the Gospel be known,
the Mysteries of Christ's Doctrine are opened, both learned and unlearned Men
and Women, being English born, do see and perceive that they have nothing to do
with Rome, nor with the Bishop of Rome, but that every Prince in his own
Dominion is to be taken and accepted as a Vicar of God, and Vicegerent of
Christ in his own bounds. And therefore seeing this Order is taken of God, and
one in the Church should bear the Office of Teaching, The Office of Teaching.
another should bear the Office of Ruling, The Office of Ruling.
(which Office is only limited to Princes) he exhorts him to consider the
truth, and to follow the fame, wherein consists our true and special
Obedience, etc.

A Letter of the University of Cambridge against the Usurped Power of the
Bishop of Rome.
UNiversis Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filiis, ad quos praesentes Literae
perventurae sunt, coetus omnis regentium and non regentium Academiae
Cantabrigiensis, salutem, in omnium salvatore Jesu Christo.

Cum de Romani Pontificis potestate, etc.

Translated into English thus.
TO all and singular Children of the holy Mother Church, to whose hands these
presents shall come, A Letter of the University of Cambridge.
the whole Society of Regents and not Regents of the University of Cambridge,
sends greeting in our Savior Jesus Christ.

Whereas now of late it has risen up in question among us concerning the Power
of the Bishop of Rome, which he does both claim to himself by the holy
Scripture, over all Provinces and Nations in Christendom, and has now of long
time exercised in this Realm of England: And forasmuch as our Censure
concerning the cause is required, to wit, Whether the Bishop of Rome has any
Power or Authority in this Kingdom of England allotted to him by God in the
Scripture, more than any other foreign Bishop, or no? We thought it therefore
good reason, and our duty for the searching out of the verity of the said
Question, that we should employ therein our whole endeavor and study, whereby
we might tender and publish to the world what our reason and censure is
touching the premises. For therefore we suppose that Universities were first
provided and instituted of Princes, to the end that does the people of Christ
might in the Law of God be instructed, and also that false Errors (if any did
rise) might through the vigilant care and industry of learned Divines be
discussed, extinguished and utterly rooted out. For the which cause we in our
Assemblies and Convocations (after our accustomed manner) resorting* and
conferring together upon the Question aforesaid, and studiously debating and
deliberating with our selves, how and by what order we might best proceed for
the finding out of the truth of the matter; and at length choosing out certain
of the best learned Doctors and Batchelors of Divinity, and other Masters, have
committed to them in charge, studiously to insearch and peruse the places of
holy Scripture, by the viewing and conferring of which places together, they
might certify us what is to be said to the Question propounded.

The Censure of the University of Cambridge against the Popes Supremacy.
Forasmuch therefore as we having heard and well advised, and thoroughly
discussed in open Disputations, what may be said on both parts of the foresaid
Question, those Reasons and Arguments do appear to us more probable, stronger,
truer, and more certain, and sounding much more near to the pure and native
sense of Scripture, which do deny the Bishop of Rome to have any such power
given him of God in the Scripture. By reason and force of which Arguments we
being persuaded, and conjoyning together in one Opinion, have with our selves
thus decreed to answer unto the Question aforesaid, and in these writings thus
resolutely do answer in the name of the whole University, and for a Conclusion
undoubted do affirm, approve, and pronounce, The Bishop of Rome has no more
State in England than has any other Bishop.
That the Bishop of Rome has no more State, Authority, and Jurisdiction given
him of God in the Scriptures over this Realm of England, than any other extern
Bishop has. And in testimony and credence of this our Answer and Affirmation,
we have caused our common Seal to be put to these our foresaid Letters
accordingly.

At Cambridge in our Regent House, Anno Dom. 1534.
The public and general Agreement of the whole Clergy of England, confirmed
and ratified in their own public Book called The Bishops Book, Anno 1534. with
the Names of the Witnesses.
WE think it convenient, Te^timonies out o^ ^he Bishops Book against the Popes
Supremacy.
that all Bishops and Preachers shall instruct and teach the People committed
unto their spiritual charge, that whereas certain men do imagine and affirm,
that Christ should give unto the Bishop of Rome power and authority, not only
to be Head and Governor of all Priests and Bishops in Christ's Church, but also
to have and occupy the whole Monarchy of the World in his hands, and that he
may thereby lawfully depose Kings and Princes from their Realms, Dominions, and
Seigniories, and so transfer and give the same to such persons as him likes,
that is utterly false and untrue; for Christ never gave unto S. Peter, or unto
any of the Apostles or their Successors, any such Authority. And the Apostles
S. Peter and S. Paul do teach and command, that all Christian People, as well
Priests and Bishops, as others, should be obedient and subject unto the Princes
and Potentates of the World, although they were Infidels.

And as for the Bishop of Rome, it was many hundred years after Christ before
he could acquire or get any Primacy or Governance above any other Bishops out
of his Province in Italy; since the which time he has ever usurped more and
more. And though some part of his power was given to him by the consent of the
Emperors, Kings and Princes, and by the consent also of the Clergy in General
Councils assembled; yet surely he attained the most part thereof by mavelous
subtilty and craft, How the Bishop of Rome rose by ambition.
and especially by colluding with great Kings and Princes, sometime training
them into his Devotion by pretense and color of Holiness and Sanctimony, and
sometime constraining them by force and tyranny. Whereby the said Bishops of
Rome aspired and rose at length unto such greatness in Strength and Authority,
that they presumed and took upon them to be Heads, Concilium tertium Cartha
inense cap. 6.
and to put Laws by their own Authority, not only unto all other Bishops
within Christendom, but also unto the Emperors, Kings, and other the Princes
and Lords of the world, and that under the pretense of the Authority c^^mitted
unto them by the Gospel; First, the General Council of Nice decreed, that the
Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antiochia should have like power over the
Countries about those Cities, as the Bishops of Rome had over the Countries
about Rome.

In the Council of Milevitan it was decreed, that if a Clerk of Africa would
appeal out of Africa un^o any Bishop beyond the Sea, he should be taken as a
person Excommunicate.

In the General Council of Constantinople the first it was likewise decreed,
that every Cause between any persons should be determined within the Provinces
where the matters did lie; and that no Bishop should exercise any power out of
his own Diocese or Province. And this was also the mind of holy S. Cyprian, and
of other holy men of Africa.

To conclude, therefore the Pope has no su h Primacy g^ven him, either by the
words of Scripture, or by any General Council, or by common consent of the holy
Ca^holick Church.


^^^rein the said Bishops of Rome do no^ nely abuse and pervert the true sense
and meaning of Christ's Word, but they do also clean contrary to the use and
custom of the Primitive Church, and so do manifestly violate as well the holy
Canons made in the Church immediately after the time of the Apostles, as also
the Decrees and Constitutions made in that behalf by the holy Fathers of the
Catholic Church assembled in the first General Councils. And finally, they do
transgress their own profession made in their Creation. For all the Bishops of
Rome always, when they be consecrated and made Bishops of that See, do make a
solemn profession and vow, that they shall inviolably observe and keep all the
Ordinances made in the first eight General Councils; among the which it is
specially provided and enacted, that all Causes shall be finished and
determined within the Province where the same begun, and that by the Bishops of
the same Province, and that no Bishop shall exercise any Jurisdiction out of
his own Province: Gregorius l. 4. Epistolarum indictione 13. Epist 13.
and diverse such other Canons were then made and confirmed by the said Councils
to repress and take away out of the Church all such Primacy and Jurisdiction
over Kings and Bishops, as the Bishops of Rome pretend now to have over the
same. And we find that diverse good Fathers, Bishops of Rome, did greatly
reprove, yea and abhor (as a thing clean contrary to the Gospel, and the
Decrees of the Church) that any Bishop of Rome, or elsewhere, should presume,
usurp, or take upon him the Title and Name of Universal Bishop, or of the Head
of all Priests, or of the Highest Priest, or any such like Title. For
confirmation whereof it is out of all doubt, that there is no mention made
neither in Scripture, nor in the Writings of any authentical Doctor or Author
of the Church, being within the time of the Apostles, that Christ did ever make
or institute any distinction or difference to be in the pre-eminence of Power,
Order, or Jurisdiction, between the Apostles themselves, or between the Bishops
themselves, but that they were all equal in Power, Order, Authority, and
Jurisdiction. And that there is now, and since the time of the Apostles, any
such diversity or difference among the Bishops, it was devised by the ancient
Fathers of the Primitive Church, for the conservation of good order and unity
of the Catholic Church, and that either by the consent and authority, or else
at the least by the permission and sufferance of the Princes and Civil Powers
for the time ruling, etc.

And shortly after follows, And for the better confirmation of this part, we
think it also convenient that all Bishops and Preachers shall instruct and
teach the people committed unto their spiritual charge, that Christ did by
express words prohibit, that none of his Apostles, nor any of their Successors,
should, under the pretense of the Authority given unto them by Christ, take
upon them the Authority of the Sword; that is to say, the Authority of Kings,
or of any Civil Power in this world, yea or any Authority to make Laws or
Ordinances in causes appertaining unto Civil Powers. Truth it is, the Priests
and Bishops may execute all such Temporal Power and Iurisdion, as is committed
unto them by the Ordinance and Authority of Kings, or other Civil Powers, and
by the consent of the people, (as Officers and Ministers under the said Kings
and Powers) so long as it shall please the said Kings and People to permit and
suffer them so to use and execute the same. Notwithstanding if any Bishop, of
what estate or dignity soever he be, be he Bishop of Rome, or of any other
City, Province, or Diocese, do presume to take upon him Authority or
Jurisdiction in causes or matters which appertain unto Kings, and the civil
powers and their Courts, and will maintain or think that he may so do by the
Authority of Christ and his Gospel, although the Kings and Princes would not
permit and suffer him so to do; no doubt that Bishop is not worthy to be called
a Bishop, but rather a Tyrant, The Bishop os Rone judged to be a Tyrant and
Usurper.
and as Usurper of other men's rights contrary to the Law of God, and is worthy
to be reputed none otherwise than he that goes about to subvert the Kingdom of
Christ. For the Kingdom of Christ in his Church is a spiritual, and not a
carnal Kingdom of the world; that is to say, the very Kingdom that Christ by
himself or by his Apostles and Disciples sought here in this world, was to
bring all Nations from the carnal Kingdom of the Prince of darkness unto the
light of his spiritual Kingdom, and so himself to reign in the hearts of the
people by grace, faith, hope, and charity. And therefore ^ith Christ did never
seek nor exercise any worldly Kingdom or Dominion in this world, but rather
refusing and flying from the same, did leave the said worldly Governance of
Kingdoms, Realms, and Nations, to be governed by Princes and Potentates, (in
like manner as he did find them) and commanded also his Apostles and Disciples
to do the semblable, as it was said before; whatsoever Priest or Bishop will
arrogate or presume to take upon him any such Authority, and will pretend the
Authority of the Gospel for his defense therein, he does nothing else but (in a
manner as you would say) crowns Christ again with a Crown of Thorn, and
traduceth and brings him forth again with his Mantle of Purple upon his back,
to be mocked and scorned of the world, as the Jews did to their own damnation.

This Doctrine was subscribed and allowed by the witness and testimony of these
Bishops and other Learned Men, whose Names hereunder follow, as appears in
the Bishops Book before named.

TESTES.
Testimonies of Bi^hops and Doctors of England against the Pope.
Thomas Cantuariensis Edouardus Eboracensis Johannes Londonensis Cuthbertus
Dunelmensis Stephanus W^ntonlensis Robertus Carliolensis Johannes Exoniensis
Johannes Lincolniensis Johannes Bathoniensis Rolandus Coventr. and Lichfield.
Thomas Eliensis Nicolaus Sarum Johannes Bangor. Edouardus Herefordiensis Hugo
Wigorniensis Johannes Roffensis Richardus Cicestrensis Gulielmus Menevensis
Robertus Assavensis Robertus Landavensis Guilielmus Norwicensis Richardus
Wolman Archidiacon. Sudbur. Guilielmus Knight Archidiacon. Richmond. Johannes
Bell Archidiacon. Gloucester. Edmundus Bonner Archidiacon. Leicester. Gulielmus
Skippe Archidiacon. Dorset. Nicolaus Heth Archidiacon. Stafford. Cuthbertus
Marshall Archidiacon. Nottingham. Richardus Curten Archidiacon. Oxon.
Guilielmus Glife Galfridus Dounes Robertus Oking Radulphus Bradford Richardus
Smith Simon Matthew Johannes P^in Guilielmus Buckmaster Guilielmus May Nicolaus
Wotton Richardus Cox Johannes Edmunds Thomas Robertson Johannes Baker Thomas
Barret Johannes Hase Johannes Tyson.
These were Doctors of Divinity and both Laws.

A Protestation in the name of the King, and the whole Council and Clergy of
England, why they refuse to come to the Popes Council at his call.
SEeing that the Bishop of Rome calls Learned Men from all parts, conducting
them by great rewards, The Kings Protestation why he sends not to the Popes
Council.
making as many of them Cardinals as he thinks most m^et, and most ready to
defend Frauds and Untruths; we could not but with much anxiety cast with our
selves, what so great a preparance of Wits should mean. As chance was we
guessed even as it followed. We have been so long acquainted with Romish
Subtilties and Popish Deceits, The Popes craft espied.
that we well and easily judged the Bishop of Rome to intend an Assembly of his
Adherents, and men sworn to think all his Lusts to be Laws; we were not
deceived. Paul the Bishop of Rome has called a Council, to the which he knew
well either few or none of the Christian Princes could come; both the time that
he indicted it, and also the place where he appointed it to be, might assure
him of this. But whither wander not these Popish Bulls? whither wander they not
astray? What King is not cited and summoned by a proud Minister and Servant of
Kings, to come to bolster up Errors, Frauds, Deceits, and Untruths, and to set
forth this feigned General Council? For who will not think that Paul the Bishop
of Rome goes sooner about to make men believe that he pretends a General
Council, than that he desires one indeed? No, who can less desire it, than
they that do despair of their Cause, except they be Judges and give sentence
themselves against their Adversaries? The King not bound to come at the Popes
call*
We which very sore against our will at any time leave off the procurement of
the Realm any common weal, need neither to come our selves, nor yet to send any
Procurators thither, no nor yet to make our Excuse for either of both. For who
can accuse us that we come not at his call, which has no Authority to call us?

But for a season let us (as a sort of Blindlings do) grant that he may call
us, and that he has Authority so to do; yet (we pray you) may not all men see,
what avails it to come to this Council, Who be they that have place in the
Popes Council.
where ye shall have no place except y^ be known both willing to oppress truth,
and also ready t^ confirm and stablish Errors? Do not all men perceive (...) as
we, with what integrity, fidelity, and religion, these men go about to discuss
matters in controversy, that take them in hand in so troublesome a time as this
is? Is it not plain what fruit the Commonweal of Christendom may look for
there, The place of the Council not indifferent.
whereas Mantua is chosen the place to keep his Council in? Is there any Prince
not being of Italy, yea is there any of Italy, Prince or other dissenting from
the Pope, that dares come to this Assembly and to this place? If there come
none that dare speak for trodden truth, none that will venture his life, is it
marvel if the Bishop of Rome being Judge, No reason that the Pope should be
Judge in his own cause.
no man repining, no man gainsaying, the Defenders of the Papacy obtain that
Popish Authority, now quailling and almost fasten, to be set up again.

Is this the way to help things afflict? to redress troubled Religion? to lift
up oppressed truth? Shall men this way know whether the Roman Bishops (which in
very deed are, The Bishop of Rom in learning and life far under other Bishops.
if ye look upon either their Doctrine or Life, far under other Bishops) ought
to be made like their Fellows, that is, to be Pastors in their own Diocese, and
so to use no other power; or else whether they may make Laws, not only unto
other Bishops, but also to Kings and Emperors? O boldness, meet to be beaten
down with force and not not to be convinced with Arguments. Can either Paul
that now Lordeth, or any of his, earnestly go about (if they alone, or at the
least without any Adversary, be th^^ in a corner assembled together) to heal
the Sicknesses, to take away the Errors, to pluck down the Abuses that now are
crept into the Church, and there be bolstered up by such Councils as now is
like to be at Mantua?

Paul the Pope proleth for his own profit.
Is it very like that these, which prole for nothing but profit, will right
gladly pull down all such things as th^^^ Forefathers made, only for the
increase of Money? Wh^^^ as their Forefathers, when their Honor, Power, an^
^macy was called into question, would either in despigh^ ^f Gods Law maintain
their Dignity, or (to say better) their intolerable Pride? Is it like that
these will not tread in their steps, and make naughty new Canons, whereby they
may defend old evil Decrees? Howbeit, what need we to care either what they
have done, or what they intend to do hereafter, England takes her leave of the
Pope for ever.
forasmuch as England has taken her leave of Popish Crafts for ever, never to
be deluded with them hereafter? Roman Bishops have nothing to do with English
People; the one does not traffic with the other, at least though they will
have to do with us, yet we will none of their merchandise, none of their stuff,
we will receive them of our council no more. England refuses the Popes
Merchandise.
We have sought our hurt, and bought our loss a great while too long. Surely
their Decrees, either touching things set up or put down, shall have none other
place with us than all Bishops Decrees have, that is, if we like them we admit
them, if we do not we refuse them. But lest peradventure men shall think us to
follow our senses too much, and that we moved by small or no just causes,
forsake the Authority, Censures, Decrees, and Popish Counsels, we thought it
best here to show our mind to the whole world. Wherefore we protest before God
and all men, that we embrace, profess, and will ever so do, the right and holy
Doctrine of Christ. All the Articles of his Faith, no jot omitted, be all so
dear unto us, that we should much sooner stand in jeopardy of our Realm, than
to see any point of Christ's Religion in jeopardy with us. England goes not
from the unity of Faith although it goes from the Pope.
We protest that we never went from the unity of his Faith, neither that we
will depart an inch from it. No, we will much sooner lose our Lives, than any
Article of our Belief shall decay in England. We, which in all this cause seek
nothing but the glory of God, the profit and quietness of the World, The Faith
of England Catholic. England ready to send to any General Council where truth
may be advanced.
protest that we can suffer Deceivers no longer. We never refused to come to a
General Council; no, we promise all our labor, study, and fidelity, to the
setting up of trodden Truth and troubled Religion in their place again, and to
do all that shall lie in us to finish such Controversies as have a great while
too long vexed Christendom. Only we will all Christian men be admonished, that
we can suffer no longer that they be esteemed willing to take away Errors,
which indeed by all the ways their Wits will serve them go about this alone,
that no man under pain of Death may speak against any Error or Abuse.

We would have a Council, we desire it, yea and crave nothing so often of God as
that we may have one. But yet we will that it be such as Christian men ought to
have, that is, frank and free, where every man without fear may say his mind.
We desire that it be an holy Council, What a true General Council ought to be.
where every man may go about to set up Godliness, and not apply all their
study to oppressing of Truth. We will it be General, that is to say, kept at
such time and in such place, that every man which seeks the glory of God may
be present, and there frankly utter his mind. Conditions of a true General
Council.
For when it shall seem General, either when no man that dissenteth from the
Bishop of Rome is compelled to be from it, or when they that be present are not
let by any just terror to say boldly what they truly think; for who would
not gladly come to such a Council, except it be the Pope, his Cardinals, and
Popish Rishops? On the other side, who is so foolish, whereas the chief point
that is to be handled in this Council is the Popes own Cause, Power, and
Primacy, to grant that the Pope should reign, should be Judge, should be
President of the Council? If he which indeed can never think himself able to
defend his Cause before any other Judge, The Pope would be Judge in his own
cause.
be evermore made his own Judge, and so Controversies not decided, but Errors
set up, what can be devised in the Commonwealth of Christendom more hurtful to
the truth than General Councils?

The Pope has no power to summon Councils.
And here to touch somewhat their impudent Arrogance; By what Law, Power, or
honest Title take they upon them to call Kings, to summon Princes to appear,
where their Bulls command them? In time past all Councils were appointed by the
Authority, Consent, and Commandment of the Emperor, Kings, and Princes; why
now takes the Bishop of Rome this upon him? Some will say, It is more likely
that Bishops will more tender the cause of Religion, gladlier have Errors taken
away, than Emperors, Kings, and Princes. The world has good experience of
them, and every man sees how faithfully they have handled religious matters.
Is there any man that does not see how virtuously Paul now goes about by this
occasion to set up his Tyranny again? The Pope how he can watch his time.
Is it not like that he that chooses such a time as this is to keep a Council,
much intends the redress of things that now are amiss, that he seeks the
restoring of Religion, that now calls a Council, the Emperor and the French
King, two Princes of great power, so bent to Wars that neither they, nor any
other Christian Prince can, in a manner do any thing but look for the end of
this long War? Go too, go t o, Bishop of Rome, occasion long wished for
offers her self unto you; take her, she opens a Window for your Frauds to
creep in at: call, your Cardinals, your own Creatures, show them that this is a
jolly time to deceive Princes in.

O Fools! O wicked men! may we not justly so call you? Are ye not Fools, which
being long suspected not only of Princes, but of all Christian People in a
manner, that in no case you could be brought to a General Council, plainly show
the whole world, that by these your Conciliables, your Hutter-mutter in
corners, you take away all hope of lawful Catholic and General Council? Are
you not wicked which so hate Truth, Truth may be pressed ^^ cannot be oppressed.
that except she be utterly banished ye will never cease to vex her? The living
God is alive, neither Truth his Dearling (he being alive) can be called to so
great shame, contumely, and injury; or if it may be called to all these, yet
can it come to none of them. Who is he that grievously lamenteth not men to be
of such shameful boldness, The Pope Enemy to Christ.
to show apertly that they be Enemies unto Christ himself? On the other side,
who will not be glad to see such men as foolish as they be wicked? The World is
not now in a light suspicion, as it has been hitherto, that you intend no
reformation of Errors, but every man sees before his eyes your deceits, your
wicked minds, The Popes hatred against the truth.
your immortal hatred that ye bear against the Truth. Every man sees how many
miserable Tragedies your pretense of an Unity and Concord has brought into
Christendom. They see your fair face of Peace has served Sedition, and
troubled almost all Christian Realms. The Pope troubler of all Christian Realms.
They see ye never oppugn Religion more, than when ye will seem most to defend
it. They be sorry to see that great Wits a long season have spent their whole
strength in defense of Deceits, Reason to put his whole power to the promoting
of Pride and Ungodliness, Virtues to serve Vices, Holiness to be slave to
Hypocrisy, Prudence to Subtilty, Justice to Tyranny. They be glad that
Scripture now fights for it self, and not against it self. They be glad that
God is not compelled to be against God, Christ against Christ. They be glad
that Subtilty has done no more hurt to Religion in time past, than now
Constancy does do good to Truth. The Popes marks whereat he shoots.
They see the Marks that ye have shot at in all your Councils past, to be
Lucre, Money, Gains; they see you sought your Profit, yea though it were joined
with the Slaughter of Truth. They see ye would ever that sooner injury should
be done to the Gospel, than that your Authority, that is to say, arrogant
Impudency should in any point be diminished.

And we pray you, The Popes craft in stealing a General Council.
what may Paul the Bishop of Rome seem now to go about, which seeing all
Princes occupied in great affairs, would steal (as he calls it) a General
Council? What other thing, than hereby to have some excuse to refuse a General
Council hereafter, when time and place much better for the handling of matters
of Religion shall be given unto Princes of Christendom? He will think he may
then do as Princes now do; he will think it lawful not to come then, because
Princes now come not. We pray God that we ever brawl not one with another in
Religion; and whereas Dissension is amongst us, yet for our parts we do say,
that we as much as men may, defend the better part, and be in the right way. We
pray God that the world may enjoy peace and tranquillity, and that then we may
have both time and place to settle Religion. For except first Princes agree,
and so (War laid aside) seek peace, he loses his labor that seeks a General
Council. If the Bishop of Rome may keep his Council while they thus be
together, will not there be made many pretty Decrees? If they which would come
if they had leisure be absent, and we which (though we safely might come) will
not lose any part of our right, trow you in all our absence that the Bishop of
Rome will not handle his Profit and Primacy well?

The time and pl^ce presently picked of the Pope.
Paul, how can any of ours not refuse to come to Mantua, through so many
perils, a City so far set from England, so nigh your Friends, Kinsmen, and
Adherents? Is he not unworthy of Life, that where he may tarry at home, will
pass through so many Ieopardies of Life? Can he which comes to Cremona, a City
not far from Mantua, be safe if he be taken not to be the Bishop of Romes
Friend, What an Heretic is among the Papists.
that is, (as the common sort of deceived people does interpret) an Heretic?
And if there come to Mantua such a number as would furnish a General Council,
may not Mantua seem too little to receive so many Guests? Put these two
together, all the way from England to Mantua is full of just perils, and yet if
ye escape all those, the very place w^ere the Council is kept is more to be
suspected than all the way. Do ye not know all Civil Laws to compel no man to
come to any place, where he shall be in jeopardy of his Life all the way? We
have no safe conduct to pass and return by the Dominions of other Princes. And
if we had a safe conduct, yet should not we be charged with rashness, that
where just terror might have dissuaded us from such a journey, The way to
Mantua long and dangerous.
we committed our selves to such perils? Surely he that (the time being as it
is, things standing as they do) will go from England to Mantua, may be careless
if he lack not wit; sure of his arrival or return from thence he cannot be. For
who does not know how often the Bishops of Rome have played false parts with them
that in such matters have trusted to their safe conduct? How often have they
caused by their Perfidie such men to be slain, The falsehood of Popes no new
thing.
as they have promised by their Faith before, that they should both come safe
and go safe? These be no news, Popes to be false, Popes to keep no promise
neither with God nor Man; Popes contrary to their oaths, to defile their cruel
hands with honest men's blood. But we tarry too long in things that as well
touch all men as us.

We will (these now laid apart) turn our Oration unto such things, as privately
touch both us King Henry the Eighth, and all Englishmen. Is it unknown to any
man what mind Paul the Bishop of Rome bears to us King Henry the Eighth, to
us his Nobility, to us his Graces Bishops, and to us all his Graces Subjects*
for the pulling down of his usurped Power and proud Primacy, for expelling of
his usurped Jurisdiction, and for delivering of our Realm from his grievous
bondage and pollage? Who sees not him even enflamed with hatred against us,
The hatred of the P^pe against England.
and the flames to be much greater than he can now keep them in? He is an open
Enemy, he dissembleth no longer, provoking all men by all the means that he
can, to endamage us and our Country. These three years he has been occupied in
no one thing so much, as how he might stir up the Commons of England, and
corrupting some with Money, some with Dignities. We let pass what Letters he
has written to Christian Princes; with how great fervent study he has
exhorted them to set upon us. The good Vicar of Christ by his doing shows how
he understands the words of Christ; he thinks he plays Christ's part well,
when he may say as Christ did, Non veni pacem mittere in terram, The Pope
brings not peace but the sword to the earth, otherwise than Christ did.
sed gladium; I come not to make peace in earth, but to send swords about: and
not such swords as Christ would his to be armed withal, but such as cruel
Manquellers abuse in the slaughter of their Neighbors. We marvel little though
they vexed other Princes often, seeing they recompense our favor showed to them
with contumelies, our benefits with injuries.

We will not rehearse here how many our Benefits bestowed upon Roman Bishops be
lost; Benefits cast away upon the Pope.
God be with such ungrate Carles, unworthy to be numbered amongst men; Certes
such that a man may well doubt whether God or Man has better cause to hate
them. But that we have learned to owe good will even to them that immortally
hate us, what could we wish them so evil but they have deserved much worse? We
wish them this hurt alone, that God send them a better mind. God be thanked we
have made all their seditious intents sooner to show their great malice toward
us, than to do us much hurt; yea, they have well taught us evermore to take
good heed to our Enemies. Undoubtedly it were good going to Mantua, and to
leave their Whelps among the Lambs of our Flock. When we be weary of our
Wealth, we will even do then as they would have us now do. No, no, as long as
we shall see his heart so good toward us, we trust upon his warning we shall
well provide to withstand his cruel malice. No let him now spend his deceits,
when they can hurt none but such as would deceive and are deceived.

They have by sundry ways made us privy how much we be bound to them. It went
nigh their hearts to see the judgment of July, of Clement the seventh, of Paul
the third, nothing to be regarded with us. They be afraid if we should sustain
no hurt, because we justly rejected their Primacy, that other Princes would
begin to do likewise, The Popes Curses not feared in England.
and to shake from their shoulders the heavy burdens that they so long have
born, against Scripture, all right and reason. They be sorry to see the way
stopped, that now their Tyranny, Avarice, and Pride can have no passage into
England, which was wont to walk, to triumph, to toss; to trouble all men. They
can scarce suffer Privileges, that is to say, License to spoil our Citizens,
given them by our Forefathers, and brought in by errorfull Custom, to be taken
from them. They think it unlawful, that we require things lawful of them that
will be under no Laws. They think we do them wrong because we will not suffer
them to do us wrong any longer. They see their Merchandise to be banished, The
Popes Trumpery dispa^^ned out of England.
to be forbidden; they see that we will buy no longer Chalk for Cheese. They
see that they have lost a fair fleece, vengeable sorry that they can dispatch
no more Pardons, Dispensations, Totquots, with the rest of their baggage and
trumpery. England is no more a Babe; there is no man here but now he knows
that they do foolishly that give Gold for Lead, Gold given for Lead.
more weight of that than they receive of this; they pass not, though Peter and
Paul's Faces be graven in the Lead to make Fools fain. No, we be sorry that they
should abuse holy Saints Visages to the beguiling of the world.

Surely, except God take away our right wits, not only his Authority shall be
driven out for ever, but his Name also shall be forgotten in England. God grant.
We will from henceforth ask counsel from him and his when we list to be
deceived, when we covet to be in error, when we desire to offend God, Truth and
Honesty. If a man may guess the whole work by the foundation, The Popes
foundation to all deceits.
where Deceits begins the work, can any other than Deceits be builded upon
this foundation? What can you look for in this Mantuan Council, other than the
oppression of Truth and true Religion? If there be any thing well done, think
as every man does, Bishops of Rome to be accustomed to do a few things well,
that many evil may the better be taken at their hands. The Pope does a few
things well, that many evils may the bet er proceed.
They when they list can yield some part of their right; they are content that
some of their Decrees, some of their Errors and Abuses be reprehended, but they
are never more to be feared than when they show themselves most gentle. For if
they grant a few they ask many, if they leave a little they will be sure of a
great deal. Scarce a man may know how to handle himself, that he take no hurt
at their hands, yea when they bless him; which seldom do good but for an intent
to do evil. Certainly, come who so will to these Shops of Deceits, to these
Fairs of Frauds, we will lose no part of our right in coming at his call, The
Pope ought to be called, and not to call.
that ought to be called and not to call. We will neither come at Mantua, nor
send thither for this matter, etc.

And so the King proceeding in the said his Protestation declares moreover,
how the Pope after he had summoned his Council first to be kept at Mantua, The
Pope again pro^^g^es his Council.
the three and twentieth day of May, An. 1537, shortly after directed out
another Bull to prorogate the same Council to the month of November,
pretending for his excuse that the Duke of Mantua would not suffer him to keep
any Council there, unless he maintained a number of Warriors for defense of
the Town. And therefore in his later Bu^l he prorogueth this Assembly,
commanding Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishos, Abbats, and other of the
Spiritualty, by the virtue of Obedience, and under pain of Cursing, to be
present, but shows no place at all where he would be, nor whither they should
come. And in very deed no great matter though no place were named; for as good
a Council no where to be called, as where it could not be; and as well no place
served him that intended no Council, as all places. And to say truth, much
better no place to be named, than to name such as he purposed not to come to;
for so should he break no promise which makes none. And so going forward in
his Oration, toward the later end he thus infers by his words of
Protestation, saying:

No, Princes as the^ gave the Pope Primacy, so they take it from him again.
we will the Pope and his Adherents to understand that which we have often said,
and now say, and ever will say, He nor his has no Authority nor Jurisdiction
in England; we give him no more than he has, that is never a deal. That which
he has usurped against Gods Law, and extorteth by violence, we by good right
take from him again. But he and his will say, we gave them a Primacy. We bear
them well, we gave it you indeed; if you have Authority upon us as long as our
Consent gives it you, and you evermore will make your plea upon our Consent,
then let it have even an end where it began; we consent no longer, your
Authority must needs be gone. If we being deceived by false pretense of
evil-alledged Scriptures, gave to you that ye ought to have refused, why may we
not, our Error now perceived, and your Deceit espied, take it again? We Princes
wrote our selves to be inferior to Popes; as long as we thought so we obeyed
them as our Superiors. Now we write not as we did, and therefore they have no
great cause to marvel, if we hereafter do not as we did; both the Laws Civil,
and also the Laws of God, be on our side. For a Fraeman born does not lose his
Liberty, no nor hurt the plea of his Liberty, though he write himself a Bondsman.

Again, if they lean to Custom, Custom.
we send them to S. Cyprian, which says, That Custom, if Truth be not joined
with it, is nothing but Erroris vetustas, that is, an old Error. Christ said,
Ego sum via, veritas, and vita; I am the way, the truth, and the life: he never
said, Ego sum consuetudo, I am the Custom. Wherefore seeing Custom serves you
on the one side, and Scripture us on the other, are ye able to match us? In how
many places does Christ monish you to seek no Primacy, to prefer your selves
before nobody, no to be obedient unto all Creatures? Your old Title Servus
Servorum evil agrees your new forged Dignity. The Popes Title and his Dignity
agree not together.
But we will not tarry in matters so plain; we only desire God, that Caesar,
and other Christian Princes, would agree upon some holy Council, where truth
may be tried, and Religion set up, which has been hurt by nothing so sore, as
by general not General Councils. Errors and Abuses grow too fast; Erudimini qui
judicatis terram, Get you Learning you that judge the earth; and excogitate
some Remedy for these so many Diseases of the sick Church. They that be wisest
do despair of a General Council; Best that every Prince reform his own Realm,
and tarry not for General Councils.
wherefore we think it now best that every Prince call a Council Provincial,
and every Prince to redress his own Realm. We make all men privy what we think
best to be done for the redress of Religion: if they like it, we doubt not but
they will follow it, or some other better. Our trust is, that all Princes will
so handle themselves in this behalf, that Princes may enjoy their own, and
Priests of Rome content themselves with that they ought to have. Princes as we
trust will no longer nourish Wolves Whelps, they will subscribe no more to
Popish Pride, to the Papacy, etc.

Favor our doings, O Christian Princes, your Honor and ancient Majesty is
restored. Remember there is nothing peetaining so much to a Princes Honor, as
to set forth Truth, and to help Religion. Take you heed that their Deceits work
not more mischief than your Virtue can do good, and everlasting War we would
all Princes had with this Papacy. As for their Decrees, so hearken to them,
that if in this Mantuan Assembly things be well done ye take them, but not as
authorized by them, but that Truth, and things that maintain Religion, are to
be taken at all men's hands. And even as we will admit things well made, so if
there be any thing determined in prejudice of Truth, for the maintenance of
their evil grounded Primacy, or that may hurt the Authority of Kings, we
protest unto the whole world, that we neither allow it, nor will at any time
allow it.

Ye have, Christian Readers, our mind concerning the General Council; we think
you all see that Paul and his Cardinals, Bishops, Abbats, Monks, Friars, with
the rest of the Rabblement, do nothing less intend, than the Knowledge of
Truth. Ye see this is no time meet, Mantua no place meet for a General Council;
and though they were both meet, yet except some other call this Council, you
see that we neither need to come nor to send. You have heard how every Prince
in his own Realm may quiet things amiss. If there be any of you that can show
us a better way, we promise with all our hearty desire to do that that shall be
thought best for the settling of Religion, and that we will leave our own
Advices if any man show us better. Which mind of ours we most heartily pray God
that gave it us, not only to increase in us, but also to send it unto all
Christian Princes, all Christian Prelates, and all Christian People.

Injunctions given by King Henry VIII. to the Clergy of his Realm.
IN the Name of God, Amen. In the Year of our Lord God 1536, and of the most
Noble Reign of our Sovereign Lord Henry VIII. King of England and of France,
Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in the earth Supreme Head of the
Church of England, the twenty eighth, etc.

I Thomas Cromwell Knight, Lord Cromwell, Keeper of the Privy Seal of our said
Sovereign Lord the King, and Vicegerent to the same; for and concerning all his
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical within this Realm, to the glory of Almighty God, to
the Kings Highness Honor, the public weal of this Realm, and increase of
Virtue in the same, have appointed and assigned these Injunctions ensuing, to
be kept and observed of the Dean, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and Stipendaries,
resident or having Cure of Souls, or any other Spiritual Administration within
this Deanery, under the Pains hereafter limited and appointed.

THE first is, that the Dean, Parsons, Vicars, and other having Cure of Souls
any where within this Deanery, shall faithfully keep and observe, and as far as
in them may lie, shall cause to be kept and observed of all other, all and
singular Laws and Statutes of this Realm, made for the abolishing and
extirpation of the Bishop of Romes pretended and usurped Power and Jurisdiction
within this Realm, Confirmation of the Kings Supremacy.
and for the establishment and confirmation of the Kings Authority and
Jurisdiction within the same, as of the Supreme Head of the Church of England,
and shall to the uttermost of their Wit, Knowledge, and Learning, purely,
syncerely, and without any color or dissimulation, declare, manifest, and
open, by the space of one quarter of a year now next ensuing, once every
Sunday, and after at the least twice every quarter of a year, in their Sermons
and other Collations, that the Bishop of Romes Usurped Power and Jurisdiction,
Against the Popes Primacy.
having no establishment nor ground by the Law of God, was for most just causes
taken away and a bolished, and that therefore they owe unto him no manner of
Obedience or Subjection, and that the Kings Power is within his Dominion the
highest Potentate and Power under God, to whom all men within the same
Dominion, by Gods, commandment owe most Loyalty and Obedience, before and above
all other Potentates in earth.

Item, Whereas certain Articles were lately devised and put forth by the Kings
Highness Authority, and condescended unto by the Prelates and Clergy of this his
Realm in Convocation, (whereof part were necessary to be holden and believed
for our Salvation, and the other part do concern and touch certain laudable
Ceremonies, Rights, and Vsages of the Church, meet and convenient to be kept
and used for a decent and politic order in the same) the said Dean, Parsons,
Vicars, and other Curats, shall so open and declare, in their Sermons and other
Collations, the said Articles unto them that be under their Cure, that they may
plainly know and discern which of them be necessary to be believed and observed
for their Salvation, and which be not necessary, but only do concern the
decent and politic order of the said Church, according to such commandment and
admonition as has been given unto them heretofore by the Authority of the
Kings Highness in that behalf.

The Kings Articles to be read to the people.
Moreover, that they shall declare unto all such as be under their Cure, the
Articles likewise devised, put forth, and authorized of late, for and
concerning the abrogating of certain superstitious Holydays, according to the
effect and purport of the same Articles, and persuade their Parishioners to
keep and observe the same inviolably, as things wholesome, provided, decreed, and
established by the common Consent and public Authority, for the Commonweals
commodity and profit of all this Realm.

Images abolished.
Besides this, to the intent that all Superstition and Hypocrisy crept into
diverse men's hearts may vanish away, they shall not set forth or extol any
Images, Relics, or Miracles, for any superstition or lucre, nor allure the
people by any intreatments to Pilgrimages Pilgrimages Forbidden.
of any Saints, otherwise than is permitted in the Articles lately put forth by
the Authority of the Kings Majesty, and condescended unto by the Prelates and
Clergy of this his Realm in Convocation, as though it were proper or peculiar
to that Saint to give this Commodity or that; seeing all Goodness, Health, and
Grace, ought to be both looked and asked for only of God, as of the very
Author of the same, and of none other, for without him it cannot be given; but
they shall exhort as well their Parishioners as other Pilgrims, that they do
rather apply themselves to the keeping of Gods Commandments, and the fulfilling
of his works of Charity; persuading them that they shall please God more by the
true exercise of their bodily Labor, Travel, or Occupation, and providing for
their Families, than if they went about to the said Pilgrimages; and it shall
profit more their Souls health, if they do bestow that on the poor and needy,
which they would have bestowed upon the said Images or Relics.

Also in the same their Sermons and other Collations, Prayers in the Mother
Tongue.
the Parsons, Vicars, and other Curats aforesaid, shall diligently admonish the
Fathers and Mothers, Masters and Governors of Youth, being within their Cure,
to teach or cause to be taught their Children and Servants, even from their
Infancy, the Pater noster, the Articles of our Faith, and the Ten Commandments
in their Mother Tongue, and the same so taught shall cause the said Youth often
to repeat and understand. And to the intent this may be the more easily done,
the said Curats shall in their Sermons deliberately and plainly recite of the
said Pater noster, Articles, or Commandments, one Clause or Article one day,
and another another day, till the whole be taught and learned by little and
little, and shall deliver the same in writing, or show where printed Books
containing the same be to be sold to them that can read, or will desire the
same; and thereto that the said Fathers and Mothers, Masters and Governors, do
bestow their Children and Servants, even from their Childhood, either to
Learning or to some honest Exercise, Occupation, or Husbandry; exhorting,
counselling, and by all the ways and means they may, as well in their said
Sermons and Collations, as otherwise, the said Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and
other Governors, being under their cure and charge, diligently to provide and
foresee, For bringing up of Youth in some Art or Occupation.
that the said Youth be in no manner wise kept or brought up in idleness, lest
at any time afterward they be driven, for lack of some Mystery or Occupation to
live by, to fall to begging, stealing, or some other unthriftiness; forasmuch
as we may daily see, through sloth and idleness diverse valiant men fall, some
to begging, some to theft and murder, which after brought to calamity and
misery, impute a great part thereof to their Friends and Governors, which
suffered them to be brought up so idly in their Youth; where if they had been
brought up and educated in some good Literature, Occupation or Mystery, they
should (being Rulers of their own Families) have profited as well themselves as
diverse other persons, to the great commodity and ornament of the Commonweal.

Placing of good Vicars and Curats.
Also that the said Parsons, Vicars, and other Curats, shall diligently provide,
that the Sacraments and Sacramentals be duly and reverently ministered in their
Parishes. And if at any time it happen them, either in any of the cases
expressed in the Statutes of this Realm, or of special License given by the
Kings Majesty, to be absent from their Benefices, they shall leave their Cure
not to a rude and unlearned person, but to an honest, well learned, and expert
Curat, that may teach the rude and unlearned of their Cure wholesome Doctrine,
and reduce them to the right way, that they do not err; and always let them
see, that neither they nor their Vicars do seek more their own profit,
promotion, or advantage, than the profit of the Souls that they have under
their Cure, or the glory of God.

Every Parish to provide a Bible in English.
Item, that every Parson or Proprietary of any Parish Church within this Realm,
shall on this side the Feast of S. Peter ad vincula next coming, provide a Book
of the whole Bible both in Latin and also in English, and lay the same in the
Quire, for every man that will to look and read thereon, and shall discourage
no man from the reading of any part of the Bible, either in Latin or English,
but rather to comfort, exhort, and monish every man to read the same as the
very Word of God, and the spiritual food of man's Soul, whereby they may the
better know their Duties to God, to their Sovereign Lord the King, and their
Neighbor; ever gently and charitably exhorting them, that using a sober and
modest behavior in the reading and inquisition of the true sense of the same,
they do in no wise stiffly or eagerly contend or strive one with another about
the same, but refer the declaration of those places that be in controversy, to
the judgment of them that be better learned.

Priests not to haunt Alehouses.
Also the said Dean, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and other Priests, shall in no
wise at any unlawful time, nor for any other cause than for their honest
necessity, haunt or resort to any Taverns or Alehouses, and after their Dinner
and Supper they shall not give themselves to drinking or riot, spending their
time idly by day or by night, at Tables or Cards playing, or any other unlawful
Game; but at such times as they shall have such leisure, they shall read or
hear somewhat of holy Scripture, or shall occupy themselves with some honest
Exercise, and that they always do those things that appertain to good
congruence and honesty, with profit of the Commonweal, having always in mind
that they ought to excel all other in purity of life, and should be example to
all other to live well and Christianly.

Furthermore, Parsons not resident to pay the 40th. part to their Parishes.
because the goods of the Church are called the goods of the Poor, and in these
days nothing is less seen than the Poor to be sustained with the same, all
Parsons, Vicars, Prebendaries, and other beneficed men within this Deanery, not
being resident upon their Benefices, which may dispend yearly twenty pounds or
above, either within this Deanery, or elsewhere, shall distribute hereafter
yearly amongst their poor Parishioners or other Inhabitants there, in the
presence of the Churchwardens, or some other honest men of the Parish, the
fortieth part of the Fruits and Revenues of their said Benefices, lest they be
worthily noted of Ingratitude, which reserving so many parts to themselves,
cannot vouchsafe to impart the fortieth portion thereof amongst the poor people
of that Parish that is so fruitful and profitable unto them.

And to the intent that learned men may hereafter spring the more, for the
executing of the said premises, Every beneficed man worth 100 l. to find a
Scholar at the University.
every Parson, Vicar, Clerk, or beneficed man within this Deanery, yearly to
spend in Benefices or other Promotions of the Church, an hundred pounds, shall
give competent Exhibition to one Scholar; and for as many hundred pounds more
as he may dispend, to so many Scholars more shall give like Exhibition in the
University of Oxford or Cambridge, or some Grammar School; which after they
have profited in good Learning, may be Partners of their Patrons Cure and
Charge, as well in Preaching, as otherwise in the execution of their Offices,
or may when need shall be otherwise profit the Commonwealth with their counsel
and wisdom.

Also that all Parsons, Vicars, and Clerks, Beneficed men to maintain their
Mansions.
having Churches, Chapels, or Mansions within this Deanery, shall bestow yearly
hereafter upon the same Mansions or Chancels of their Churches being in decay,
the fifth part of those their Benefices, till they shall be fully repaired, and
the same so repaired they shall always keep and maintain in good estate.

All which and singular Injunctions shall be inviolably observed of the said
Dean, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Stipendaries, and other Clerks, and beneficed
men under pain of Suspension, and Sequestration of the Fruits of their
Benefices, until they have done their duties according to these Injunctions.

Postscript.
CHristian Reader, Who have perused and well weighed this Protestation, thou
do see therein the Frauds, Pride, Avarice, Treacheries, Cruelties, Enmity to
God and Christ, and his Truth and People, with many other notorious Enormities
of the Pope and his Shaveling Priests and Clergy, clearly and openly
discovered, detected, detested and renounced, by so great a King. He pronounces
them to be open Enemies to Christ himself, and to carry in their Breasts an
immortal Hatred to his Truth. He Proclaims to all Christian Princes and
Peoble the miserable Tragedies, which under pretense of Unity and Concord, they
have brought into Christendom, and that they have troubled all Christian Realms
with Seditions, under plausible pretenses of Peace. That in all their Councils
and Actings touching Religion, the only Marks they have shot at, was Lucre,
Money and Gains; yea that they sought their own Profit, with the Slaughter of
the Truth, and were infinitely more willing that the greatest Injury should be
done to the Gospel, than that their Authority, that is to say, their Arrogant
Impudence, should suffer the least Diminution. That their usual practice is, to
defile their cruel Hands with honest Men's Blood, and that contrary to their
Oaths. He further declares, That this holy Vicar was so inflamed with Hatred
against the King and Kingdom, for pulling down his Usurped Power, and Proud
Primacy, for expelling his Usurped Jurisdiction, for rejecting his False and
Heretical Doctrine, and delivering this Realm from his grievous Bondage and
Polage; that He sought by all ways to endamage both King and People; and by
Enemies at Home and Princes Abroad, to stir up Troubles and Commotions. Upon
which sufficient Grounds, and for which just Causes, he thus resolves, saying,
Surely except God take away our right Wits, not only his Authority, to wit the
Popes, shall be driven out for Ever, but his Name also shall shortly be
forgotten in England. And again, We will have the Pope and his Adherents to
understand that which we have often said, and now say, and ever will say, He nor
His has no Authority or Jurisdiction in England. That which he has usurped
against Gods Law, and extorted by Violence, We by good right take from him
again. And He exhorts all Christian Princes to favor and follow his Godly and
Just Proceedings.

Thus did God of his Infinite Goodness raise up this Great and Wise King to
root out the Pope's Usurped Authority, and False Religion also, in a great
measure, out of England; and the Lord grant that these Intolerable and
Unsupportable Evils may be kept out of it for ever. For without doubt, that
Curse of God which Joshua pronounced against him that should Rebuild Jericho,
which was destroyed by the Word and Power of God, according as it is written,
Joshua 6.26. And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed be the Man
before the Lord that rises up and Builds this City Jericho, which was
accordingly fulfiled in Hiel the Bethelite in the days of Ahab. I am very well
assured, that that, and a greater Curse will be the Portion of that Man from
the Lord, that shall rise up and Rebuild this Spiritual Babylon again in
England, to wit, the Antichristian Church, which the Word and Power of God has
destroyed, and now for several happy Years kept out of this Nation. Et nunc
Reges intelligite, erudimini qui Judicatis terram. Be wise now therefore O Ye
Kings, be instructed Ye that judge the Earth.

And Oh ye People, be not as the Horse and Mule that have no Understanding, but
as Men at least, and (if it may be) as Christians: consider and weigh well with
your selves the great and inexplicable Evils that the poor Nation now groans
under, none can tell for how long; some of which are these that follow, and
greater cannot be told.

1. The Suppressing the Glorious Light of the Gospel, and Banishing it out of
Public View; the silencing the Grace of Christ's own Lips, and causing the
Joyful Sound that Proclaims the Acceptable Year of the Lord, to cease out of
our Borders. And this is the Evil of Evils, and the Misery of Miseries which
brings all other Evils and Miseries along with it; yea this shuts up the
Kingdom of Heaven from the World, and sets Hell wide open, for all men to run
headlong into it, as we see it done this day. This excludes the Love, Mercy and
Goodness of God from the World, as much as possibly it can, and brings in his
Wrath and heavy Displeasure to wast and consume it; of which we have had the
sad and most exquisite Experience, now alas! for several years together. For
since the Gospel, under several Mulcts and Penalties, has been forbidden to be
Preached, how many Manifestations of Gods Just Anger have we seen in many
strange and unusual Prodigies, in the Heavens, in the Earth, in the Waters,
etc. being loud Warnings of the Wrath to come. What a grievous and desolating
Plague, the Scourge of the Almighty, has destroyed Thousands and Ten Thousands
in that late great C^^ and in many other parts of the Nation, the like
whereunto has not been heretofore? What a dreadful Conflagration has devoured
that Famous and Incomparable City, the Head and Glory of these Nations, and
laid it in Ashes and Ruins like Sodom and Gomorrah? which Cities were set on
Fire from Heaven, but this from Hell, by the Locusts of the Bottomless Pit, the
Emissaries of the Pope and his Clergy, which Vermin have swarmed in this
Nation, since the removal of the Gospel.

And this provoking Sin, is not so much the Sin of the People, as of the Powers
of the Nation, who as it were, of very Malice, have openly renounced Christ,
and desired Barabbas to be given to them in his stead; they have rejected the
Sweet and Meek Gospel of Christ, and have desired to be given to then the Cruel
and Murderous Religion of Antichrist; a Religion written in Red Letters, even
in Letters of Blood; for it has shed the blood of innumerable Saints and
Martyrs in the several Ages, since Antichrist first lift up his Head out of
Hell into this World; seduceing the Powers of the World to take part with him
in this bloody Work. This Religion, or rather this Iniquity in the Suburbs of
it, we see Erected already, and now the great City thereof, is ready to be
built again; and this Kingdom of Darkness could never have been founded but in
the absence of the Light, which they have violently chased away. And this one
thing carrys weight in it, that they who tolerate Popery to take its ease among
us, and to lengthen its Cords, and to strengthen its Stakes, though it be
directly against Christ; and they who tolerate the open exercise of the Jewish
Religion, which denies and blasphemes Christ, will by no means suffer nor
endure the true and sincere Gospel of Christ's Kingdom to be published by any,
but under great Penalties. Whereby they declare, that they are of one Council
and Work with Satan, who has with all his Subtilty and Cruelty fought against
Christ and his Gospel, from the first day of their Heavenly Birth hitherto.

This is the first and greatest Evil the Nation mourns and groans under, but
this is not all.

For Secondly, From hence follows the greatest and deepest ignorance of God and
Christ that can be, and of all their unsearchable Riches which the Gospel has
discovered to the World. The greatest ignorance of the Law and of the Gospel,
of Sin and of Righteousness, of Salvation and Damnation, of Heaven and Hell; in
a word, the grossest ignorance of all the Revealed Truths of God, which concern
us either to obtain Eternal Life, or to avoid Endless Death. So that in India
and Ethiopia, in Calno and Carchemish, in Pathros and Cush, in Mesech and the
Tents of Kedar, there is not greater ignorance of Christ and his Gospel, and of
the way of Salvation, to be found than in many places, and among many People in
England; the true report that may be given of it is even incredible. And would
it not grievously affect any Christian Man's heart to behold so many thousands
of Children in this Nation, brought up without any right instruction in the
Christian Religion? Oh consider, what a Profane and Heathenish Nation this must
necessarily become in a few years! for, what the Children and Youths now are,
the Commonwealth will be in twenty or thirty Years. And what a brutish and
beast-like Generation will then People be in this Land, if the Lord take not
care of this matter in the mean time. When few will be found who shall know any
more of Christ's Name than what they capacitate them to blaspheme it, or of his
most Precious Death and Crucifying, more than to serve them to Swear by his
Blood and Wounds. For the glorious Sun of Divine Knowledge, is three quarters
Eclipsed already: the Good Lord prevent the Total Eclipse thereof, by sending
forth again Ministers of his own choosing and anointing, to feed his People
with true Knowledge and Understanding.

Thirdly, The third Misery we sigh under, is the overflowing of Iniquity like
the mighty Waves of the Sea. Never was there such a Deluge of Sin seen upon
Earth, as now covers the Face of the Nation; this is even become the covering
of all Flesh. All sorts of People, of High and Low Degree, whether Secular or
Ecelesiastical, are all drencht and dyed in it; in such sort, that Men live in
this World in the manifest likeness of the Devil, and if Satan himself were
Incarnate, you could not easily discern one from the other. They set their
Faces against Heaven, and call out upon God to Damn them, Soul and Body. So
Divelish they are, that they would fain be tormented before their time, and do
often provoke Hell to swallow them up; for because they can be no liker to the
Devil in this World, they would hasten to Hell that there they may be fully
like him. Oh Monsters of Mankind! Oh the true Seed of the Serpent! the right
Generation of Vipers! Ye have been fore-warned by God to flee from the Wrath to
come, but who has warned you to flee unto it? Who among the remote Nations
would believe the report of all your Villainies? The very rehearsal of them
would put them into Pangs, and the bare hearing of them into Tremblings: their
Sayings and Doings are such, as are not fit to be mentioned or recited among
Men, but only in the midst of Devils. For who without horrible fear, could
either repeat or hear their desperate Blasphemies against God himself, glorious
in Holiness, and against our Lord Jesus Christ, (whom God has made his
First-Bor^, High^r than the Kings of the Earth; and when he brought him into
the World, he said, Let all the Angels Worship Him) and against the Holy Spirit
(against whom whoever speaks a word, it shall nev^r be forgiven him) against
the blessed Gospel the great and only Power of God to Salvation) against the
Kingdom of God on Earth, and against them that dwell in Heaven. Therefore, O
Lord, forgive them not.

For their Vine is as the Vine of Sodom, and of the Fi^lds of Gomorrah, their
Grapes are Grapes of Gall, their Clusters are bitter, their Wine is the Poison
of Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Asps. The show of their Countenance does
witness against them, and they declare their Sin more than Sodom, they hide it
not, they boast of it, and every Man is famous as he can do most wickedly. Woe
unto their Souls, for they have rewarded evil against themselves.

For therefore H^ll has enlarged her self, and opened her Mouth without
measure, and their Glory, and their Multitude, and their Pomp, and he that
rejoiceth shall soon descend into it. This their Day approaches, it comes, it
makes have, when they shall perish for ever like their own Dung, and they that
have s^en them shall say, where are they?

And therefore howl ye Profane Ones, for the Day of the Lord is at hand, it
shall come as a Destruction from the Almighty: then shall your Wicked Hands
fall down, and your Proud Hearts melt, and you shall be sorely afraid; Pangs
and Sorrow shall take hold on you, even Pangs as of a Woman in Travel: and when
ye shall look to one another ye shall he amazed at one another, and your faces
shall alter and change color as Flames. For b^hold the Day of the Lord comes
cruel, both with Wrath and fierce Anger, to lay the Land desolate for your
sakes, and he shall destroy the Sinn^rs thereof out of it. And he will punish
the World for their evil, and the Wicked for their wick^dness, he will make the
Arrogance of the Proud Ones to c^ase, and will lay low the Haughtiness of the
Terrible Ones. In that day Sodom and Gomorrah shall rise up in Judgment against
you, and it shall be more tolerable for them than for you, O Ye Profane Ones of
England!

These Spiritual Evils press us sore; As for our Outward Evils, they are well
known and felt by All, of all sorts; and though I should be silent in the
rehearsing them, they speak forth themselves. They are a sore not to be
touched; yet if no hand should touch them, how should they he healed? Wherefore
I will in the Name and Fear of God make mention of one of them, and of such an
one as briefly compreheds all the rest.

And this is, The strange and dismal Withering, Wasting, Languishing and Dying
Condition of Poor England, whose common Welfare no Man now looks after or
regards. Oh England! where are now thy Wise Men? where are thy Pilots? where
are thy Physicians? where are thy Counselors? where are thy Helpers? where are
they that pity thee, and say, Alas, Alas Poor England! thy Husband has
rejected thee, as a Wife of Whoredoms, and thou art become a Widow of Sorrows:
thou art left as a Cottage in a Vineyard; as a Lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers,
as a Besieged City. Thy bruise is incureable, and thy wound is grievous. There
is none left to plead thy Cause, that thou might be bound up: thou have no
healing Medicin^s left thee; Fear and a Snare and the Pit are upon thee, and to
whom will thou stretch forth thy hands, to whom will thou lift up thy Voice for
help?

Thou wast lately Rich and Flourishing Kingdom, and for thy Plenty, Wealth and
Glory wast both the Wonder and Envy of the World. Whilst thou did enjoy the
Presence of God, through his Word and Ordinances; whilst Iniquity was banished
out of Public View; whilst Holiness and Righteousness, Justice and Judgment,
Truth and Equity had their chief place in thee, Thou wast a People saved by the
Lord, Honored by the Lord, Exalted, Magnified, Protected by the Lord. Thou
wast the H^ad and not the Tail, even the Glory of Kingdoms and Nations. Our
Land then, was blessed with the precious things of Heaven, with the dew and the
deep that coutcheth beneath, with the precious fruits brought forth by the Sun,
and with the precious things put forth by the Moon, with the precious things of
the Earth, and the Fullness thereof. We had plenty of Gold, and of Jewels of
fine Gold; and our Houses were stored with Silver; our Barns and Storehouses
were replenished, and we were plenteous in Goods; in the fruit of our Cattle,
and in the fruit of our Ground. Our Sons were as Plants grown up in their
Youth, our Daughters as polisht Pillars; our Oxen were strong to labor, and
our Sheep brought forth Thousands: we did eat our Bread with joy, and drank our
Wine with a merry heart, because God accepted our Works. Yea then the
Firstborn of the Poor did feed, and the Needy did ly down in Safety; for there
was no breaking in nor going out, nor complaining in our Streets. We were a
happy People that were in such a case, yea much more happy, because God was our
Lord.

And thou O London, (for my heart is toward thee, and I am distressed for thee
O London, and pained at the very heart) Thou wast a Joyous City, whose
Antiquity was of Ancient Days; thou wast the Crowning City, whose Merchants
were Princes, whose Traffiquers were the Honorable of the Earth: by thy great
Wisdom, and by thy Traffic thou did get thee Riches, and thou did get
Gold and Silver into thy Treasuries. The Harvest of the River was thy Revenue,
and thou wast the Mart of Nations. All Nations emptied their Delicacies into
thy Bosom, and poured forth their pleasant things into thy Lap. And when thy
Wares went forth out of thy Seas, thou filledst many People, thou did enrich
the Kings of the Earth with the multitude of thy Riches, and of thy
Merchandise. Thou wast also the Mountain of God, thou had, in the midst of
thee, the stones of Fire. Thou wast the chief High-Place; the Ministers of
Jesus were dear to thee, and thy Arms were always open to embrace them; thou
did frequent the Solemn Assemblies of the Saints, with the Multitude of them
that kept right Holy Day. The Outcasts of Christ were wont to dwell with thee,
and thou wast a Covert to them from the face of the Spoiler. Many Fatherless
Children had harbor and succor in thee, and thou wast a Husband to the
Widows. It was thy Meat and Drink to feed the hungry, and to cloth the naked,
and to visit the Prisoners of Jesus Christ. Thou wast as the Vine-tree amongst
the Trees of the Forest, Verily a Noble Vine; But why have thou so suddenly
turned into the Degenerate Plant of a Strange Vine? Why of a right Seed did you
so easily become strange Children, whose Mouth talks Vanity, and your Right
Hand is a Right Hand of Falsehood? Why did thou join thy self with the Wicked,
and help the Ungodly? Why did thou love them that hate the Lord, and did
turn thy heart and hand against them that love the Lord? Thou did reject his
Ministers: thou did persecute his People; thou did hunt the steps of the
Righteous that they could not go in thy Streets; thou did hawll to Prison the
Assemblies of the Saints; and did make havoc of the Church of Christ till
there was no remedy.

For when the Lord saw this he was angry, for he looked for Grapes from you,
and you brought forth wild Grapes; he looked for Judgment from you, but behold
Oppression! for Righteousness, but behold a Cry! Wh^refore he bent his Bow
against thee like an Enemy, He stood with his Right Hand like an Adversary. He
sent a Fire into the midst of thee that could not be quenched, and it has
devoured thee, and brought thee to Ashes on the Earth, in the sight of all them
that beheld thee. He has swallowed up thy Habitations, he has thrown down in
his Wrath your pleasant Dwellings, your stately and beautiful Buildings. He
sent into thee treacherous Dealers to deal treacherously with thee, and
Spoilers to spoil thee; whilst thou wast become a silly Dove without heart. He
has brought upon thee the days that have not come on thee since thou wast a
City; He has stained the Pride of thy Glory, and brought into contempt all thy
Honorable Persons: they that did feed delicately were left desolate in the
Streets; they that were brought up in Silks and Scarlet embraced Dunghils: they
that dwelt in well built Houses were glad to shelter themselves in Booths, and
to crowd their heads in desolate places; they are come down from their Glory to
sit in Dust. For thy filthiness was found in thy Skirts, therefore thou wast
brought down wonderfully. How are thy Merchandise of Gold and Silver, and
Precious Stones, and of Pearl, and of fine Linen, and Purple and Silk, thy
broidered Works, thy Chests of rich Apparel, thy Spices and Odors, thy Vessels
of precious Wood, of Brass and Iron, and Marble; thy Wine and Oil, thy stately
Buildings and beautiful Structures of many Generations, how in three or four
days are they all brought to nothing? London, the Glory of the Kingdom, the
Beauty of England's Excellency, is become as when God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah: and is now at present, a place for doleful Creatures, for Owls to
dwell in, and for Satyrs to dance in, and for Wild Beasts to cry among the
desolate Houses, and Dragons in their Dwellings. For thou art swept with the
Besom of Destruction, and the Line of Emptiness is stretched out upon thee;
because thou did reject the Word of the Lord, and knew not the day of thy
Visitation.

How art thou brought down, which wast inhabited by Seafaring Men? the renowned
City which wast strong at Sea? and thy Inhabitants did cause terror to all
Nations. All that knew thee formerly are astonished at thee; thou art become a
Terror to them that see thee, and they that hear of thee are pained for thee. I
was bowed down at the hearing of it, I was dismayed at the seeing of it. O Lord
b^hold my affliction, for the Enemy has magnified himself: see and consider,
for I am become Vile. Our Enemies say, This, this is the Day we have looked
for; we have found it, we have seen it. This Day shall do that which the Fifth
of November could not do; now shall we see our desire upon them; for the
Strength of the Protestant Interest is broken; we have broken the Head of it,
and now shall we raze it, to the very foundation of it. But O Lord thou have
seen my wrong, judge thou my Cause. Thou have seen all their Vengeance, and all
their imaginations against me; thou know the Contrivers, the Abettors, the
Incouragers, the Actors, the Favorers of this Hellish Mischief; and all those
that rejoice in it: Give unto them All Sorrow of Heart, thy Curse unto them.
Persecute and destroy them in Anger, from under the Heavens of the Lord. And
let all the People say Amen.

But now I must shake hands with thee O London in thy Dust and Ashes, for there
is hope in this thy End. And I must turn my self back again to England, the
Land of my Nativity, and take up a Lamentation for it. O England, what Nation
was like unto thee from the Rising of the Sun to the Setting thereof? thou wast
a People satisfied with favor, and full with the Blessings of the Lord, but
art now suddenly become a poor and peeled People, meeted out and trodden down.
Thou art smitten with a perpetual stroke in anger, by a heavy hand: thou art
oppressed, spoiled and crushed in pieces evermore, and there is no man to save
thee. For God has remembered our Iniquities against us, and set our sins in the
light of his Countenance. For by Lying, and Swearing, and Oppressing, and
Slaying, and Drink^ng, and Whoring and Blaspheming, etc. the Land is defiled,
under the Inhabitants thereof. We have forsaken the Laws of God, changed the
Ordinances of Christ, and broken the Everlasting Covenant, and therefore has
the Curse devoured us. Our Labors yield us no Profit: our Plowing, Sowing and
Reaping eats up the Husbandman: our Trade is every where decayed: our Gold and
Silver are exhausted and drained away: our Estates are impoverisht and wasted:
the Abundance we had gotten and laid up, is departed: our Exactions and Taxes
are heavy upon us, so that we eat our Bread with sorrow, and drink with
sighing; for they have found out our Riches as a Nest, and as one gathers
Eggs that are left, so have they gathered the Substance of the Nation, and
there was none that durst move the Wing, or open the Mouth to the People. We
are brought so low that we have forgotten Prosperity; but we daily mourn and
fade away; for we are filled with bitterness, and made drunk with Wormwood. For
our Wise Counselors are become Fools, Understanding is perished from them: our
Princes are rebellious, and Companions of Thieves; they are Riotous Persons
that eat not for Strength but for Drunkenness. Our Counselors take Counsel,
but not of God, but against him: our Judges abhor true Judgment, and pervert
all Equity; they turn Judgment into Gall, and the fruit of Righteousness into
Hemlock: they justify the Wicked for a Reward, and take away the righteousness
of the Righteous from him. Our Priests, of all Titles and Degrees, are like
roaring Lions in the midst of us, ravening the Prey; they rob the Purses of
Men; they imprison their Bodies; they devour their Souls: they live in Rioting
and Drunkenness, they commit Adultery, and speak Lies: they strengthen the
hands of Evil Doers, that none does return from his Wickedness. Our People are
foolish and unwise, a company of treacherous Men, that ly in wait for precious
Souls; they are perverse Children, who have forsaken the Law of the Lord, and
have said to the Holy One of Israel, Depart from us. Wherefore we are become a
base Kingdom, because we have rejected all righteousness; yea, the basest of
Kingdoms, because we have Apostatized from the Truth. Of a Pleasant and Joyful
Land, we are become a Land of Trouble and Anguish; where is the Young and Old
Lion, the Viper and fiery flying Serpent. We are become a Mingled People,
Strangers devour us in our presence; they devour our Strength, they swallow up
our Riches, they eat up our Bread; yea they destroy us, our Cities and Towns,
and there is none to reprove them. We who were the chief of Nations, the
Princess of Provinces, who when we spoke there was trembling to the ends of the
Earth, are now become weak and contemptible; because our Rock has sold us, and
the Lord has shut us up, Therefore the Pomp of our Strength has ceased, and
our Spirit fails in the midst of us. So that we are shamefully brought down, by
the least and lowest of the Nations: who have subdued our Naval Power; taken,
burnt and spoiled our Royal Ships, the Wall and Bulwark of our Nation: fought
us in our own Bowels; triumphed over us in our own River; blocked up the
Passage of our chief City; stopped all intercourse of Trade; made a Spoil of
our Riches, and a Prey of our Merchandise; hindered and deprived us of all our
pleasant things; bereaved us of several of our Rich and Advantageous
Plantations; brought us down to their feet, humbly to beg their favor, and
have made us a Reproach, a Proverb and a Hissing to all Nations. O England who
shall bewail thee? What Lamentations shall we take up for thee? Oh that thou
were sensible of thy Stroke and could bewail thy self, for thou have sinned
grievously, therefore art thou cast out of the Mountain of the Lord, thou art
cast to the ground, and laid before Kings and Nations, that they may behold
thee. This is the end of the Children of Pride; for they that exalt themselves
shall be made Low. And therefore talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not
Arrogance come out of your Mouth again, for God is a God of Judgment, and by
him actions are weighed. The Adversaries of the Lord shall be broken in pieces:
out of Heaven shall he thunder upon them, and therefore let not the Rebellious
exalt themselves,

Thus have I rehearsed the Evils we ly under; and now I shall represent some of
the Great and Deadly Dangers that we are in.

And one is, to have the Nation quite overrun with Popery, and to have the
Popes Throne of Iniquity new erected amongst us. And are there not swarms of
Priests and Jesuits earnestly at work to bring this to pass? they having
emptied their Popish Cloisters and Monasteri^s from beyond Sea into England, to
promote their Catholic Design here. And they knowing who stands at their
right hand, have done it with great boldness, and with too great success, For
they have perverted not only very many of the Common People, but some Nobility
also, and many Gentry. And they have two great Engines to advance their design,
to wit, on the one hand Safety, on the other Danger; on the one hand Promotion,
on the other Destruction; on the one hand Life, on the other Death; with the
one of them they allure, with the other they terrify; with the one they draw
whom they can with the other they drive whom they cannot draw. And these
Engines are of that force, that thereby they have conquered many weak, sinful
and unstable Souls, yea and have prevailed with some Persons of Honor and
Quality, to send their Sons to Monasteries, and their Daughters to Nunneries
beyond Sea, to be trained up in their Damnable Religion there, till better
provision can be made for them here; of which they now are in full hopes.

And now think with your selves, and consider well, O my Dear Protestant
Countrymen, how could you endure to see the Pope Worshipped here again in
England, for a God on Earth? to see him set his proud Foot on the Neck of your
King? to see your King a Tributary to the Pope, and to stand or fall at his
base pleasure? how could you endure to be forced to acknowledge his sinful and
foolish Decrees to be equal to the Holy Word of God? and to own his little
Wafer, or piece of Bread, for the very Natural Body and Blood of Christ which
was crucified and shed on the Cross? how could you endure to have your throats
stretched so wide, as to swallow down only this one Abomination of his, which
is more vast and rude than the first Chaos? how could you endure to see new
Roods erected in every Parish Church? and to bow your selves down and worship
Stocks and Stones, Crucifixes and Images, instead of the True and Living God?
how could you frame your selves to Auricular Confession, and to rehearse or
enumerate all your sins in a Priests Ear, who himself stands in need of
Forgiveness more than you, being a greater Sinner? how could you endure that
their lusty Priests should defile your Wives and Daughters, they being
prohibited Wives of their own; and so should drive again a General Trade of
Whoredom in the Nation, as they have been wont to do formerly? how could you
submit your selves to their Popish Penance, and to travel their Popish
Pilgrimages, to their feigned Saints and ridiculous Relics? how could you
bear the severity of their Ecclesiastical Courts and Censures, and to be
pronounced Heretics by those who are themselves the greatest Heretics in
the World? how could You Noblemen and Gentlemen, who have your Estates, or part
of them, in Abbey and Church Lands, as they were called, be content to have
them taken away from You and your Posterity, and given back again to maintain
Abbots, Monks, Friars, Nuns and such kind of Popish Vermin and Locusts, which,
if once admitted, will eat up again every green thing in the Land? And let me
tell you, that all these Estates of yours, they do not only promise to
themselves, but verily expect them. Yea farther, how could you endure to have
your loving Husbands taken from your Heads, and your dear Wives torn out of
your Bosoms, your sweet Children dragged out of your Houses, your near
Relations and friendly Neighbors hawlled and hurried into Prisons and
Dungeons, and there to be wracked, starved, tormented, and at last (if they
live to it) to be put alive into the flames of Fire, there to be burnt and
consumed to Ashes? and that only because they sincerely cleave to Christ and
his Gospel, and will not adhere to Antichrist, nor receive his Mark, nor do his
Hellish Drudgery? how could you endure to see this cruel Beast of Rome to play
Rex here in England again; and though he be the Firstborn of the Devil, yet to
set himself up above all that is called God, and Worshipped? And yet you are
now in more danger to see all these things come to pass ( because you received
not the truth in the love of it, whilst you enjoyed it) than your Predecessors
have been this Hundred Years, they having now gotten both Wind and Tide with
them, even Opportunity and Encouragement. Wherefore a Great Man concluded, That
now certainly the Papists would do their Work, they were in so fair a way. But
he reckoned without his Host. And lest my Protestant Countrymen should be too
much discouraged in this apparent and approaching Danger, I will furnish you
with one Rich Cordial, out of the Words of Henry the VIII. which he directed to
the Papists in his days, in his foregoing Declaration against them: where he
says, Are you not wicked which so hate the Truth, that except she be utterly
banished, ye will never cease to vex her? The Living God is alive, neither can
Truth his Darling, He being alive, be called to so great shame, contumely and
injury as you would have her; and if she may be called to all these, yet can
she come to none of them. Who is he that grievously lamenteth not! Men to be
come to such Shameless Boldness, to show apertly that they be Enemies to Christ
himself? on the other side, who would not be glad to see such Men, as foolish
as they be Wicked? For they work a deceitful Work, and by all their cunning
Craftiness, Mysterious, and Industrious Actings, they only dig the Pit, into
which they must fall themselves, and contrive the ruin that must be their own
Portion.

Your Second Danger, is to have the most Cruel and Inhumane Massacre executed
upon you, that ever yet was committed in the World, by the Consecrated Hands
and Weapons of the Papists. And this Glorious Service of theirs is designed
upon the English Protestants, for the singular Promotion of the Catholic
Cause, which has its way usually prepared into all Nations, by Fire and Sword.
The Wrath of the Papists is so kindled against you, and they are so thoroughly
set on fire from Hell, that they are ready to break forth into their greatest
flames, and to endeavor the Destruction of All at Once. It is well known, how
well they are Horsed and Armed, and how they train their Troops against the
Bloody Day intended. It is well known, how well they are furnished with Money,
intended for other purposes. It is well known what numbers of French Men are
brought into the bowels of the English; and many Noblemen and Gentlemen are so
pleased with the Children of those Strangers, that they have French Servants,
Papists, to attend them, whom they have well Mounted and Armed, enough to make
a little Army of themselves. And this they do that their strength may be hidden
till opportunity shall serve to make it appear. It is well known that the chief
Places of Strength, and many Chief Commands are in the hands of Papists. And
now they become so numerous, and having such power, what is there wanting but a
convenient Opportunity to fulfill all that is in their Hearts, upon Secure,
Unarmed, Unprepared People, and to dispatch their work in few days, and
especially upon thee O London, who art their chiefest Eyesore. O England,
(except the Lord prevent it) thy Calamity is near, at the very Door: and thou
may expect every day, now Peace is made Abroad, when these will unsheath and
draw their Swords upon you here at Home: and you must be charged in the Kings
Name (for so they will abuse it) to stand still, and to hold forth your Throats
to Murderers. You cannot forget the dreadful Massacre at Paris, nor that late
more dreadful and bloody Massacre of the English Protestants in Ireland, when
more than a Hundred Thousand Innocent Persons, Men, Women and Children were in
a very short time, with the greatest Cruelties and Torments that ever were
heard of, murdered by them; and what Authority they pretended for it. But they
have treasured up in their minds the fullness of all Cruelties, for you
Englishmen. They have discovered something of their Kindness and good Pleasure
to you in their firing the City of London, which they have left as an
Everlasting Monument of their Treachery and Villainy to England, and of their
hatred to English Protestants; and let this most notorious fact of theirs be
engraven in great Characters on the Gates and Walls, and Chief Places of your
City, when it shall be built again; that all Posterity when they shall see New
London, may know and consider what Persons, and what Religion burnt the Old.
They have also often attempted the firing of Southwark, and of the remaining
parts of the City; for nothing but the utter ruin of it will satisfy them.
And when the kindling of some of these later flames, was related to a Great
Person, they laughing said, Now the Game is begun again: for they make but a
May game of consuming all. And yet Fire only will not satisfy them, it is
blood must follow, or they are never the near. It is you O English Protestants,
whose lives they thirst after, and they can neither eat nor drink comfortably,
nor sleep quietly, till they be filled with this Venison. And therefore of you
it may be truly said, Your lives are in jeopardy every hour.

Yet for all this let us not despond nor cast away our Confidence, saying, Our
hope is cut off, and we are perished; for he that sits in Heaven laughs them to
scorn, even the Lord has them in Derision: and though we hold our peace, he
will speak to them in his Wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. He will
make his Arrows drunk with their blood, and his Sword shall devour their flesh,
from the beginning of Revenges upon the Enemy. Rejoice O ye Nations, with his
Paople, for he will av^nge the Blood of his Servants, and will render V^ng ance
to his Adversaries, and will be m^rciful to his Land, and to his People.

Thirdly, Another of your Dangers, which also is one of the greatest, is your
own Heedlesness and strange Security, in the midst of such thick Clouds and
Storms which have encompassed us round, able to awaken even dead Men. How
stupid and sottish were you at the burning of your City, when you saw with your
own eyes, your House^, your Substance, your Riches, all consuming together in
those furious flames before your faces; yet how insensible were you of your
deplorable condition? how regardless of that heavy hand of God? how insensible
of the Treachery and Cruelty of Men? who did not only begin those ^^^mes, but
also continue them in the Progress they had appointed for t^em. Had you the
Brains or Hearts of Men, to suffer those Incendiaries who were taken in the
very Act, to be rescued from Justice, and released to carry on their Villainy
again? surely you were so Sottish, that had not the Lord been the more merciful
to you, your Lives and Houses had perished together, as it was designed.
Moreover, how insensible have you been of the Popish Plot, and intended
Massacre; as if those good Men had been but in Jest, when a Regiment of Papists
was brought up to secure the Prot^stants, and a company of Wolves to guard the
Flock; and when some of their own Pens and Lips reveal their minds, why should
you yet be so ignorant of it, who are wholly concerned in it? Wherefore as your
Lives hitherto have been dear to God, so let them now also be dear to your
selves, and do not you say, P^ace, Peace, when the Papists intend and prepare
D^struction, Destruction; but let that be verified of you, which Henry VIII.
says of his time; to wit, The World is not now in so light a suspicion of you
(Papists) as it has been hitherto; but every Man sees before his Eyes, your
deceits, your Wicked Minds, your Immortal Hatred against the Truth, and the
Professors af it, every Man sees how many miserable Tragedies your pretense of
an Unity and Concord has brought into Christendom. They see your fair face of
Peace has served Sedition, and troubled almost all Christian Realms. And
therefore seeing they were so quick-sighted who lived above an hundred and
thirty years ago, to see and foresee the Treacheries and Cruelties of the
Papists, let not us who live so many years after, and have had far greater
experience of them, be altogether blind, and see nothing at all, in the clear
Noon-shine of their Doings.

Wherefore let all be admonished, that after the desired Tidings of Peace they
be not so eagerly addicted to the rebuilding their Houses, and regaining their
Trade, and prosecuting their Worldly Affairs and Concernments (whilst yet they
are uncertain of the enjoyment of any thing) that they become careless and
regardless how it fares with the Church of Christ and his Gospel (which is the
very light and life of our Souls, as well as the foundation of all our outward
comforts) or how active and watchful the Brood of Antichrist, which lurks
amongst us, becomes, that they may deprive us of our Religion and Lives; and
so, be as greedy Birds that are scratching for food, whilst the Net is
spreading over them to catch them at unawares, for what will it profit you to
win Estates, and to lose your Lives? your Lives are better than your Estates;
and your Estates are but for the comfort of your Lives. And if the Enemy take
away your Lives, whose shall your Estates be? they shall even become a reward
to the Murderers.

Awaken therefore O Protestants and English Men out of your deep and dangerous
Security! and stand upon your feet like Men: Ye dead men live again, and I will
humbly and faithfully advise you (as I am able) out of very love, in a few
things.

1. My First Advice is, that you believe none of their pretended fairness and
kindness to you, seeing their hearts are wholly against you, and their hatred
to you is immortal; even the hatred of the Devil in the Hearts of Men, which is
a certain fire of Hell which goes not out by Day or by Night. But know for
certain, when they promise fair, they are not to perform any thing, but the
quite contrary: when they seem to kiss you, they intend to kill you; when they
suffer you to be quite, it is that they may bring the greater Trouble upon you;
when they retreat from the exercise of their fierceness, it is that they return
upon you with the greater Fury, when you shall less think of it; for their
whole Trade is Deceit and Violence. Though Satan transform himself into an
Angel of Light, yet still is he is the Prince of Darkness; and these his
Followers are exactly like him, both to deceive and to destroy: they will
change their Colors, like Proteus, to deceive you, but they will never change
their cruel Minds; but they that will be deceived, let them be deceived.

2. My Second Advice is, that none either Plot or Attempt any thing against the
present Power, but that all stand still in their Place and Calling, like
Wisemen with their Eyes in their Head, quietly waiting for the Salvation of
God. For no Man's Hands can help him in this Matter, but our strength is to sit
still. We can no more change Kingdoms and Governments in the World, than we can
alter the Course of the Sun or Moon in the Heavens; but it is the Great God
that must do these great things. It is the most High God that reigns in the
Kingdom of Men, and gives them to whomsoever he will. And when his time is
come, the set and full time, and the most High shall utter his Voice, his
instruments shall be at his foot, ready to do his work, even to execute the
Vengeance written; and all his mighty Providence shall concur, to bring about
the Council of his Will. Wherefore remember that Man's rashness carrys ruin in
it, but Patience perfects both Gods Works and Man's. In Patience possess your
Souls.

Wherefore all that we would do, if we might be heard by those that are
instructed to help, at this needful Time is, only to desire for the Glory of
God, and the Nations good, and their own, these three things.

1. That the dear and precious Gospel of our Lord and Savior may be permitted
publicly to be Preached again, in the Purity and Power of it, and that the
faithful Teachers may be restored to their Ministry throughout the whole
Nation. For when Jesus Christ who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given into
his hands, has commanded his Ministers to go and teach in all Nations. How can
you Worldly Powers, who have but a little Power in this Nation, answer it to
him, when you forbid that to be done which he has so solemnly commanded? He
that has all Power in Heaven and Earth has commanded his Ministers to teach
his Gospel, and dare you who have but a little power on Earth, and none at all
in Heaven forbid them? If you do not repent of and amend this our Evils, it had
been better for you, that you had never been born.

2. Our second desire is, That all Popish Commanders may be Disbanded, and put
out of all Office and Trust in a Protestant Nation; and that all Papists
through England may be disarmed; seeing they are not armed for us, but against
us.

3. That all French and Outlandish Men may be banished; for they are but Moths
in our English Garment, to fret it by degrees, all to pieces; as they have
fretted a great deal of it already.

And what Englishman or Protestant is there, that wi^ not s^ with us in these
necessary Desires, which if they be not granted, farewell all Good Days from
England for our time.

And now to conclude all, I shall only leave two or three Sovereign Antidotes
with my dear Countrymen to preserve them from the noisome Contagion and Plague
of Popery.

1. Consider with Trembling, that none are given up to this Damnable Delusion
but those whose Names are not Written in the Lambs Book of Life, as the Spirit
of God affirms Rev. 13.8. saying, And all that dwell upon Earth shall worship
him (i. e. the Beast or Antichrist of Rome) whose Names are not writt^n in the
Book of Life, of the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, And what
Person would carry such a Worm in his Conscience continually, for the whole
World, and all the Kingdoms and Gl^^y of it, as to know and certainly to
understand, that his Name is not written in the Book of Life, nor can ever be
put in; for all the Writings in that Book are from Eternity, and no new thing
can be inserted in it. And therefore let Men say what they will, they are none
of Gods Elect, who close in with this False and H^^^tical Religion, after the
Gospel has been Preached to them, and they have been instructed in it. For to
depart from the known Truth to known Error, is not a Sin of Ignorance, but of
Malice; and this is the Sin unto Death, for which there is no Remission.
Wherefore let every one that would attain to any comfortable Assurance that his
Name is Written in the Book of Life, flee from Popery.

2. They that Apostatise to this False Religion, are a surely to be Damned as
if they were in Hell already, This is a hard saying, but a True One: as it is
evident in that of Paul, 2 These. 2. where speaking of Antichrist, that Wicked
One, whose coming is after the working of Satan. with all Power and Signs, and
Lying Wonders, and with all deceiveableness of Unrighteousness in them that
perish, because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be
saved. He adds, And for this cause God shall send them strong Delusions that
they should b^lieve a Lie, that they All may be Damned that b^lieve not the
Truth, but have pleasure in Unright^ousness. This sort of People God gives them
up to believe a Lie, the Grand Lie of Popery (for this whole Religion is
nothing else but one continued Lie, from the beginning to the end of it) to the
intent, that they should all Perish and be Damned. This is the Word of God,
against all wilful Papists, and it cannot be made void. John also testifies
Rev. 14.9. that an Angel Proclaimed with a loud voice, saying, If any Man
Worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in
his hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God which is poured
out without mixture into the Cup of his Indignation. and he shall be tormented
with Fire and Brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the
presence of the Lamb; and the Smoke of their Torment asc^ndeth up for ever and
ever: and they have no rest Day nor Night, which Worship the Beast and his
Image, and whosoever receives the Mark of his Name. In which Scripture you may
see with open face, the sad end of all the Popish Generation: which is to be
tormented for ever and ever. Wherefore out of very Malice, they have been, are,
and will be our Tormentors here, when they get opportunity, because the Devil
is to be their Tormentor in Hell for ever. Wherefore who ever would avoid the
Torments of Hell let him fly from Popery.

3. Lastly Antichrist is now in his Old Age, and draws near his End, yea is
drawing his last breath. He is very shortly to be utterly destroyed with the
Spirit of Christ's Mouth, and the Brightness of his coming. And what Wiseman,
yea what Man of common reason would join himself to Antichrist, for one hour,
yea for one quarter or minute of his hour? If Men might have reigned with him
many years, and have enjoyed his Delicacies for a long Season, then might it
have been a strong inducement to a carnal heart, who seeks his Portion only in
this life, to have closed in with him; but now to do it when his Destruction
draws near, what extreme Folly and Madness must it needs be? Who would venture
a Board that Ship which is just a sinking? or become a Subject in that Kingdom
which is just ready to be rooted up? and confident I am through God, that after
Antichrist and his Brood of Serpents, have played a few more of their old cruel
Pranks anew in England, both He and They will become so utterly odious to All,
that their Name shall be no more remembered among us, but with highest Contempt
and Indignation, and that for ever. And let the Lord say Amen, and all his
People.

AND now O Lord, to whom should we look? our Eyes are only unto thee. And we
beseech thee to look down from Heaven, the Habitation of thy Holiness, and of
thy Glory, upon us, and upon our present Sad, and almost Desperate Condition:
and stretch forth thy Holy Arm to maintain Thine Own Good Cause, (which thine
Enemies scorn and deride, and laugh at among themselves) and to help afflicted
Righteousness, and thine own poor People, who are brought very low, so that
their belly cleaves, even to the dust. Indeed, Vain is the Help of Man, and
our Enemies say, There is no help for us in God: But yet we know there is help
in thee, and that thy help is never in vain. For thou can do the greatest
Things by the smallest Means, yea thou can do the greatest Things, without
all Means. For thou spakest and the World was made, thou did command, and it
stood fast. Therefore our Eyes are unto thee, O Lord, and we do believe that
thou can do all things; and can so do them, that none can resist thee. Is any
thing too hard for the Lord? shall we call thy Power in Question, who did
prepare a safe passage for thy People through the mighty Waters, and did
cause them to walk on dry ground through the depths of the Sea? Take therefore
thy great Power and come and Reign in the midst of these thy greatest Enemies,
till thou make them All thy Footstool, and till thou have put down all Rule,
Authority and Power which lifts up its Head, and stretches forth its Arm
against thee, O Lord, and thy Holy and Blessed Gospel, and thine Anointed. Oh
cause Iniquity to stop its Mouth, and Wickedness to hide its face again. Let
Violence no more be heard in our Land, nor Wasting and Destruction within our
Borders; let the cause of the Fatherless and of the Widows be justly judged,
Let thy Prisoners be loosed, and thine oppressed be eased; let them be helped,
who have no helper. Make way with thy strong Arm for thy own Laborers to
continue to come to thy Harvest-Work; for thy Harvest (we trust) is very great
in England. And therefore O Thou into whose hands all Things are delivered of
the Father, and all Power in Heaven and Earth is given; and who by this
Greatest and Highest Authority of Thine, have commanded thy Ministers, to go
and teach all Nations, after thou did send them: Oh do thou make way for them
to teach this Unworthy Nation, before the Coming of the Son of Man; that
through their ministering thy Word, thy Church may awake and rouse up it self,
and put off its filthy Raiment, and may be restored to the Brightness of its
first rising, when it was full of faith and love, and all Graces and Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, without any mixture of Antichristian Errors, that all thy
People may strive together for the Faith of the Gospel, and not quarrel any
longer about empty Forms; but may with One Mind, and with One Mouth confess the
Truth as it is in Jesus: and then shall all Kings bow down before thee, and all
Nations that serve Thee, they shall sing forth the Honor of thy Name and make
thy Praise Glorious. Amen.

FINIS.

