A REVIEW OF THE OBSERVATIONS UPON SOME OF HIS Majesty's late Answers and
Expresses.

Written by a Gentleman of Quality.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1643.

A REVIEW OF THE Observations upon some of His Majesty's late Answers and
Expresses.
IN the Contestation between Regal and Parliamentary authority, finding by the
frequent Declarations of the two Honorable Houses made unto the People, (like
so many Appeals of the Body representative, to the Body at large,) that the
Sovereign judgment of all things is (upon the matter) brought unto the People,
I see not, but that it is both lawful, and even the necessary duty of every
private man, that has any understanding of the things in question, to publish
his particular judgment and apprehension of them; That from the most free and
universal agitation of the truth, some judgment from that vast body may be
rendered to the appealors satisfaction. And so, having conceived that the
Author of the Observations upon His Majesty's late Answers, has upon this
subject broached diverse State-doctrines, neither agreeable to our Laws, nor
yet to true Christian Religion: and that yet, (to the prejudice of the Truth,)
they have, as truths, got a strong prepossession of men^ minds; I have thought
fit to offer such notions upon the sum of them, as I conceive ought to bring
them to a more serious re-examination. Saving therefore to His Majesty His
Right of Animadversion into the particular falsities, insolences, and seditious
calumnies in the several passages of that book; I only apply my self to the
sum and scope thereof, and that I find to be to this purpose.

First, That God is no more Author of Regal power then of Aristocraticall, and
as much Author of usurped Dominion as of Hereditary. That Power is originally
inherent in the People, and but derivative in Kings. That the People are the
efficient and final cause of Kings. That the name of King is not greater then
of People. That though the King be singulis major, yet He is universis minor.
That He is not to be accounted a God, a King, a Lord, a Father etc. to the
People conjunctim, but divisim only. That Treason (so far as it concerns the
Prince) is not so horrid in nature, as oppression in a Prince, etc.

In the better examining of these, we find; That God creating man single, left
him not other means of multiplying, then only by propagation, and in
propagating, he gave the Rule and Sovereignty of the issues propagated, to the
Father of whom they were propagated; and in defailance of the Father, He gave
the Rule of all the younger (and consequently of their descendants too) unto
the firstborne, Genesis 4.7.
(as we may see where God tells Caine; Thy Brother shall be subject to thee,
and thou shall bear rule over him. So that all men in the beginning were born
Subjects, either to him that naturally was their Father, or to him that by
right of primogeniture was representatively the Father. After the Flood, the
then common Father of the world, having a family of three Sons of differing
condition, and they (for the plantation of the then unpeopled world) by Gods
determinate fore-councell dispersed into three distant parts of it, the elder
Brothers right of Sovereignty over those younger, (through distance of place,
and want of occasion and means to exercise it.) became wholly neglected, as
upon like severance and search of new places of Plantation, it, in other
places, often after became. But every Planter becoming so by himself a
Father, soon became a Family, and from a Family grew into a City, so into
diverse Cities, and at length into a Kingdom. And though we first hear of the
irregular Kingdom of the descendant of Cham, yet find we also, that Shem the
eldest and blessed Son of those three, was grown into the Sovereignty of a
Kingdom, and was the first King that ever was in the world: for by the
judgment and computation of the Learned, Melchisedeck the King of Salem, could
be no other then very Shem himself. Neither had the ten Tribes of Israel,
(when revolting from the son of David, they said, they had no part in David,
nor Portion in the son of Iesse,) any other meaning then only to infer;
That David being neither their Father by nature, nor in primogeniture by
representation, they were free from that natural subjection unto his son,
which otherwise (they implied) they were bound to be subject to. And indeed,
(if there had not been an especial ordinance of God in the case) it had truly
followed; that being neither descended of Jesse, nor Iesse the first borne of
their common Father; the rule of subjection which followed nature, had not tied
them to obey his son. The fifth Commandment it self proves this natural
bond of subjection, when (as all Churches expound it) it commands Obedience to
Governors, under the name of Parents only. And that (according to Gods saying
unto Caine) Sovereignty did rightfully follow primogeniture, we may see it in
this; that as God promised Jacob the Sovereignty, so he procured him the
Birthright, formally transacted by Esaus sale of it. Therefore a King being no
other then a common Father, by either natural or legal Right; neither the
People, nor any other Power then only God (the Father of nature it self) can
properly be said to be the author of the being of Kings.

Next, God has not authorized Kingly Power in nature only; but by his express
promises before the law, and by his ordinances concerning it, in the law, even
before ever the people of Israel sought a King: also by settling over his
People the government of a King: by sacrating that office with anointing: by
his own assuming of the name of King: and by setting forth our Saviors
Dominion over his Church, by that name and office. In all which if God has
done the like for authorizing aristocraticall or usurped Dominion; then is the
Observour in those assertions to be justified: but if not, then is he in them
an Author of lies. Yea, God is more Author of what he ordaines and directs,
then of what he only permits; and therefore more Author of good, then of evil.
Wherefore to say usurped Dominion referres as much to God as author thereof, as
lawful hereditary Dominion does, is not only false but also blasphemous.

As for Power inherent in the People, how should one imagine such a thing?
unless also he would imagine People to be juvenes aquilone creati, men like
grasshoppers and locusts bred of the wind, or like Cadmus his men sprung out of
the earth; where none deriving from any pre-existent Parents, had all of them
equal original and power, and therefore subject to no civil Power but what
by agreement they themselves ordained? But where man is borne of a Father, to
whom, by the law of God and nature he is subject, he is so far from having
inherent Power originally in him, as that he has not his own original being
but only in subjection; either to his immediate Father, if his Father were
absolute, or to him and his common Father, if his Father were a Subject. Now if
man, in his particular and natural capacity, has not original Power of
himself inherent in him, he cannot have original inherent Power, by any
civil capacity whatsoever.

And though, upon the overthrow and breaking up of Kingdoms, instance may
perhaps be given; that People have made themselves a King, yet does not that
prove, the People to be the original of Kingly Power; no more th^n going upon
crutches, after loss of a leg, proves crutches the original and natural way
of going: for people being by misfortune deprived of their natural common
Father and Sovereign, must of necessity entertain such supply of their loss,
as their fortune can best afford them. And even in that case too, their making
of a King, was no other, then the choosing of one to bear the known Office of
the true and natural common Father. For we must note, they never made Kings by
giving them power constitutive, to do so; and so; (as they must have done, if
Kings had had nothing but commissionary authority from the people,) but they
made Kings, only by choosing one to bear the office and person of the same
Governor, that the law of nature had before described and authorized to
command and govern.

Though therefore the ten Tribes of Israel rebelled against Rehoboam, for
refusing to relieve their greivance, made Jeroboam King, and God forbad
Rehoboam to war against them for it, yet this proves not, That people have
power of making Kingdoms or Kings. For God himself had first declared, that he
would rend ten Tribes from the Kingdom of Judah, and that Jeroboam should be
King over them. And had Jeroboam and the people attended Gods will and pleasure
in it, (as David after his anointing did) he had been a King and they a
Kingdom not of their own making but of Gods. But to show how quickly the
by-affections of the people pervert the right work of God, when they look not
as well unto the way, as unto the end: we may see, that for all this, new
Kingdom and King were of Gods appointing, yet when the people would in a way
of their own, take upon them the Crowning of the man appointed, God disclaimes
the authorizing of what they did. They set up a King (says God) but not by me.
Hosea. 8.4.
and in recording the fact (both in the first of Kings, and again in the
second of Chronicles) the Scripture directly tells us, that they rebelled.
That therefore God forbad Rehoboam to fight against them, did not approve what
the people had done, for God tells the reason why he forbad them; not because
the people had done well, but because the thing was of God, which if God had
not revealed, Rehoboam might, and ought to have reduced them to their
obedience: and howsoever the thing it self was of God, yet to teach us, that
the people have not authority to do the thing that he has ordained, without
his espceiall appointment, we see that when Abijah, (Rehoboams son) with
four hundred thousand, against eight hundred thousand, pitched a battle upon
the right of that Kingdom, and committed the cause to God, though Jeroboam had
entrapped him in an ambush, God gave such a sentence against Jeroboam and his
people, that after an overthrow and slaughter of five hundred thousand of them,
they were disabled from ever recovering strength in all Abijahs days. And that
Subjects for luck sake may take heed of making new Kingdoms, or Kings: this
King (the only instance of peoples King-making, and yet in making of whom the
people did only anticipate Gods purposed work) became the isntrumental
efficient of their final destruction, and (setting up the Idolatry which the
people themselves had first affected) his sin through all his successors so
adhered to them, as that it never left them, until it had extirpated them from
their own, and transferred them captives into another Country. To conclude this
point, when we hear God himself stiling himself a King, a great King of
Kings, and telling us that the Kingdom is the Lords, etc: who without
reluctance of conscience and even horror of it, can yield the power of Kings
to be derivative, and the People to be the original of it? for then, God by
setting himself forth in the name of a King, does instead of presenting
himself, in a notion of magnificence and Sovereignty, present himself under
the notion of an inferior and of a derivative, from a more Sovereign and
original Power: whereas we see God never expresses his Power by the name of an
Elder, or of a Magistrate, or any subordinate Authority how good or honorable
soever. Yea to be King of Kings, is then no more, then to be the derivative and
creature of Kings.

As for the Peoples being the efficient and final cause of the King. If one
knew in what sense the Observour would be understood, he were soon answered.
For if he would be understood according to the propriety of his words, (as
indeed that which he would maintain does need he should,) Then is that
position not only false, but an impious falsehood, even full blasphemy: for
properly God, and none but God, is the efficient and final cause of all
things: there being no difference between the efficient cause and the
Creator. But if the Observour means, that the people be the isntrumental
cause of Kings; the isntrumental cause and mediate end, are terms of so
extreme and notorious difference, and consequence, from efficient and final
cause, as it is by no means to be pardoned him that he should mean the one,
and say the other. Besides, to understand him so, does overthrow all that he
drives at: for if the People be but the isntrumental cause of Kings, then can
they not be the end of Kings, no more then the instrument of any work can be
the end for which the work was made, but contrarily the work is the end of the
instrument, and therefore greater then the instrument. As for the people, they
are so far from being the final end of Kings, as that they are not any way
the end of them. For government is the end of Kings (of which the People are
but the Subject) and God alone is both the efficient cause and final end, both
of the Government, Governor, and Subject to be governed.

As for that which he affirms, That though Kings be singulis majores yet are
they vniversis minores, and that wherein soever they be to be accounted. Gods,
Lords, Fathers, Heads, unto the People; they are not so to be understood,
otherwise then as to the particular persons of men, considered singly not
jointly, what an impudent insolence is it that one that has use of reason,
should so wickedly belie the principles of it, to so infinite a consequent of
absurdities. For if Princes be Kings, Lords, Fathers, Heads, etc: to the single
persons of the Subject only, and not to the universality of them, then is every
single Subject by himself alone a body politic, whereof the King, as King,
is Head, and so has as many Kingdoms as Subjects: and every one being
distinct in relation one from the other, have not, nor can have any civil
communion among them; neither can any of them have to do with the civil
Affairs one of another. And further, (which is not only false, but destructive
to the public weal and safety of all Kingdoms) If Kings be not Heads of
the public community of their People, as well as of the private particulars
of them, then is the public community out of the Kings Protection, and Kings
are discharged of all care of the public. For the mutuality of relation
betwixt Protection and Subjection, suffers not the one to move, but within the
limits of the other, and if the universality must be under the Kings
Protection, it must be also under His Subjection, for which cause the ancient
and constant wisdom of our Peers and Commons sitting in Parliament as the
Body representative of the whole Subject of the Kingdom, do in the Preamble
of their Acts, in that quality, to this day, recite themselves His Majesty's
loyal and faithful Subjects. So that in this point the Observour insolently
controules the Wisdom and Judgment of the representative of the whole
Kingdom, as well as contradicts the principles of reason.

Lastly, whereas he says that Treason so far as it concerns the Prince, is
not so horrid in nature as oppression in a Prince. Without excusing any way or
diminishing the faults of Princes, in any the least act of oppression, let
every one but ask his own conscience, whether is more horrid in nature,
Superiors to wrong Inferiors, or Inferiors their Superiors: Masters their
Servants, or Servants their Masters: Husbands their Wives, or Wives their
Husbands: Fathers their children, or children their Fathers: and he will soon
find the impiety of this assertion. And whereas now the Observor professes his
good will and affection to Monarchy. You may by these grounds which he has
laid, and by his propounding to us for a pattern to our Kings, the condition
of the Prince of Orange, and for our Kingdom, the pattern of the
Commonwealth of Venice, know how false a meaning he has, and what his design
is; even to loosen the sacred tie of Obedience toward our Liege Sovereign, and
with it the firm and settled stability of the Kingdom, and to prepare men's
hearts and persuasions, to the receiving of some new form of Government,
according to the fancy of the common People.

Having therefore with false principles endeavored to found the original of
all Sovereignty in the People, as hoping thereby to find means to pluck it out
of the Kings hands: he then proceeds to persuade, that not only natural
reason, but even the frame of the Kingdom, and the positive laws thereof, do
all concur to maintain the highest Sovereignty to be in the People. But when
he should make that apparent by the manifest Judgment and Acts of our Law; not
being able to do that, he seeks by sly insinuations, to have that admitted
and swallowed, which to prove he knows were impossible. Therefore pretending
to show the original, the progress, and changes of sovereign government, all
from, and by the authority of the People, even from the fall of Adam to the
present. when it should be expected he should show the Sovereignty of this
Kingdom to be derived from them, he runs himself into a puzle, and then
breaks off and tells us what he thinks, and he thinks, that when most
Countries have found out an Art and peaceable order for public Assemblies,
whereby the people may assume its own power, to do it self right, without
disturbance to it self, or injury to Princes; he were unjust that would oppose
that art and order. That Princes may not be beyond all limits of Law, nor tried
upon them by private parties, the whole Community in its underived Majesty,
shall convene to do Justice, etc: and so he goes on insinuating, that our
Parliaments are such public Assemblies, wherein the Community in underived
Majesty convenes to do justice upon the King.

Truly I am not so well affected to arbitrary Government, as to admit the
judgment (much less the thought of one man) to be proof of Law and
Government, We shall therefore by Gods help examine how well this new conceit
agrees with our Laws and ancient settled frame of Government. But this is
obvious a forehand, that it is so far from being true that most Countries,
have found the art and order of Assemblies wherein the People may assume the
power of doing themselves right. As that unless you will call the Assembly of
some mere popular Republique, such an assembly: there is not the ordinance of
any such assembly to be found in all the world. and the reducing of our
Parliaments to such Assemblies, will suit as well, as the shaping of our
Kingdom to the frame of the commonwealth of the Venetians, or of the
Hollanders.

That we may know therefore that our Parliaments are no such imaginary
Assemblies, in which the people in underived Majesty convene to assume any
Power supposed to be theirs originally, and with that Power to do themselves
right. Even the Observour himself has assured us, when in his fast and loose
play, he unawares confesses that the composition of our Parliaments are so
equal and geometrical, and all parts so orderly contribute their office, as
that no part can have any extreme predominance over other. This is most true
that he confesses. God grant that no endeavor to the contrary may ever
deprive the Kingdom of the right benefit of this happy and well composed
Ordinance. But now then if our Parliaments be ordained Assemblies, composed of
three necessary different parts, one Sovereign, the others Subject, some
appearing for their own interests, others representatively for them that sent
them, and all balanced in such a geometrical equality, as is proper for the
conservation of their several rights and interests from any extreme
predominance of one of the parts above the other. Then can they not be
assemblies of resumption of the peoples supposed power, for in such imaginary
assemblies, there must be a dissolution of all constitute orders, degrees, and
qualities of the parts, and all the members must be reduced to a natural
coequality undistinguished by any difference, of quality, degree or privileges
whatsoever: so as there must be neither King, nor Peers, nor any office or
power of the former State remaining, but all resolved into a mere Chaos, till
all be new framed by the deity of the people. So far therefore are our
Parliaments from the nature of such assemblies, as that the endeavor of
introducing of such Assemblies is most seditious, traitorous, and destructive,
not only to the person and dignity of the King, to the Crown Imperial and to
the Kingdom it self (whose well balanced rights have (beside other ties)
been so often, so solemnly, and by so many of us, even by our whole
representative body sworn to be defended) but even to the rights, privileges,
and being, of the blessed Ordinance of our Peace and welfare our very
Parliaments themselves.

For we must know, that our law (taking notice, that in every State, there are
three parties capable of just or unjust Sovereignty; that is to say, some
Prince; the Nobles; and the People) judged no government so safe and assured,
as where every of the three parties capable of Sovereignty, were in some sort
admitted to a participation of it, but so admitted, as that still the
Sovereignty should clearly remain to Him that ought to be the Sovereign. And
to this end, our law (having first through the piety of our law-giving Princes
obtained a just and regular course of government; the stability whereof it
found to be more concerned in the power of making laws, then in any other
power belonging to the Sovereign) did for preventing innovations that might
subvert that settled regularity: in such a sort establish the frame of State and
government, as that the Prince should have his hands bound up from using the
legislative power without the concurrence of the Peers and Commons. But then,
to the end that they (whose consent was brought in only to prevent the evil
which absolute power might work against the settled frame of the State) might
not themselves become that evil, which they were called to prevent: The Law
gave to them no more interest in the legislative power then it had still left
in the hands of the Prince, to wit, to every of the three parties, the King,
the Peers, and the Commons, an equal power of assent or dissent in making of
new Law. And so by opposing the single power of every one of them, to the votes
of every other two; made so secure a ballancing of their powers one against
another; as that no practice of any two of them can do any thing to the
prejudice or diminution of the third, without that third party it self do
give consent unto it.

Nor did the providence of the Law here rest. But considering that in the power
of making Laws it had now opposed the powers of two numerous bodies, against
the power of the single Sovereign. It foresaw, and feared that by the
Sovereigns consenting to Laws for the ease and benefit of the Subject, things
might pass to the prejudice and diminution of the sovereignty, if the single
person of the sovereign (surcharged with the care of the manifold affairs of
the Kingdom) should be left all alone to advise and dispute His Right against
all the wisdom and solicitation of the numerous body of the Subject. To
prevent that: it ordained, that the King should at His own discretion swear
unto Himself a body of Council, to advise Him in the concernements of His
Sovereign Rights, and safety (which is His Privy-Councell) and a body of
Council at law, to advise Him that He may neither do, nor suffer contrary to
the rule of Law. And through this even Counter-poise and balance of all the
three States of Parliament (as through a means wherewith God has especially
blessed us above other Lands) do we enjoy the assurance of a regular freedom,
under the government of a just and legitimate sovereignty. In which, if without
the free concurrence of every of the three ordained parties, there shall be any
invasion and exercise of the legislative power; then shall the well balanced
frame of legitimate law-making be overthrown, and with it, the rightful being
and use of Parliaments destroyed.

But the Observor having not ascribed such underived Majesty to Assemblies of
the Community, to the end to maintain the rights of Parliaments, but to
innovate Parliaments to the destruction of their true being, and to the
transformation of the State and government. Howsoever that fol. 15. he tells us
only of some defects in Parliament that might receive amendment: yet let us he
slip, that those Defects, are Divisions between the two Houses, and between
the King and them. Now Division being almost inevitable, and power of
dissenting necessary for ballancing the three differing parts of Parliament, to
prevent this power of dissenting, were to destroy the balance and being of
Parliaments, and to make them Courts of popularity, where they that please the
People should absolutely carry all things. Though therefore he here discovers
his design, yet being assured not to bring it about, but by misleading the
most faithful and well-affected both to true established Religion and
Government, He covertly pursues His purpose altogether under the show of
vindicating the Rights, Privileges, and being of Parliaments.

So, whereas our Parliaments are assemblies wherein the whole State in three
distinct formal parts convenes in Council, and wherein every of those three
parts have free power of allowing or disallowing of any thing propounded for a
law, and wherein the law takes notice of no vote, nor act, for any general
law, save what does pass with concurrence of all the three parts of the
Assembly, The Observor tells us, that for the King to say, that without the
Kings concurrence and consent, Parliaments are without all power, this at one
blow confounds all Parliaments, and subjects us to as unbounded a Regiment of
the Kings will, as any Nation under Heaven ever suffered under. And his reason
is, If Kings may so frustrate Parliaments, He may by the same means frustrate
all inferior Courts, and then farewell Law, Right, Liberty, and all things. O
impudence! does His Majesty in this claim more, then either the House of Peers
to it self, or the House of Commons to it self challenges? Nay, claims His
Majesty more then He acknowledges due by the Law to each of the two Houses, as
well as to Himself, freely to assent or disassent to what is propounded for a
Law, and do not, and have not, both they and His Majesty and both their
Predecessors ever practiced that power? so as we have had scarce one
Parliament wherein either King or Peers, or Commons (or perhaps every one of
them) have not severally dissented from the votes each of other two and tie
their dissent frustrated the votes of the other two, and yet (God be praised)
our Parliaments do, and (we hope) still shall continue, notwithstanding such
undermining foxes would bring that three fold Cord of our State, into the
singlestring of a popular Assembly, and all things so into confusion?

And how false is the consequence that if the King by dissenting may make void,
the sentence of the two Houses of Parliament He may also void the sentence of
any inferior Court of Justice? When in Parliament, the law has appointed the
King Himself to give His own Vote and consent, personally if He will, or by
His Letters under His great Seal, if He will. But in inferior Courts has
appointed none to give sentence or Judgment but only those Judges who in a
definite and formal way are ordained to be the only Ministers and Deliverers
of the Kings Justice and Judgment in that behalf, so as no personal or
isntrumental assent or dissent of the Kings, can alter or frustrate the
sentence or judgment of any inferior Court, because that though the Judges
there give the Kings Judgment, and not their own; yet the Law having
authorized none but them to be the givers of the Kings Judgment there, it
takes no notice of any other judgment in those Courts, then only of the
sworn Judges themselves, and though the King, the Peers, and Commons in
Parliament have every one the power, by any one of their votes to frustrate the
votes of two of them, from becoming the Judgment of the whole Court: yet
cannot the Vote of either the King, the Peers, or Commons alone, or of any two
of them, frustrate or change the Judgment of any inferior Court. And it is
further to be observed that in those Courts the Judges judge as strangers of
matters that concerns others only and not themselves and therefore render
Judgment in invitum, against the will of one of the parties at least, in which
case because expedit rei publica ut finis sit litium, if all the Judges agree
not, yet Judgment shall be given according to the Judgment of the Major part.

But now (contrary to the use of inferior Courts) The parties in Parliament in
(those things that concern the public) meddle not as mere Judges, but as
Parties interessed, with things that concern every of their own Rights, in
which case it is neither Law nor reason, that some of the Parties should
determine of that that concerns all their mutual interests, invita altera
part, against the will of any one of the Parties. But that all Parties
concur, or else their mutual interest to remain in the same condition it
was before, For Parties cannot meddle with Judging in invitum, but per
consensum, and therefore no major part of the three Parties in Parliament, but
the consent of all three, must make the judgment of that Court, otherwise two
of the three Parties, may totally or in part oppress the third, and then one
of those two, oppress the other, and be a sole arbitrary Tyrant. The King and
Peers may oppress the Commons; the King and Commons, may oppress the Peers,
the Peers and Commons may oppress the King: and then the Peers being easily
suppressed by the Commons, what shall hinder but that some Appian decemvirate
(that under show of zeal of reforming Church and Commonwealth, may carry the
sound and well-affected Subject with them) After they shall have not only
possessed men's minds with the lawfulnes of their authority, but possessed
themselves of the Militia and all the Power of the Kingdom, and two or three
year kept all that power in their hands, pretending they cannot sooner perfect
their Laws of Reformation (though indeed they do but time it out, till they
secure all unto their private ends) (as Appius in all things did) what then (I
say) shall hinder, but that by means of some such decemvirate among the
Commons, some Appius may invade an absolute Sovereignty over us, or missing
that, resolve yet all our settled State, into an unsure troublesome Aristocracy?
or Republique?

The better to prepare the way to some such upshot. The Observor finds a
defect in the frame of our State, he cannot see how Parliaments can have
sufficient power, to restrain Tyranny, if they can do no Act without the
Kings consent. And he finds, that if Princes in matters that concern the
public, be admitted to prefer weak opinions (as he calls them) before
Parliamentary motives, then Parliaments are vain, Princes unlimitable, and
Subjects miserable.

The Observer will be more wise and faithful then the Law it self, and
looking only one way, tells us of insufficient provision for restraint of
regal power, without some coercive superintendant be placed over it. But the
law that looks every way, tells us, that the erecting of such a superintending
power, would unsoveraigne our King, and make that superintending power
Sovereign and when it were made, the exercise of it would be subject to more
dangerous extravagances then regal power is, and yet less capable of
regulation then it. Therefore the law (knowing that there is none but God, qui
custodiat ipsos custodes, that can restrain supreme Governors, and knowing
that nothing in this world can be reduced to so absolute a perfection of
setlednesse, but that in the last means it must merely depend upon the
providence of God) after a full consideration of the weakness and imperfection
of every several form of Government, concludes, that the Sovereignty was
better placed in the hands of a sole Prince, then in a popular, or
Aristocraticall hand, and that a positive known law, without any coercive
superintendant, was a sufficient and the best boundary of regal power, against
any irregularity whatsoever, especially when the law (being backed with a
Parliament of all the orders of the Kingdom) shall thereby find means of
discovery and manifestation, both of the truth of the law it self, and
likewise of the violation of it. For the law, and the transgression of the law,
being both at once made manifest and notorious, that will so sufficient a
security of the future observance of the law, as Princes will not further
endure to violate it; because (as the Poet says) Nec pueros coram populo Medea
trucidat,
Aut humana palam coquit exta nefarius Atreus.


Infamous acts will not endure to be committed in the sight of all the world.

Therefore to say truth the Observor's conceit of having some superior power
to enforce the law that should regulate the power of the Sovereign Prince, is
a mere false conception, of an heart as traitorous to God as to his Prince,
who would have absolute security by an arm of flesh, when no such can be given
to it. For, to regulate his Prince, he would not only have a law, but a
superior power to enforce that law; and such a superior power being once
erected, that must also be either boundless, or must be circumscribed with a
law: if circumscribed with a law, then also must that law have a superior
coercive power, to enforce it, and so must we have superior Power, over
superior Power, usque ad infinitum, and yet at last, leave the most superior
power, in that liberty which the Observour calls boundless, arbitrary, and
tyrannical. And how absurd a thing is it to imagine, That when the Law has
trusted the sovereign Power in the hands of the King, it should again distrust
Him and unsoveraigne Him, and place in another the sovereignty of the same
sovereign Trust? and with a second absurdity leave in the Kings hand the Power
of calling together and dissolving the power whereby He himself should be
constrained? and (to make up all) should by authority of that power, constrain
all the Heads of the people, and even the representative body of that power, by
solemn oath, to declare that the King is not only Supreme Governor, but that
He is the only Supreme Governor, when (such a superior power admitted) he can
be neither only, nor at all, Supreme.

But the Observour aiming more to subvert what is established, then to reduce
things unto their first establishment, quarrels still with the Regal power;
and he reasons, that whether or no the Law gives the single Person of the
Prince as full and free a Vote to assent or not assent, as it does to either
the House of Peers or House of Commons, yet is not the Prince to use the
liberty of His Vote licentiously, but advisedly and by Council, and what
Council can He have more wise, faithful and impartial, then theirs that
represent the whole Kingdom, who cannot be supposed to have private ends as
Courtiers, Cavaliers, and private men may have?

Truly that Princes ought with great respect to hearken to the advice and
information of the great Council of the body of their people, who can so much
as make a question of it? But why should these things be objected to His
Majesty? For what Prince of all his Predecessors has so much harkened and
condescended to his great Council, as His Majesty at once has done unto this
present Parliament? Not any one; Nay, not the whole succession of His
predecessors since the granting of the great Charter has done the like.
Witness the condescending to the Earl of Staffords attainder, the damning of
Ship-mony, and of all Monopolies, the Star Chamber, and high Commission Court,
the taking away of the Votes of Bishops and of Popish Lords, the parting with
the long used power of imposing upon merchandise, bounding of Forests, and
yielding to the regulation of whatsoever further greivance should be found in
the commonwealth. And (for a seal of observance of all) the granting of a
Trienniall Parliament, and the perpetuating of this present Parliament. With
what dispensation of the violating of Christianity can a Subject (through all
these presumptions to the contrary) charge his Sovereign with aversnes to
public counsel, and inclination to private whi perers? O that being at once
possessed of so many not long since unhoped for satisfactions, we might not want
hearts to enjoy them and acknowledge them.

But the two Houses thought the Kingdom in imminent danger, and desired it
should be put in a posture of defense, and His Majesty by evil Counsel
refused and deserted them. Truly the Observour neither does nor can show, that
His Majesty, upon the Parliaments apprehension of danger, refused to take order
for the defense of the Kingdom; for the contrary thereof is true. And in His
seeking to secure it by a military posture, He so far condescended to the
satisfaction of His Parliament, as that He offered to change the persons, that
in any County had the charge of the Militia, if His Parliament made any just
exception to any of them. And for His Majesty's coming to the Parliament to
Westminster, even in that also He so far hearkened to them as that he offered,
that if, to secure future seditions, they would make some exemplar punishment
of the Actors in the late seditious Tumults there, He would even come thither.
And being refused in that: He notwithstanding, offered them to come to any
other indifferent place. As for the place where they now sit, who (that has
vowed His Faith to the Laws of the Land, and to the Privilege of Parliament)
can in such conscience as He will answer God withal, hold that a place of
indifference and of freedom to vote in, where the people in Tumult demanded of
the House of Commons to know who were the Lords that refused to vote with them,
and where some of the Peers were assaulted by the multitude for having differed
in their votes from them, and yet none of those Tumulters were punished or ever
questioned for it?

But ere we leave this point of harkening to the advice of Parliamet, we must
consider too, that though we grant it behoovefull for the King to hearken to
His Parliament, we must not understand it so behoovefull, as that there should
be inevitable necessity laid upon Him, that He must follow whatsoever they
advise, for then at one blow we overthrow the fundamental Law and frame of
Parliaments. If from any of the three formal parts of the Parliament we take
away the freedom of voting, to assent or dissent, we break the threefold cord
of the State, we cast away the balance of it, and even dissolve the very frame
it self. If when for necessity of State, the Head assembles the whole body in
Counsel, (where the Law gives the Head one vote of three, and allows Him a
Body of Privy Council to maintain the proper Rights of the Head) the Head may
not use that Power which the Law gives it, no not in case the two other parts
contest and claim part of the Right belonging to the Head, and where (by Law)
the Vote of the Head is opposed in balance, to the moderation of those two
powers; as well as their powers are opposed in balance to the power of the
head; but that the Head must do all things according to the advice and counsel
of the two parts, which are the body of the Subject. Then all that solemn
form of Law, that calls the Head, Sovereign: that authoriseth the Head to
swear a body of Privy Council; to convoke the Nobles and Commons in public
Counsel; to call to that Counsel whom He thinker good: to take homage of the
Peers, and Oath of Supreamacy of the Commons: and having used their Counsel,
at His Judgment to dissolve it. All this (I say) is then a mere misleading
formality of the law, The Sovereignty (against all our Oaths and expressions
to the contrary) is not in the King but in the people; the King is the only
Subject, and but a common vouchee, whose concurrence is unavoidably employed;
His will, his understanding, and his power (though he be acknowledged Head,
Sovereign, and chief residence of authority) is all subjected to the body of
the very Subject that in Parliament does swear subjection to Him. The
tripartite frame of a Parliament of three Estates, is a vanishing apparition:
there is really nothing but a mere popular assembly, not of Subjects but
Sovereigns. The Crown Imperial and Kingdom it self, (though asserted by
our solemnest Acts of Recognition and oaths of the body representative,) are
mere non entia, we are but a Republique, and the chief Head of the Kingdom
has not (beside the name) more of a King, then the Duke of Venice, or the
Prince of Orange. And this being hid ever since the first beginning of the
Kingdom; the whole generation of the Subject ever since, has by the injury of
our Laws, been most impiously mis-worne in their allegiance; and the error
has never been discovered till the whole Kingdom (having now solemnly sworn
to stand to, and defend the Laws) cannot receade from their wrong-sworn
obedience, but with the guilt of universal perjury, and under the burden of
that guilt, expose an old grown Kingdom, to the hazards of a new framed
Commonwealth. All this does necessarily follow, if we take away the freedom
of the Kings assent and dissent in Parliament; or bar Him of the use of His
Counsels advice therein.

I should little need to say any thing concerning that which the Observour so
much pretends that Communities, and universalities of men, are void of corrupt
affections and of private ends, and that therefore their desires are always
lust, and their council faithful and impartial. But when in the fallacy of
this persuasion there lies (I fear) a great part of the sin, for which Gods
anger now so publicly does show it self upon us, I would be loath to pass
it over without any touch at all. I fear we are too diffident to rest upon the
ordinance of God: I fear we are too confident of our selves, as if our own
natural providence (if we were left unto it) were beyond any other means of
safety, although it were the ordinance of God unto us. A word or two shall not
therefore be unnecessary concerning the corruptions and errors that even
communities themselves are often subject to.

That Communities are less subject to private ends and affections then
particular men are, is true: but it is also true, that they are not absolutely
free from them, and when they fall into them, they are more fatally violent and
dangerous. And though one would think it repugnant, that an universality (which
conteines the whole public) should have private ends; or that that should any
way be counted private, which they that contain the public do pursue: yet
seeing it is not the number of agents, but the capacity in which they act, the
quality of their acting, and the coherence or incoherence of what they pursue,
with the publiques end and weal; that makes the actions of men public or
private: it must needs follow, that if without authority, or out of the way of
the public ordinance, men pursue any thing (though the whole community
concur in the pursuit) yet is all of the nature of a private action, done to
a corrupt and private end, for though the thing intended be to the present good
of the public, yet being beside the ordinance and way, it is in consequence
against the good and weal of the public, and so against the very ends of the
public. And as in the body natural a very few members (that is none but the
eyes) have the sense of seeing, but all the members have the sense of feeling.
so in Communities all have the sense of enjoying good, or suffering evil: but
very few the faculty of discerning the cause and means of either. Yet the major
part of the Community (more carried by sense then true discerning) often makes
the judgment of the whole Community, and brings it to act that, that agrees
not with the intended weal of the Comity. By this means (at the best) the
whole universality of the Israelites (contrary to their own final good and
prosperity) forced their Priest to set them up golden Calves. By this means
the universality of them again revolted from David (their King by Gods
immediate Ordination) to Absalom an usurper. By this means the universality of
the ten Tribes, for redress of their grievances, rebelled against David's
Grandchild, and set up Jeroboam, who reviving their own affected false
religion, authorized that sin which pursued them in their extirpation. It is
therefore an untruth, to say that Communities can have no private ends, and a
belying of the Law and Truth to say (as fol. 22.) that ever there was such a
Maxim.

But it will be said, that though in Communities the body at large (in which
the vulgar is the greatest part) may be subject to corrupt affections and ends;
yet the body representative, which is the Choice of the Community, is to be
presumed free from corrupt ends and affections, and therefore most wise,
faithful, and assured.

Truly we pray, that since in this knot lie many scruples that wring the
consciences of thousands in our Israel, we may with modest freedom, reason the
things that tend to clearing the honor and observance due to representatives.
To whom we acknowledge the highest honor and observance that can be given to
the body represented. But the honor and authority of the representative will
always depend upon two things, that is, the quality and condition of the body
represented, and the quality of the representation it self: for as that is
more or less proper and lively, so will it derive more or less authority and
reputation. If therefore the body at large be an absolute free sovereign (as
is the Community of a right Republique) the true representative of that body is
then to be observed with all sovereign honor and due subjection: but if the
body at large be it self a Subject, the honor and authority of the
representative cannot exceed the honor and authority of a Subject: for none
can make their image more then they themselves are. Next then, (besides that
all representations how plenarily soever authorized, must ever be subject to
the condition of the body represented) The repute and authority of
representatives, will also follow the soundness or weakness, exactness or
imperfection of the representation it self. For if throughout an whole
Community the representers be equally and proportionably ordained according to
the true relative interest, that each part which sends them has to the whole
public (as in the united Provinces they are) there will be all full
acknowledgement of authority to the representative, that possibly can be to the
body at large: and there will also be some presumption that the representers
are authorized, to determine soveraignly of those things that concern the
public. But if (on the other side) there be no equality, in making
representers, observed: but that some parts send as many as others that are an
hundred times greater and more considerable, both in power and support of
burden in the Commonwealth and if for some of the parts none are admitted to
choose the representers, but substantial legal Freeholders, and for other
parts all are admitted of what condition soever. And if the number of those
that are unproportionably and promiscuously chosen, do three or four fold,
exceed the number of them that are strictly chosen for the most principal part
of the Community. And lastly, if it lie in the power of some other authority to
give to some particular Towns the power of sending representers, equal in
number to the greatest Provinces of the Community. These circumstances will not
only detract from the repute and authority that a more exact representative of
the Community might have, but vehemently demonstrate that the institution and
end of such a representative is rather to minister information of the state and
condition of every of those particular places and advice, and assistance to
some other sovereign, and to consent with him, then to determine soveraignly
it self.

To come then to the Objection of the assuredness of Representatives in their
judgment and fidelity. If in Kingdoms, we by the representative body of the
Community mean a perfect representation of the whole body Politic, so as
that the head as well as the other parts do freely cooperate and concur (as
in our Acts of Parliament it ever does) then can we presume no other Counsel
more assuredly wise, faithful, or safe for the public, then is the counsel
of the universal representative in that sense. But if by the representative,
we mean the representation of the gross of the body without the head, (that
is, the representative of the body of the Subject only) then is the assertion
false, for the Law presumes not in the representative of the Subject, so
assured judgment and fidelity for government, as it does in the sovereign
head alone, for then it would not have placed the sovereignty in the head, but
in the representative of the gross of the body. But the Law knowing both
Communities themselves, subject to dangerous inclinations from private
incitements, and their representatives likewise subject to misleadings,
factions and ambitions of private men, has (as in the most assured place,
placed the sovereignty in the head, and the head so having the ordinance, both
for judgment and for government, where the ordinance is, there is the blessing
and there the best assurance.

We need not seek examples how representative bodies of Subjects moving without
consent of their head have been misled: there is not one imitable example to be
found that ever the representative of the Subject, moved to act soveraignly
without the consent of the head. But we have examples of sovereign
representatives, in Republiques themselves, notoriously misled by private men;
was there ever a more reverend representative then the Roman Senate, yet did
not Appius and his Faction, under the Color of a Dec^mvirate (or Comittee of
reformation) so blind that Senate, as to work them to confer all the power of
the Commonwealth into his, and his Factious hands, to the subversion of the
common liberty? so as that if by accident he had not been taken away, he had
made himself Prince? And was not that sovereign representative, another time
wholly swayed and carried by Marius and Sulpitius? Sure as nothing is more
wholesome for the public, then that the Sovereign of a Kingdom should often
have the advice of the body representative of the Community, so is it most
dangerous for the public to have the advice of the Community enforced on the
Sovereign. Least so that that should be for Our good, be unto us an occasion
of falling.

But the Observour insists not so much, that the representative body is the
great Council of the King and Kingdom: as that it is the supreme judge and the
most sovereign power. If the Prince (says he) be seduced, some Court must
judge of the seducement, and some power enforce that judgment, and that must
be the Parliament (meaning the two houses of Parliament.)

We have already showed the absurdity of a superior power to enforce the
Sovereign: but farther to dissolve all difficulties in this false assertion,
we must know that in Parliament there are diverse kinds of judgments. And that
the mere representative body, that is, the house of Commons solely, has not
any judicatory power by it self, unless it be in particular cases concerning
their own house and members. But they are as the great Inquest of the Kingdom
to enquire, discover, impeach, etc. The house of Peers has generally in all
things judgment preparatory in order to judgment of Parliament, as to give
Oath, to take recognisance, to fine, to imprison etc. In matters that come
before them bywrit of Error, it has judgment decisive to determine and
adjudge Law. But this judgment it has not as it is part of the representative
body: for the representative body has not therein any part with it. But the
house of Peers alone has this superior judgment, as great Court of the Kings
Barons of the Kingdom, which being assisted with the Judges of all the Benches,
is by formal Ordinance of Law in all matters so coming before it, the proper
and immediate superior Judge of Law. But it is not absolute supreme Judge of Law
in all things: and therefore it cannot revoke the judgment which it self has
given. Neither can the House of Commons, nor the two houses together revoke, or
anull any judgment given in the House of Peers, or elsewhere; therefore also
the two Houses are not supreme judges or declarers of Law. The Observer (fol.
44.) tells you the reason, To be supreme judge or declarer of Law is all one as
to be supreme maker of Law, and that you know the two Houses are not. But in
the whole three Estates of Parliament, that is, in the King, the Peers and
Commons, there and there only are all powers ingredient, for they upon Bill are
not only judges of the last resort, to reverse the judgment of the House of
Peers and of inferior Courts, but they can repeal and restore, and repeal
again in infinitum their own Judgments and Acts. And they can not only
declare the Law but they can make the law, and none but they. They alone are
they that cannot be bound by precedents or Acts of Parliament, they alone are
they that have the Legislative Power: and therefore they, and only they that
have the absolute Supreme Judgment of the Law.

But (says the Observer) The King deserts His Parliament, implying that then
the two houses must be Supreme judges; though otherwise they were not. As well
may he imply, that if the King come not to Parliament then are the two Houses
no more Subjects, but Sovereign's, yea Sovereign's in the highest exaltation.
Let us see what this deserting is, that shall so easily create Sovereignty in
Subjects. We know that by the law, the Kings personal presence is of no
absolute necessity to the proceedings of Parliament, and that by the law
(declared and confirmed 33. Hen: 8.21.) the Kings presence is not necessary at
His giving consents to Acts passed, but He may give consent in His absence by
His great Seal. If then the Law count His personal absence no deserting: and
as to deserting for want of just and reasonable consent to their demands, His
Majesty be so little faulty toward this Parliament, as that he has given His
Consent beyond the example of His Predecessors. Where then shall a sincere
Conscience in any deserting the King has made, find warrant enough to desert
this Sovereign, and acknowledge another Superior? but to return.

Diversity of Powers and authorities exercised in the several parts of
Parliament, necessarily causes a diversity of respect and observance to be
rendered to them. And though the judgment of the representative of the Subject
(that is of the Peers and Commons) in those things wherein it is properly
exercised, ought to have esteem and credit before any other judgment of the
Subject. Yet is it not to be opposed to the judgment of the Sovereign, in
those things which the law has entrusted to the judgment of the Sovereign for
the law trusts none but whom it judges to have judgment, fidelity, and
provision of all necessary incidents sufficient for that trust and then it
preferrs both the Acts and judgment, of the party trusted, before any other
judgment whatsoever. Not is the judgment of the whole Kingdom any whit
slighted thereby, no more then if in particular Sciences (as Divinity,
Philosophy, Physic, Mathematique, etc.) the judgment of the professors of
those Sciences should be preferred before the judgment of the whole body
representative, for Vnicuique in sua art credendum: Matters of State and
secrets of government are not only unfit and dangerous to be publicly
managed, by so numerous a body as our representative is, but the greater part
are so little experienced or able to manage them as that in Edw. the thirds
time, the House of Commons themselves (as the Observour (fol. 6. tell us)
desired they might be spared from giving advice in those matters, de queuxals
nont pas cognizance, of which they had not the Cognisans. The Judgment of the
body representative it self, did not at that time believe, but that as well the
Judgment, as the care of the Ardua Regni, did chiefly belong to the King. To
whom alone, the Law having committed the Sovereign Government, ordained him
withal, a body of sworn privy Council to advise with therein, and a sworn
Counsel at Law to advise Him of the Rights and Privileges, that belong unto
Him as supreme Governor, and first of the three States of Parliament.

If any of these sworn Counsailers shall Counsel the King against the known
Law, or any by their counsel, act any thing against it: after legal
proceeding and conviction, it will soon be out of question what shall become of
them. But if without legal proof of particulars, such Counsailers shall by
general vote of the Subject, be ce^sured private whisperers and seducers of
the King, and to be wholly removed from Him: then shall the King at once be
dangerously deprived of the constant means which the Law has especially
ordained Him, for support of His Right against the other two opposed powers,
and for the good discharge of His Kingly office. Besides if men shall so be
condemned and made guilty, more by Sovereignty and uncontroulablenes of
Judgment ascribed to the condemners, then by clearness of evidence and legal
proof of any fact then is the birthright of the Subject, in the highest
concernment of Life and fortunes taken from Him, and He muststand and fall by
the vote of the people, that (like a Judgment infallible) shall supply the
office of both witness, Peers, and Judge.

While I pursue the examination of those things which the Observour would have
received for reason, I may not let slip the observing of his slye unfaithfulnes
and deceit, to pass over that point which most of all concerns the souls
and bodies, lives and fortunes of the whole Kingdom, and all because his want
of proof in that point, does (if noted) overthrow all that he contends for. For
though he argues the lawfulnes of Subjects taking up Arms and resisting the
Authority and Commands of the King, under the warrant of a general rule to
this effect, That in extreme peril and failance of ordinary means, any
extraordinary means may be taken for the safety of the People: yet finding an
impossibility of proving the State in such extreme danger (for indeed such a
danger must be so visible to all men as not to need any proving) and finding it
also not possible to prove a necessity of the Subjects arming himself for want
of other means, when His Majesty, (in whom the natural ordinary means of
protection is placed) readily offered, and yet offers, to perform that regal
office of protecting; The Observour passes over the matter without proving
either danger or want of other means, and presses only the lawfulnes of
selfe-defence in extreme danger, as if (if that were granted) all men might
take up Arms whether there were danger or no, and whether there were other
ordinary means of defense or no, and so securely do we pursue this error, as
that we with it swallow any thing, and because that in ordinary providing for
danger before it threaten; the ordinary courses of putting the Kingdom in a
posture of defense by Commissions of Lievtenancy and of Array, are voted
illegal; therefore we not only admit them to be so, but we admit also that the
King (to whom it properly belongs to take order for the safety of the Kingdom)
may not in extremity of danger, by any means that he can use, raise Arms,
and put the Kingdom in a posture of defense, but the Subject (to whom it is
Treason (by the Law) to raise Forces without authority from the King) he may
(against the ordinary rule of Law) raise Arms in the very same form that is
unlawful for the King to do, and all because of the extreme necessity and
danger. Yet the very same necessity and danger shall not make it lawful to the
Right and proper Authority of the King to do the very same thing. Oh, what
shall we say, when at once, extreme necessity is pretended, all wonted forms
of defense (without showing a lawful form) are declared unlawful, and the
course which Law abhorres, and the Conscience of every Law-sworne Christian
trembles at, is set on foot, without the warrant of the lawful Sovereign, when
yet he is ready to supply that office in the Just and lawful way?

I cannot also but note, that though levying of Arms and putting the Kingdom
in a posture of defense is a right so clearly belonging to the King, as that we
know His Majesty, and all His Predecessors have ever been possessed of it as a
right and authority inseperably annexed to the Crown, which nere any have
lawfully exercised, but they. And though the representative body of the
Kingdom, and (in them) every one of the body represented have, according to the
positive law, sworn allegiance to the King and sworn to assist and defend etc.
all Privileges, preheminences, and authorities belonging to his highness, His
heirs and successors, or annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm etc. Yet
is not the observer afraid to say that the Oath of Supremacy is not endangered
by such taking of Arms. Nor is he afraid to say that next to renouncing of
God, nothing under Heaven can be more perfidious then peoples withdrawing
themselves from their representations. As if Subjects, by giving authority to
some of their fellows to represent them, and to advise, and consent for them,
gave them a power so much above the condition of Subjects, yea so much above
the condition of their Sovereign, as that neither breach of faith, nor Oath,
nor any other duty unto him, were comparable to their withdrawing from the vote
or act of their own representers: as if the right of the King, the Crown, and
Kingdom; and the concurrence of the three Estates in Parliament, did not so
concern the Commons of the Land but that, (against all) they stood soly bound
in allegiance to their representers as to the only Sovereigns of their
obedience. Of that it may please the two honorable Houses to take into a
serious consideration; how repugnant these positions are to the loyalty of a
true Christian: how hard it is for a pious conscience to persuade is self,
that they that broach such Doctrines intend nothing but the defense of the
King, of the laws of the Land, and of the true Protestant Religion: how much
the name and Majesty of God himself is blasphemed, when in a Christian Kingdom
that boastes it self of the knowledge and true profession of his word; such
Doctrines so derogatory to Christianity should so audatiously be maintained:
And lastly, how much it must needs reflect upon their own honor, in point of
jealousy and distrust (as if some ill-affected factious persons had too great
an influence and power over their votes) when such impious assertions, so
desperately misleading the souls and consciences of men, are so licentiously
divulged without any condemnation check, or discountenances, from them though
earnestly desired by His Majesty at their hands.

I suppose there remains not in the observations any thing material, that is
not already answered. As for the design of changing Religion into Popery, which
the observer perhaps glances at in speaking of Popish Prelaticall and Military
Courtiers. If a Christian can in his conscience find any other ground for such
belief then only the opinion of a judgment, that would be believed rather for
authorities sake, then for any thing prooved or discovered, he then may well
listen to it. But if instead of presumptions that way, he finds presumptions
of intended change to the contrary Corruption of Religion, a good Conscience
will not be so Popishly affected, as for the infallibility of any judgment, to
believe contrary to what his heart tells him the most apparent presumption
must incline him. For besides that it is easier to bring in a corruption in
extremity contrary to an old exploded corruption, then to recover that, that
has been once exploded, (as Popery has been and is.) We have His Majesty's
often solemn attestation of God, imprecating the prosperity of Him and His, if
he do not maintain the true Protestant Religion established in the Church of
England against all Popery. We have not the like on the other part, against
Schismatic innovations. Yet our Schismatiques are thrice as many as our
Papists; and whereas our Papists are (God be thanked) disarmed, awed, and in
fear, our Schismatiques are bold, armed, and in authority, and therefore
licentious, and tumulting in every place.

God will require an account of our Oaths, and Protestations for defense of
the true Protestant Religion, as well against Schismatic corruptions, as
against Popish. And an account of our solemn Oaths of Supremacy, and of
observance of the Law, as well against popular insolences, and invasions of
Sovereign power, as against regal Tyranny. Let us take heed, that when
because of Oaths the Land already mournes; we through an universal breach of
Oaths make it not for perjury mourn more greivously. Least when with our
solemn Oaths, we have brought the animadversion of our observance of Law, of
right, and of Religion, before the presence of God, as Judge and Revenger of
it; and with out own hands kindled a fire for the trial of it: we our selves
be found guilty of a breach, or of halting in it. Let us weigh well the cause,
the ground, the way, and the end of our taking Arms, that the horror of unjust
and causeless bloodshedding may not lie upon us; let us see what it is that
we would have, which we may not already have without it.

May we not after some provision made for forbearance of such Ceremonies, as by
the Judgment of the Church shall be thought fit to be spared, have the
authorized service of the Church established? And after purgation and
regulation of some enormities in Church government, have the discipline of the
Church of England in a good condition settled, with severe penal provision
against connivers and Innovators in the one or in the other? Has not His
Majesty declared himself ready and willing to consent thereto? Again, to make
sure the abolishing of all grievances already suppressed, and to regulate Arms,
and some other extravagances in government not yet provided for, may we not
have fit provisionary laws, with severe and penal damning of all practices to
the contrary? Does not His Majesty to that also freely offer His consent? what
can be wanting to the settling of as sound and well a governed Church and State,
as any Nation under Heaven has ever lived in? For if by a severe Law the
persons of them that shall attempt any thing prejudicial to the settled
practice of Religion or to the declared liberty of the Subject be exposed to
exemplary punishment, no fear of Innovation to the prejudice of either can
remain. Nor can we fear His Majesty's tolerating of offenders when besides
his imprecating in that case himself and His, he has (in case he so violates
the Law) with His own mouth dispensed with His Subjects obedience. As for Our
Parliaments, it can no way be in the power of the King to take away the least
Right, much less the being of Parliaments; for whatsoever a King can do to
the prejudice of Parliaments, and how soever averse He may be from them, yet
always the necessity of State will at last enforce the calling of a
Parliament, and when it is called, it is presently repossessed, and re-invested
of all the Rights and Privileges that do belong unto it. For nothing but a
Parliament it self, or so much of a Parliament, as in the peoples opinion
shall have the authority of a whole Parliament, can any way destroy the being
of Parliaments, or deprive them of the least right or privilege belonging to
them.

To conclude therefore, if they that devised and broached the new State
principles and doctrines published in the Book of Observations, have in them
dealt truly and faithfully with the Subject. Then let the Author of those
Doctrines rejoice in them that receive and maintain them; and let the
maintainers of them rejoice in them that were the authors. But if they have
dealt unfaithfully and deceiptfully with the souls of the Subject to cause the
blind (that cannot Judge) to err, thereby to bring to pass their own
designed innovations. Then let it please the just, and all-seeing Supreme Judge
of Judges in mercy to so many thousand souls in this our Jsraell, who in the
darkness of these difficulties know not the right hand from the left, to send
(as once he did at Jothams instance) Iud 9.16. a fire from the malicious
authors of them, to bring to confusion and shame the malignant maintainers and
defenders of them; and a fire from them to bring to confusion the malicious
authors. And let the Throne of our Sovereign Lord the King, (with us the only
supreme Vicegerent of the great and Supreme Judge) be in righteousness, in
Judgment, to true Religion, and in Peace for ever established over us.

The Printer, to the Reader.
THis Summary Answer (good Reader) having it seems lain long upon the way to
Oxford, happned to come to the Press before Christmas last, where by reason of
our full employment ever since, Is could not be dispatched till now.

FINIS.

