FROM THE LADY ELEANOR, HER BLESSING TO HER BELOVED DAVGHTER; The Right
HONORABLE LVCY, COUNTESS OF Huntingdon.

The Prophet DANIELS Vission: Chap. 7. Jn the first year of Belchazer REX, etc.

Printed in the Year, 1644.

FROM THE LADY ELEANOR, HER BLESSJNG to Her beloved Daughter, etc.
WHose new Interpretation, not with Froath filled up, or Interlarded with
differing Opinions of others, such old pieces having No affinity and agreement
with this BRITISH garments or displayed COAT by blessed Prophets pend: So what
the Verity of those fouer great Beasts, diverse one from another, which should
arise etc. Whosoever would understand and know their mystery for this very time
reserved, hitherto with the Kingdom of Heavens great seal shut up.

Distinguishing not only Nations but Times: The very truth of it: N'other then
the several Coat, Arms, given or borne by him, the first of great Britains
Kingdoms or Monarchy.

Not unlike Jacobs united Family his Wives* Children, and Children of the
Handmaids. The aforesaid Crowns four, concerning whose piece of
super-artificiall Heraldry unknown to those Heralds of the King of great
Babylon (Dan. 3.) even at hand proclaim the ancient of days, the aproach of
that great day of his. So go thy way Daniel, for the words are closed up and
sealed till the time of the end, which: Not only the Time, but unfolds unto
what Nation or Language, revealed those glad Tidings, as by the Word (Sealed)
given to understand thereby. Even where the great Seal the Jmpression thereof,
those fouer Coats or Beasts, styled Kings which shall arise, etc. And the
Coin stamped therewith and the like, etc.

And so the first in the likeness of a Lion with Eagels wings, etc. first
displays the arms of England and France, and then standing upon the feet like
a man, a Lion rampant (to wit) Scotlands coat, where the other the Jrish
Instrument, or Harp evident also out of Tune, etc. That no need to say, J am
Joseph, or over-verball to be in this case.

No more requisite then their asking either whether or no thy sonns coat this
of so many colors or pieces, as in the field, now those inumerable colors,
etc. That were HE living, our Father JACOB would say, some evil beast had
devoured us, to behold such blood shed amongst brethren and cruelty, as Since
the Creation such a flood, the old Serpent never casting out of his mouth, and
so like Joseph sold to the Midianits, our woeful estate, sale and rapine made,
by Malignant brethren etc. But such miserable Shipwreck with us being no news,
shall return to those mysteries of Heraldry.

The frequent Oraments of your House wherefore to explain them farther, but
needless; nor endless Figures here borrowed out of old Orators Books,
suffices for figurative Demonstrations such, to render their meaning truly,
running the way of the plain rather for the ancient of days his coming to
prepare the way. So for my Commission thus.

And farther as to you not unknown especially at what time your Mother became a
Writer or Secretary, concerning the unsealing or interpreting this obscure
piece to open the Vission of Daniel, though no obscure persons of the seed of
the KINGS and of PRINCES. Even in the year 1625. undertaken this burden,
following his steps, who declares when HE wrote first in BELCHAZARS first
year, the last of those Caldeans of great Babylon.

Also showed in that great plague year, when the City shut up: This Vission
then opened, whereof even Then a Sign to Token, not without a touch given in
those words. But thou O Daniel shut up, etc. (Dan. 12.) And thus where every
word a mystery, cannot pass over them, as none of the least His being so often
saluted or styled so highly of the Angel: O Daniel greatly beloved man, as much
to say too, O KJNG of great Britain! as Kings and Prophets; Brethren, Let him
that reads Daniel understand.

And as it extends to this time also, bears Date forty four; directly the
present Year as these beareing Record of time and place, etc. of whose
storming days thus. And Daniel spoke and said, J saw and behold upon the great
Sea, the four Winds strove, and four great Beasts came up. diverse one from
another (to say) from beyond sea, the occasion of such divission, ready to be
swallowed up in these swelling Seas.

The first like a LION, and Eagels wings, (Daniel 7.) J beheld till the VVings
were plucked thereof: And lifted up from the Earth, and made stand upon the
Feet like a MAN: And a MAN'S HEART was given unto it, viz. The LIONS Passant
(regardant) turned into the Rampant, etc. After her decease, a Virgin Princess
of renowned MEMORY, ENGLAND styled great Britain, and then these four
several Coats given, etc.

(And this Sailing on; or pursuing the Subject:) And behold another Beast, a
second like to a BEAR, and it raised it self upon one side: And had three
Ribbs in the mouth of it, between the teeth of it. N'other then as it were
displayed The three LYLLIES: The Arms of FRANCE, to the full given by this
KINGDOM, where Nothing but a mere Shadow, or the bare Coat of it Left,
Leaves in stead of Fruit: Besides, how by a She-Beare, as this N'other: Three
divided KINGDOMS rent in pieces. The Ribbe or Side, bears Witness thereof,
The second SEX its Character.

And so farther from This saying, too well prooved; ( Arise and devour much
FLESH:) even what Date it bears needless to say: Her MOTTO the Mother not of
the Living Child, but of Divissions and Massacres, where inclusive the adored
Sacrament called the MASS: Thus uttered Her Voice, Let it be neither Thine,
nor Mine, but devide it: destroy it utterly, etc. No such Coat then, like to
have any Affinity with Solomon's Ivory Rament or Robe: as the Ensign of Peace,
the LILLY of the field, but rather a Slip come out of the Bear-garden,
unworthy to behold the Sun: became degenerate and so wild: Sometime to none
of the Flowers of Parradise inferior.

And another like LEOPARD, Lyon-like SCOTL ANDS Coat the truth of it displaied
Thus: Which had four Heads, and four VVings on the back of it, as it were a
Heralds Coat, or KING AT ARMS, etc. So great BRITAJNS four KINGDOMS or
Crowns proclaims by them: And this the Sum of it; showing Then revealed the
time of END, when united These four aforesaid, etc. As hereby farther
appears. ( And Dominion was given unto it:) No small addition, after Her days
reigning forty four Years, for Scotland to give such a Large Coat by a
Prince as unfortunate in His Progeny and Successor; As in his Predisessors or
Parents: Wherefore liken'd to the LEOPARDS Spoted skinn those sable spots or
drops.

And behold a fourth BEAST like a HARPYE, or some such Monster, having great
Jron Teeth, and Nayls of brass, to be short, the Jrish Harp demonstrated,
likewise the very wrest as it were a little Horn, of which Jnstrument not a
little out of tune, as insues, stamping all underfoote Gods Law, Human Law.

And so far for the Harp, Like the very forequarter or ribbs inform or
likeness, as strung in that manner ribbwayes, whose short Horn the express
Character of tirrants of no long continuance, raising up and setting lower,
like the wrest according to their will made a law, changing and altering when
they please.

Informing moreover concerning the blaspheming blasts of the little Horn, that
had eyes like a man, and such a mouth, as much to say, that mouth speaking such
great things, a Woman's and no Man's.

Her Proclamations at her command, the great Seal, the Elders and the Nobles,
so with the Story goeing on of that Idolatrious time, Come see now that cursed
Woman's spirit, she cast down, etc. cunjured up, as it were, walks up and down,
that like her self of her unnatural Dogs, Acteon like eaten (of her none left
to bury) Jezebel by name, Woe to the House, whose signification, so no other
then a stolen piece by the Poet, very like to be, as that for another: Borrowed
from Elias, Elevation, also the fable of Phateon, That Prophets being sought
for as though some where had fallen or miscarried.

Whose mysteries or morralls in so high esteem among the Heathen against many
may rise in Judgment, of whom reverenced no more Divine Oracles further more,
to weigh or unite those times, with our heavy days, Likewise Peace, though
voiced, Jacobs voice like and the hands of Esau, yet such divisions and slaying
of all hands, nothing but peace, put the question as though he sought nothing
else, is it peace, and thus says the King, is it peace.

And ever and again, Thus says the KING, etc. Js it peace, JEHV. New
Propositions as it were. And Sir as long as her Sorcerors enforce doing what
she pleases, what have thou to do with peace, also at her last cast (when
this Motto, who is on my side who) who troode HER underfoote, her enchanting
voice, Had he Peace that slew his Master? (As it were to look to his Head)
This blood-thirsty Mistres of Charms and Spells like Satan's falling those
aspiring Spirits.

So alike the time possessed, now see what a double portion powered out of the
curse what one leaves, another taks, He that escapes the Sword of Hazael Jehu
slayes, and he escaping Jehus Sword Elisha slayes, because the Land divided as
those waters by him parted with the mantell of Elias, wherewith Sailed over
Jordan River, and such virtue in it, bein worn out by them, much more vigere
then and Spirit in their Books being perused and studied upon.

And Mother and Daughter alike too. Now she cast into a languishing bed,
confumed to nothing an Anatomy, etc. scarce any thing to bury.

The occasion of this LANDS deep CONSVMPTION SHE, And wast made thereof: Woe to
the House of God, and the House of PARLIAMENT both, the nursing mother of
DRAGONS, those Sonns of BELJALL in arms, for as her name is, so is she MARRAH:
The GALL of bitterness.

But because the Daughter of a King as JEHV speak, Here forborne the
Remainder, buried in silence, for so births PREROGATIVE surmounts or goes
before that gained by Marrage as desent and blood, a Character not to be
blotted out, where with follows the state of VIRGINITY, the presidence theirs,
Not in subjection as others.

And for ELJAS progress in the SPIRIT: The return of those long expected
days, Let the READER be pleased for his satisfaction to turn but (to the
Apocalypse the 11) And see in his COMMISSION to the Gentills. What date it
bears there, concerning the revealed time of the Resurrection, etc. even
behold the Sevententh Centurye it measured out by months and days, amounting
unto three years and half, the half of seven like the time nothing, but
divission, including the great mystical week, expressed several and diverse
ways. A touch of which time folded up with that sevenfold marriage, put the
question in the resurection whose wife, etc.

Wherefore of the last (turned) Houre-Glasse of time, Thus (Revel. etc.) And
in the same Hour a great Earth Quake and the tenth part of the CITY fell, and
slain Seven Thousand, Decima Pars, etc. and thus pend with the Character of
the present when Elias his days shall appear again, their Resurrection or
Revolution, as it were by a beseiged City its model, and yielded or rendered
up by the affrighted remnant, when such public Thanksgiving, saying, We give
thee thanks O LORD GOD Almighty, which art and wast, and art to come. Vtter'd
(times) treble voices, to weigh the time, etc.

And as a Reformation time, to the greatest part hateful and unsufferable: so
the day of Judgments tidings as welcome, like the writs of Parliament that
news to many also dreadful, and detestable to the world, these makes it
sufficiently plain, and the Nations were angry the time of the dead was come
that they should be judged, etc. (ergo or viz.) to be manifested to the
Gentills, and so like the last Supper aforehand, showing his death, likewise
commands the little book opened to be received and eaten, as much to say, The
last day revealed to be or before showed the Lords second coming, etc. Also by
two witnesses, to wit, the Books of Daniel and St. John, although reproved
for his fiery Spirit: That he was forward and sudden in calling for the day of
Judgment as it were: Then who knew not of what Spirit he was.

And here like Elias and Elijah not to be parted (those twain goeing along
further with the last time, those aforesaid mourning months 4.2. And a
Thousand two Hundred and Sixty days, and three days and a half, etc. (
Revela. 11.) all but sounding the great days Alarm in the seventeenth
Century: Then to watch as the time for the Elects cause promised to be cut off
and shortened, to wit its coming short of 2000. years, and so much for times
sentence, to be no longer ( Revela. 10.) And the Sacramental tree of life, or
Books of the old and new Testament, before mentioned, And he therefore that
shall add or deminish from the set time written by those witnesses let Him
expect the plagues also proceeding out of their mouths, Pestilence and War,
etc. otherwise that might have escaped death no few with Elias have been taken
alive up, debarred from entering the rest, etc. as that figure of the
Refurrection, double witnessed by Elijah a touch of whose Corpse thereby one
raised up again, but let down into this Sepulchare.

So again looking back to Daniel touching the little Horn declaring or
sounding the brevitye of great Britains Monarchy, (Whose look more stout
then his fellows) more over thus I considered the Horns, And there came up
another little Horn, before whom three of the first Horns were plucked up by
the roots, the truth of it as much as to say, That he the first Heir of the
red rose and the white. Whose ISVE three of them Crowned Princes childlesse,
deceasing without Heirs of their body, the Crown of England fell to Scotland,
and great Britain so styled, then wherefore blazoned by those great Beasts
four being from name of Brute derived, whose Unicorns Horn become as short
as his fellows. Lookeing of late as though al by conquest had been his, so
according to his will wresting and altering whatsoever, and possessed with no
little wilfulness as well as pride, proceeding from Ephnesse and
Shallowness.

And so from HENRY the fourths taking possession of the Kingdom, regained by
EDWARD the fourth of those royal Rose ten in number (giving the dunn Cow) so
many even from the House, of Lancasters usurpation until the diadem fell to be
Scotlands lot, all which displayed by those Horns ten and another little
Horn, etc. as Corone being derived from Cornua, and Caroles a Diminative, etc.

For saylingon, the VVind serving fair still, or for proceeding with the Map
of great Britains last Parliament, so manifest, that whose Image this, who
needs to doubt, as a little farther, I shall hold on, etc. ( J beheld, then
because of the great voice of the word which the Horn spoke, J behold even
till the Beast was slain and his body given to the burning flame:) Some may
say has God care of Oxen? Yes doubtless beholds even such a Den or Draught of
restless beastliness day and night, St. James-Fayre so called, not without
Cause their Privilege of late abolished: As hereby appears the Model every
of those Courts put down: Where so long such Lawless doings there, etc.

(As for the rest of the Beasts, They had their Dominion taken away: BUT their
Liver were prolonged) as He no little or inferior Beast for one, whose voice
set a Note lower, brought to the bar, though so long deferred, yet whose
Judgment sleeps Not.

And then the Ancient of days, fitting in his Judges Robe, and Locks like
Snow, Even the day of Judgment clothed in the Parliaments likeness: And the
Parliament clouded under, or shadowed out by the day of Judgment. His coming
in the Clouds, so all in their pure wool, set forth and wool Seats, and thus
much for that: The judgment shall fit, and the Books were opened, the Books
of the Old and New Testament also: Nothing covered that shall not be disclosed
too and proclaimed.

Likewise by those Legions of Angels, beside the Parliaments everlasting
sitting, the war raised, by them fet forth, like Dooms day as it were, when
the Elements melting and the Heavens shaking, and Stars falling, like those
Valies of Thunderbolts with lightnings, such a fiery Stream now making way:
the general days Epitome and the conclusion of all these, Dan. 7.

( And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the
whole Heaven, Shall be given to the Saints of the mosthigh (OR RVLERS) whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom.)

As to no other given such a high style, except unto this Kingdom, etc.
Hitherto is the end of the matter concerning the end, and as for Daniel his
countenance changed, and his cogitations troubled. The troublesometime before
the change, fore saw even our evil times, His heart bleeding too, etc. And as
Daniel signifying the judgment of God, so that Monsterous fourth Beast, as
much to say; a Viperous generation:

Herewith is signyfied like Joseph's and Pharoahs dreams doubled, even the
seventeenth hundred year: By this very measure doubled to be likewise: a Time
and times, and the deviding of time, or three and a half, (viz. 7.) Surge and
metire templum, (Revel. 11.) follows tempus and tempora, and dimidium
temporis. The Resurrections time hereby measured even in the present Century
cut in the midst too (as it were) Paradventure fifty there, etc. And
paradventure there shall lack five of fifty, expressed in the day of judgments
very language, as shall not the Judge of all the earth do right, and Abram he
but Dust and Ashes then.

With whom saying, Now J have taken upon me to speak, cannot here rest
showing farther, as Noah outlived the Flood, three hundred years and dyed, two
thousand years after the Creation, likewise now the time abated or comes short
300. years, wherefore the disolution in the seventeenth hundred year, and thus
cut off so many years, like the shortened days of Enoch whom God took, who
lived three hundred years and Eternitys forerunner begat Metheuseliah, thus
five hundred years amounts to a PERIOD, as deeply sworn the Time should be
longer, (Revela. 10.) measured by the CREATORS his right hand lifted up, Tempus
non erit amplius, sed in diebus vocis septimi Angeli: Times mystery revealed,
etc. as promised to be witnessed by the Prophets, his servants concerning times
TRVMPET then put to silence time no more, etc.

And lastly for MICHAELMVS (1644) That happy half year herein included, a
time and times and half also, to disperse the Forces, etc. Revela. the 12. and
Dan. the 12. concerning Michaels alarm, there signified and so like a Thief
in the night as this fearful night vission, appears even the end stolen upon
the whole world, or coming as the travel of a Woman misreckoning sometimes
taken before SHE looks.

Also farther for this last of Parliaments, and whereas Gods word able to
speak for it self of full age, other argument whatsoever, needless, it being
of a quicker return, shall press another place of Scripture, as briefly
explaind as others before, Reve. 10.9. Concerning that Albion Army, and Aleluja
voices where even the revealed time of the Lords coming. And the writs of this
happy Parliament sealed up in one: Scribe Beata, etc. They that are called to
this meeting, etc. All sealed with the Unicorn in pure Paper, as it were
mounted on white Horses, or like the great show. both going together: as noted
etc.

Nomen scriptum quod nemo novit, the Parliaments name in another language, viz.
et vocabant nomen ejus verbum dei. The Word, etc. et cum Justitia judicat, et
pugnat. And upon his head many Crowns with a garment dipped in blood, deep
Scarlet clothed, and on his vesture, and upon his leg written, etc.

Namely the Color and Garter of the order the Knights of St. Gorge (Ecce equus
Albus) likewise from Chival and Equus. And thus the Knights and Esquires of
both Houses displayed, of what house, and so from the name of Oxford, thus, et
vidi Beastiam et Regis terrae et exercitus, etc. Revela. 10.9.

And for the aforesaid war so far, as for the motive, Meritrice magna qui
corrupit terram in prostitutione sua, etc. Has bin showed before where she
painted like her Images that downfall of Hers before theirs.

Also added these to the premises because enjoined not to part, or put asunder
what is joined, showed Farthermore, The great Jmage, ( Dan. 2.) even armed at
all points, the verity of those four Metals, ore Argent, etc. the very same
likewise diverse one from another. Apertains to the four great Beasts the one
rising out of the Earth, the other out of the Sea.

So contains Caesar's Superscription even the Roman Empires age, written in in
those Characters of the 3. Ribs, 4. VVings and the 10. Horns and then those
Eagles wings so lifted up plucked too, notwithstanding Germanies manly looks,
that Saxon state: like this great Statue unable longer to stand upon its feet,
not unlike Irelands estate, the model of that Empire in such a flourishing
condition, and as the blow then in the 17. year of the present reign, so the
other in the 1700. etc. broken so soon in pieces: Wherefore the world but like
a Dream vanished: Like his sudden awaking in a moment forgotten all, etc.

But now returning to great Britains brittle condition again: That union
dissolved and broken in pieces since his days: He the head of GOLD, as by
those pieces called JACOBVS, after his name, etc. And he the ROMAN SPANISH
Emperor by his tribute of late, since the Judies discovery, who makes up the
head of Gold too: And all this but to manifest and show. That God is a Revealer
of Secrets in these days also: Reveals the deep and secret things, And makes
known what shall be in the Latter days, by diverse and several demonstrations,
as this for another: Of the Axe laid to the root: That tree or pedigree whose
fruit much of such a hight, reached up to Heaven, this Jacobs Ladder, etc. And
now but the Stump end remains as ye see.

The very VVoods every where proclaims it, where the Axe never put so to the
Root, such felling, etc. And so the Axe that fell into the water, by a stick
cast into it, caused to swime: The Morrall thereof no other then the
Resurrection time revealed to be by the Spirit of prophecy. As much to say, As
the late hand writing for a seal or sign of it, a sufficient prophetical
proclamation though not on the Walls, etc. in the Banqueting House, yet not
unknown to Lord ^o few how these applied. Thy Kingdom numbered, and thou found
wanting, etc. and come to pass too, as published and printed, 1633.
sufficiently known, in meeter to his Majesty from great Babylon transferred to
great Britain.

And so this but the truth of it ( showed in the 12. of the Revelation) How
Satan because he knows his reign or time to be short: is ready to devour the
Woman even for the truth of the Resurrection time revealed, as most proper to
be performed by that sex, a Woman by whom death came to be the Messenger of
Life. And so, WOE TO THE INHABJTERS of the EARTH, and of the SEA, etc.

And since a pleasing Theme (as it is said) makes a good Orator, and sure I am a
worse time then this never known or ever heard of, so then the time the end
discovered, although pend somewhat hastily or unperfectly, etc. being like the
honey: and like the honey gathered out of so many parts, I shall the less need
to excuse it unto such as have a full knowledge of the Scriptures, That should
it be written at large a Chronicle or a book as ample as those tables, of the
Mapps of the World could I suppose not contain it.

Not suitable to the little book, being but an Epittomie as it were, and so much
for being not voluminous, especially when the time ^o short too: as by Tyrant
time his reign expired, showed to be and these the appointed Scutchins for his
Hersse apeared, those winged Beasts devouring times likeness, etc.

As by this one witness more produced or set forth: asigned to the present,
even in the days of these Kings, or united Kingdoms: Shall the God of Heaven
set up a Kingdom which never be distroyed. And the Kingdom shall not be left
to other, etc. And shall break in pieces, even to the same effect, with that (
Dan. the 7.) The greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, for ever
given to the Saints (or Rulers, etc.) which shall break in pieces, etc. viz.
By those ordinance or orders of Parliaments, and field pieces, etc.

And yet not so strange as true; notwithstanding such a troublesome time O let
Jsmale live as it were, preferred before Jsaac to be his Heir, And Absolons
life before Solomon the wise (O Absolon my son Absolon) Like Egypts Leekes
and Garlike before Canaans Grapes, etc. And so preferred this worlds vanity and
folly before everlasting Righteousness, endless Joy, life eternal, and now
ended thus this point of Honor, displaying the Ancient of days his Kingdom
your portion to you dedicated: that so punctually have discharged that duty of
the first commandment with promise, in so much and such dishonor endured,
have been your mothers Copartner, even You, her alone and sole support under
the Almighty. So Veni Domine Jesu, gracia Domine, etc.


