TO THE MOST HONORABLE THE HIGH COURT OF PARLJAMENT ASSEMBLED, etc.
MY LORDS;
There Is a Time for every thing under the Sun, and if any; for to be abrupt
and breife in ever, it is NOW when Time so precious is with your Lordships: under
the Sun there is nothing but a supernatural Course to be taken, Touching the
Cure of such unnatural conditioned Times: The Almighty his Word the only
Balm then, and Sovereign remedy when ye have tried all: If any therefore do
amiss and miscarry of you. Blame your selves none but the Parliament: For I
shall of no little Burden discharge my self here who can but say, and tell
you. I have a receipt of such rare opperation and virtue given me; That within
few days it shall bring Him again to Himself, I mean the KING; after absent
so long from his Parliament: whose Character if ye please to observe; This is
his:

He that no Chains could bind him, (Mark Evangelist the 5th.) That had been
often bound with fetters and with Chains plucked assunder by him. And the
fetters broken in pieces, neither could by any man be tamed; as much to say,
neither Oath, nor word, or promise availing, or any reason of force to parswade
with Him, as the Holy Ghost speaking plain: by that adjuring in Gods Name; and
by asking his Name too, saying, LEGION, for they were many, who spoke not with
the Lest: Nevertheless, not more feirce then fearful of the Lords coming,
this man wounding himself thus.

And thus have made tender unto your Lordships, Of my service, whether or no
ye accept thereof: for to bring His Majesty to you, Setting as before time
clothed, etc. And doing withal what Ye shall ask or desire. As for the
Caveliers what They shall do all of them, even crave a Pass here, to take
Shipping for the Low Countries, and Germany to be gone away; the Boors will
entertain them willingly, St. Matt: the 8. gives Notice of two, so exceeding
feirce that none might pass by that way, to wit, that Dutch Duke, or Prince
possessed with an unclean Spirit, out of his WITS; he to return also without
delay Home again, beyond Sea.

Waiting on your Lordships Commands ELEANOR.
1642. The 3d. of January. The Holy Ghosts New-yeares-gift.



SAMSONS LEGACY.
JVDGES, the 16. Chap. etc.
ANd as instanced or brought to his Trial, here found light; SAMSON guilty
that way: which Vow of his, had he unhappily not violated, a business that: Of
no mean weight, what Fetters of Brass bound him had; none of what kind
soever. Samsons fall, lost himself hereby, dispossessed of the Spirit of the
LORD.

By him discovered the Almighties counsel unto the Lords Enemy, could not
withold or refrain, told her all his heart; she acquainted is therewith be
it whatsoever: Such a blind thing is Love; They into such Thraldom brought
which harbor it: suspected nothing because he loved her, or doted rather. That
whosoever they were, was able with a look of his Browe, to put them for ever
to silence, wherein his soul so far engaged, any to attempt but the motion,
etc.

And farther showed, how in his allegiance having toward his Master and Lord
failed: Both stripped of that great strength of his, Lost both his Eyes, not only
board or put out, feign to be lead afterward by a Ladd: But put in prison,
beside grinding in a Mill: To taste of restless HELL, that wearisome being.
Even takes Essaye of our Saviors Cup; indeed these in some things to Samson
belong only: able but for to turn his weary sides without other help, or by a
walls side to go, which before had The Lord his support; The Philistims his
Lords now: a heavy change, of no other estate worthy, had taken his pleasure
and so came of it.

One Trusted with that high place of Government: Twenty years therabout, as it
appears. Crowned with so many favors; That had the Eternal words direction
his light: set so light by alhough chastised never so severly the bage of his
Masters heavy displeasure, none commiserate his Complaint be it whatsoever,
whether marked, shorn or noted. He which wist not the Spirit of the Lord was
departed from him, when He had foolishly departed from the Lord: And if GOD
spared not Samson, others much less that have him for their lesson.

who could have supposed, warned before hand too, what trust to be reposed in
them. That upon a VVomans assault her charms such a Forte rendered up: without
any reason rendered But to please Her, was not that Riddle disclosd enough: who
would not have laid another wager, as great as Samsons? That this man could
never have been over taken so, that had been mistaken so much in Her before,
named his Heifer; and this woman she of the Philistims breed too, both of them
one in effect: or two witnesses appearing as it were: Herewithall bidden to
take heed all, of Close-underhand-dealers: For the holy Ghost is not without a
double, or twofold meaning in these thirty Shirts wrapped up, and thirty Shutes
those; not only Judas His livery-Coates or Coatearmes expressing, but our
bleeding days wherein such Plundering and intolerable Theifts:

For which betraying of the trust, as one beside himself; beside being a
Prisoner, made a byword, or one for a mean Occupation fitter, or trusted when
His eyes be out rather then other-wise: In steed of a Savior or Deliverer,
he delivered into the hands of such, etc. Which kindness for; To none other
Bound, but to Her: beside his willfulness, whose Parents some-time could not
prevail with Him, or any other: Is during the remnant of his wretched days,
ordained for to bear those shakels and fetters, Brassen ones for suretiship,
and better security: Thus armed by Her from Head to Foot etc.

But her Ladyship urged him, She pressed him Daily, vexed his Soul, his
Conscience to the Death. Moreover, by Lulling of him as much again, was kept
in a Dream, until laid himself flat at her Feet: By such maine Strength was
Samson over-mastred by his Mistres, who so often gives the Allarum; The
Philistines SAMSON, etc.

But to bring these home a little farther, to these last days, without
Over-laying Your patience I hope, showed great Britains low ebb, like Samson
what pass brought to.

The worlds wounder for blessing and bounty from above beyond all theirs not
unknown; a dreadful Name, far and near: Now by His Majesty's warfare being
fettered and in Arms; become the game and music of the World.

Those (as it were) away hidding and running before time, crowding as fast, and
covering house-tops, fearelesse now of Samson. In which difference difficult to
judge; whether for Might and Majesty more reverenced, then dejected at last
and despised: Certainly manifested as great Imbecillitie in subjecting himself
to a Woman's waywardness, therewith carried away so and transported.

But these not for disputationsake; but made for dispatch, not so wide and full
of stuff as others are acknowledged: If it sit close, it is as becoming Joseph
in making himself known to his Brethren, in have told them, I am Joseph: So
now it was not you that sent me hither, but GOD

So was it of the Lord; no thank to Samson, Samsons saying, she pleases me
well: When nevertheless it displeased his Father and Mother. They saying; is
there never a Woman among thy Brethren or people, etc.

The almighty for bringing his own Counsel and purpose to pass; suffers
much, and forbeares long: the Holy Ghost thus saying, he sought an occasion
against the Philistines, GOD on his side, he needs not fear any. The Time was
come of their fall: at last which stricks home, though hardly like the Thunder
at first heard.

And to be som-what louder, or plain herein: was not an occasion sought also
against that House of Lords and Commons, by that unexpected progress without
President or Example of Progenitors, when he separated Himself from his
Head-Kingdoms. Parliament Assembled then, for rooting that Slip out, blind
Herisie Her Majesty's darling, grown unto such a height. Without doubt with as
ill, or worse success taken in hand, then he which but lost his life, good
Samson: When the House of Peers and Commons those two Pillars, charged with a
heavy tax of Treason, purposing to lay violent hands next: first robbed of
their good Name; and then of their Life lastly, brought about by Liars in wait
for that purpose. And thus his causlesse falling out, the occasion of these
such unspeakable miseries; He carried away from His Parliament thus, by the
Church of the LIBERTINES and ROMES CHVRCH, proceeding from a loosnesse or
carelessness of goodness: the good affection not set by of those, to have been
Equaliz'd, if not preferred before Foreign states; a greater Honor then
proginey (common to all) to discharge such a Stewardship well. The office of a
Crown ( a good name, Proverbs. 22) as our Eyes opened, and Woeful evidences
thereby given to understand: That not old Samuel, godly Queen Elizabeth was
rejected, tender hearted unto every one. But herewith we which were not
content: But nay, we will have a King to reign over us, whatsoever coming to
pass.

How soon verified, the old true proverb, seldom comes a better: for unto
Samson as at his end; so befallen us More slain in one year, then since the
Conquest in the Reign of so many Kings and Queens of them called to sacrifice
their Lives for the Truths testimony: commanded to rest a little season.
Blessed innocents were who changed have their scarlet for white robes, calling
a loud, how long O Lord Revela. 6. etc.

And every hair of Times head grown precious, never recald; and if ever
perrilous to loose it, as it is now revealed here; and unloos'd the mystery of
time, how Samsons sevenfold ropes plucked asunder, even drawn from them; like
Pharaohs double Dream, where the thing was one, likewise these broken Withes
and ropes reach to this sevententh hundred year present not alone; But to
that sevententh year of the Kings reign, a time of greater famine then
Pharaohs, when the plenty was not known, by reason of the scarcity following
so grevious.

And now great Britain newly so styled, accompanied with no few Honors that
started up, have in this sevententh hundred year; Even as those knots undone
all and broken, with Jrelands green plantation by the roots plucked up: This
knot or union so fast made, how is it come to nothing, but all up making ready
in Arms; that beside a Coatearmes borne, no other appearance at all remains,
suddenly like his arms become when be awaked; great Britains peace even so
brittle stands as those ropes, etc. Compard unto towe, or a piece of thread,
choked with Match and Powder now: for the sweet sents of peace and plenty
enjoyed Long: And handled Thus: Notwithstanding, not unfore-told. None
Considers of that hand writing, though in the Year, 1633. showing, His
Kingdom is divided and numbered etc. Belshazzar, it shall be easier for him in
the day of Judgment.

By the Prophet Jeremiah: PASHVR which smote him, was rebaptiz'd: Who gave him
that Name Compounded as unluckie as it was Long; MA: GORMIS Sabib namely
restles or fear round about being no less then great Britains very Motto:
Wherefore to make it good unto His Majesty two Names be attributed a
Godfathers and Godmothers here: toward his regeneration Baptized in their
tears, for Salt that is wanting. Now from Samson: JAMES SON derived, and also
Mother Rachels Name; hers added: drawn from CHARLES, to wear it for a Favor,
as long as he lives here; weeping because they were Not, or were lost, would
not be comforted etc.

The Lion become a Noted sheep, signifies: for Rachell is a sheep, but herewith
to give nevertheless some comfort: Thy Kingdom come etc. Then the only
remedy when all is done; Come Lord Jesus. For what Thy Kingdoms are come
unto, none need to show it: They speak for themselves, round about plainly:
and thus Samsons story their state sets forth, no news either Your hangings
and Tapstery makes it not a stranger, but Common blind Alehouses not without
it, His lying in her Lapp a sleep, whilst she pooles him etc.

And without streining this Legacy of his too, besides those ropes pulled in
pieces, which became as singed with fire. With His Brazon Chains, as the one
Stands for Match, the other toward your pieces of Ordnance. Fastend this also
on our Effeminate time, his seven Locks, Left to this last hundred year:
showing what weaving and curlling we have of FALSE-HAIRE, by that going away of
His, with the Web fastend to the Beam; whose locks therein woven by her: who
said; Thou say false, (or) have mocked me, etc. Expressing how men
forbidden expressly long Hair, yet the sons of God will wear it: some of
them looking thereby more like the sonns of Devils.

And so farther, for the green Withs and new ropes provided of old, long since
for such Hellhounds, whose smoking tongues as Links set on fire already,
notwithstanding RACHA, he who calls his Brother so, he shall be in danger of a
Counsel, etc. and so much for those Withs and ropes; unusefull neither for
great Britains Navy and Taklings, together with Irelands Plow-Taklings and
other uses, as aforesaid.

And nevertheless like the Plague-tokens of their inevitable end: The hasty
Messengers, likewise so many Judgments sent forth suddenly forerunners of the
dreadful days approach: All prepared alike to meet the Son of God, as those
Hoggish Gergesens, when all the City came out to meet Him, and besought him
to depart: And now truly fulfilled. The wedding is prepared, but they which
were bidden, were not worthy, etc. (Matthew. 22.) For nothing but in eating and
drinking, and giving in Marriage, is this your hastening To his Coming?
Cleansing your selves of all filthiness. But returning to Times cutting off,
which no more returns. That great Man sealed in the forehead, or front with
1642. Noah's days even shall declare the meaning of that scentence from our
Saviors mouth; that no flesh saved except those days be shortened, as much to
say: shall come short of his days, at the time of the Deluge alluding to it,
when all flesh perished, except eight persons.

In like manner from (...) ^ncarnation, (when God became man, thought not
scorn to take our Nature upon Himself,) From which time to his second
coming, Parrallels it Thus. But as the days of Noah were, so shall the
coming of the son of Man be: For as in the days before the flood, until
the day Noah entered into the Arc. And knew not until the flood came, and
took them all away: So shall also the Coming of the Son of Man be. And so
all before the coming of the last day also forewarnd to be, appears plainly (
Matt. 24.) Dated with the present year, 1642. Two shall be in the field, two
Arms, to wit, Two women shall be grinding at the Mill, etc. and of our
miserable devission, so much for a watchword shall serve.

The seventh Angels Trumpet ( Revela. 10.) give his voice on Noah's side, beside
that Angel that set his Right foot upon the sea, etc. Whose feet as Pillars
of fire: with that little Book open in his hand: Even great Britains revealed
forewarning, That Islands vissitation: That there be some standing here not
only, but throughout the World: that shall not taste death, till the day of
Judgment. And so take eat this little Book, the Sacrament of his coming at
hand:

As herein is no small mystery Conteind too, twofold double Witness appearing
like all the rest: Judges the 15.20. verse, And he Judged Israel twenty
years, in the days of the Philistines, etc. verse 31. and 16 Chap. And he
Judged Israel twenty years.

Also, when the sonns of GOD became Tyrants, and carnal ( Gen 6.) My spirit
shall not strive always with man: for that he also is flesh. Namely, how great
soever: Yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years: It includes Times
reign; This twenty years to be put upon his last score. The Prophet David
foresaw this week ( Psalm. 90.) A thousand years in his sight, are but as
yesterday. The Apostle Peter: One day with the Lord, is as a Thousand years,
and a Thousand years, as one day. Daniel the Prophet, that Master of
Arrethmatitians: confirms that week thus; He shall confirm his Covenant with
many for a week, and in the midst of the week oblation shall cease, etc.
The Messiah slain, and the Cities Desolation, to wit; in the fourth Thousand
year: Wherein not only showed Messiah his days cut off: but Time, the son
of Eternity, his days too shortened: Even one Thousand years fulfilled, or
complete. For the Gospels Progress:

The 20. of the Revela: Thus speaks; That they lived, and reigned with Christ,
a Thousand years: before these Idolatryous times of late (...) therefore in
respect of Time past, (our Saviors late coming Then.) The Apostle Paul, after
this fashion admonishes. The Time is short, as much to say; And to be
shortened. For which cause, as if we possessed or enjoyed nothing. Corinth. 7.

And here adding but in a word or two, of the LORDS day; that also cut off: how
this Samson has been shaffed: This Samson-day, how it has been observed and
kept, after what spiritual fashion; Even the LORDS house haunted by Spirits of
Devils, no few amongst those Tombs, etc. Holding their Spirituall-Courts
there, whose daily Office, and Occupation was, before their being cast out of
Paul's, Either to make many forswear themselves; Or to fill Prisons, with those
called by them, Puritans: and now, Rownd-Heads. For which senseless, rediculous
Name, not amiss with the Prophet, to bestow these for a Girdle: always to
be girded with fear, round about MAGORMISSABIB: those Characters compounded
of GOG, and MA GOG: Compassing the Camp of the beloved City of the Saints:
Whose number etc. Revela. 20. consisting of Papists, the Queens Army, and
prophaine Protestants, before the day of Judgment, being let loose: These like
Herod and Pilate, that were made friends, at variance before.

And wherewith observed, as it deserves no other, as others have served God,
professing themselves his servants, and going contrary: as it were your servant
etc: likewise by them as supposed. Their Name but used for the abusing or
betraying of their person; having first craftily gone about to cut the throats
of so many: by giving them another Name: But to return; Thus this Sabbath too
discarded: not only Excommunicating the Lord prophets and servants, etc. but
turned into a Day of Cardding, and Diceing, with sweating Pastimes: Go for thy
labor, sit down and spinne, and weave; plough, and ditch, from henceforth in
the sweat of thy face Eat thy bread: Come no more into the garden of God; so
much for harkening to the Serpents voice: The flaming Sword beware: Neither be
grieved with him, crying; O my son Absalom my son, my son Absalom. (also)
O my son Absalom, O Absalom my son, my son: The Saboths double Eclips: as
much to say, or twice Changed and altered: That harkend not to that voice
rather, saying, verily my Saboths shall ye keep, even he shall be cut off,
that works thereon. That day which was given for a perpetual sign: Exodus
31. etc. No marvel or wonder therefore; our Houses though vissited by the
Spoyler and Plunderer with our day-labour, turned into Days and Nights-warding
and watching.

Nevertheless, not cut off without declaring in the place (of this Judas-day,
more like then the Resurrections) a lawful Successor herewith showed, etc.
upon Mathias-day, how the Lot fell in the year 1633. that Mundaies first day
of the week. In which aforesaid year, the Beast he also asscended then out
of the bottomless Pit; The son of perdition: The last Arch B. gone to his own
place Now; by whom the word of God, in the Month October 23. was burnd,
suffered Martyrdom by a Candle, from his own hand, at the High Commission
board Sacrifiz'd. And at this time, two Armies striving in the field for
Possession, and in Barke-shire and Oxfordshire, where the Heavenly voice was
heard first at Englefield-house: The prime Shire imediately carried thereupon
to Oxfoads Parliament to be published, etc. In the first year of the Kings
Reign, it being a Roll a manuscript, revealing the day of Judgment, etc.

For which Cause now again, a great meeting of the Prophets; as sometime in
the days of John, that Conjunction then: Jsaiah, 6. An ancient Saint
complaining thus, Woe is me, I am cut off, (or undon) because J am a man of
unclean lips, etc. When as those Heralds of Arms present, Each of them with
six wings, twain they covered their faces with, with twain covered their
feet, with twain did fly: holy, holy, holy Lord of hosts; cried one to
another, etc. The whole earth is full of thy glory: And here to bring these
home to the days of John, in the Revelation, etc. prophesying to his Time,
even to the end of the world; being Times Voices expressly: for no other then a
third Sabath to be through the earth, as expressed by the four Beasts, and four
Evangelists, etc. give all their voices also, saying; holy, holy, holy, Lord
God almighty, which was, which is, and which is to come: And for more light in
this matter; ( Revela. 4.) The seven Lamps of fire before the Throne, etc.
which are called the seven Spirits: signify no other then Monday, to be a
Spiritual day. ( Chap. 5.) Signified thus, There stood a Lamb in the midst
of the Elders, having seven eyes, and seven horns, which are the seven Spirits
of God, sent forth into all the earth: To wit, Sunday the middle Sabbath; the
Eye, as it were, to the Gentels, that great light for seventeene hundred
years space. Likewise the Horns, the new Sabbath, Monday, as before showed: As
the one proclaming the first Resurrection or coming; So the other the Last, in
the seventeth hundred years to be recal'd. And thus our eternal Sabbath, and
these Sabathdayes, both in one, sealed up in the little Book.

Farthermore, for an addition these; showing beside how the Worlds ages being
cast into three parts. That had not those days before the Flood, been cut off
or shortened; the Deluge had not been till Noah's Death, which lived 300. Years
after, etc. Enoch his walking with God, confirms it: Walked with God 300.
years after his begetting Children: as much to say, weary Time three hundred
years, Comes before his Time. High time of such days to be disburthened.

And to touch this New-day with a coal from the Altar, showed also the one
even Monday purified, and the other remooved: As appears in that Massage sent
Herod, who had shut up the Lords Messenger: Son of Herod the great so Sir
Named, That be-headed Him: setting abroach his Blood for his Birthday: better
he never had been borne: John of too high a spirit to feed him with flattery,
took our Savior for John risen again, or some walking Spirit. The Lord sends
him word of the Resurrection, saying; go tell that FOX, behold I cast out
Devils, and will heal to day, and to morrow, and the third day I shall be
perfected: Nevertheless I must walk to day, and to morrow, and the day
following, etc. bids him do his worst; as much to say: which Embassage,
whether delivered it were, or no, we read not.

But doubtless for admonition spoken unto all spiritual Herod's, neither being
curious whether these came to her ear, endeavoring rather to unlocke or open
the meaning of that. How coming to pass, Herod or Hayreod, to be Sur-named
Reynold the Fox. Not only because John called our Lord, Innocent Lamb, made
their prey, but his ear dedicated to her so, his Dalilah. Very likely he did
wear some odd Lock, Fox-tayle-like, a scourge, as it were, of hair,
portending how, together with his Soldiers, our Savior should be stripped,
scourged, despised, and mocked by him.

Wherefore before that Easter, this word or mock sent him, that before had
given his consent: Only for a rash words sake (as made an eye-winesse of his
valor) to be-head such a one, for such a woman, partly because of his
alliance, etc. Then lessen himself. His greatness makes himself a firebrand
of Hell rather: And although this Fox, the first of that Name, is said to be
exceeding glad to see Jesus, of whose coming then questionless he was
foretold, in that word sent unto him; notwithstanding, to those questions of
his, vouchsafed no answer at all. As much to say, he had and would make good
his word in the end, etc. Thus she in such obedience to her Mothers
instruction; He standing in as much awe of them both, those Philippian Dames.
And so much for an Old Case new reported.

And as in the Gospel the five Yoke of Oxen, these serves for OXFORDS
Meridian, which belong to His Majesty's invitation: Has MARRIED a wife, and
cannot Come, etc. Yoked in the year, 1625. unequally. Also that Term of FOX,
or OXFORD, to wit: Ominous to long Gowns; Samson Companion too crafty for him;
afords them that subject likewise to work upon. So again Lastly: What Lack
ye? Do you lack Match, and Powder, or Cable-Ropes, or any Brass etc:
Fetters toward Fieldpieces, or long Hair any to wear? Or Irish Withs? Of
these as much as ye please: SAMSON is provided for you, Bound to serve is; as
long as he Lives: Even he with those grinding Gunpowder. That Mother and
Daughter in the GOSPEL: Two women shall be grinding etc. The last days
watchword, so much shall hereof suffice. Only these, ( Matt 24.) Then shall
two be in the Field, etc. As it serves for this year 1642. with the
sevententh hundred year: So Samsons sacrificing here his Life. He bearing as
it were, the gates of Hell and Death: Also, these bears date about this
present EASTER, set forth in Honor of the glorious Resurrection, his Life, and
End.

And hitherto from Thence etc. Your Silence on all sides, which concludes
Consent: Wherefore I Conjure and Charge the aforesaid Evil Spirits, or
Legions, no more here to enter into this Kingdom from henceforth: Go down
into Hell, out into the farthest part of the Earth: get thee hence, etc. Glory,
Honor, and Blessing.

From the Blessed LADY, her Day in Lent, etc. 1643.
None offer without Privilege, to Re-print These.


