Sir Barnaby Whigg: OR, No Wit like a WOMAN'S. A COMEDY. AS IT IS Acted by their
MAJESTY'S SERVANTS AT THE Theater Royal.

Written by THOMAS DURFEY, Gent.

Quiquid agunt homines, votum, timor, Ira, voluptas,
Gaudia, discursus nostri farrago libelli est.
Juvenal. LONDON, Printed by A. G. and J. P. for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Black
Bull in Cornhil. 1681.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE Earl of Berkeley, Viscount Dursely, Lord
Berkeley of Berkeley-Castle, etc.
My LORD,
IT was one of the most prudent Actions of Virgil's Life, to bestow the fruits
of his admired Genius, and prostrate the Labors of his Honored Muse at the
feet of a more Honored, Witty, and Learned Patron; for Mecaenas was a Man of
an unbiased, impartial, and generous nature; and knew as well how to Judge and
Applaud an Excellent Poem, as the Poet himself knew how to write what was fit
to be Applauded.

This therefore causes our Modern Authors (instructed by his Wife Example) to
make an humble offering of their Works to the most deserving and knowing Men of
the Age; cunningly implying, That as they have most Wit and Judgment to find
out their faults, they have also most modesty and good nature to excuse 'em.

Amongst this tribe, my Lord, I must humbly confess my self one, and
acknowledge these two Reasons for my presumption: First, A secret pride to have
my Play graced with the great Name of the Honored Berkeley, lineally descended
(for many Ages past) from the Royal Blood of the Illustrious Harding; and
thence flowing through the veins of One and twenty Noble Families, to the
Honors he now deservedly wears, and which his Sacred Majesty could not more
justly bestow. And, secondly, to be impartially Judged, by a person who knows
as well how to write, as to ^atronize.

Your Lordship did me once the favor to present me a little book of your own
Writing, Entitled, Historical Applications, etc. where he that reads may find
an exact serenity of Fancy, a vivacity of Wit, a refined Elegance in Language,
and observe it to be adorned with certain Jems of Morality and Divinity, and
other maxims of Rational Wisdom, and true Collections of History, that render
it a piece fit to be admired by the most Wife and Learned, and loved by the
most Religious and Loyal.

I make this little digression my Lord, not out of any insolent belief, that I
am fit to commend either the Book, or its Author, for that belongs to a far
better Genius and Pen, but only out of an impatient desire to do my self
Justice in applauding you, though it is impossible I should do you any.

Sola virtus vera Nobilitas, is a Maxim in which Seneca and your Lordship fully
agree; for would any man be Pious and Morally good, let him make you his
pattern; would he be blessed with a sweet, benign, and modest disposition, and
show a perfect Character of true Nobility, unsway'd by the powerful vices,
Pride and Folly, let him make you his pattern; Or would he be loyal and honest,
a faithful lover of his King, and an unmovable Pillar of his Country, still let
him Copy you, and make your Actions his Examples, you that had rather be Just
than Popular; and had rather follow the dictates of a good conscience, than
gain the service and applause of a numerous and potent party.

This, my Lord, is so great and undoubted a Truth, that with the most nice
apprehensions it is impossible it should leave the least impression of flattery;
that being a thing as difficult for me to do, as for you to endure; for all
that know ye will say thus much; and therefore it is probable all that love ye
will speak much more.

As to this Comedy, it had the Honor to please one party; and I am only glad,
that the St. Georges of Eighty-one got a Victory over the old hissing Dragons
of Forty-two; it is a good Omen, and I hope portends future successes, though
some fat Whiggs of Sir Barnaby's tribe made all the interest they could to cry
it down.

My Lord, it is not only a nice, but a very difficult thing to write a good
Comedy, and therefore a tolerable one should be the more excusable; for there
is not only Wit, but Plot, Invention, and a quick and ingenious fancy required:
Fancy! the brightest Jewel of Poetry, of which the Famous English Spencer was
the great and only Master, as we may see in all his Descriptions, but more
particularly in his Legend of Temperance, when he speaks of Mammon or
Covetousness.

I.
At last he came into a gloomy Glade,
Covered with Bows and Shrubs from Heavens light;
Whereas he sitting, found in secret shade,
And uncouth salvage and uncivil wight;
Of greizly heiw, and fowl ill-favored sight,
His Head and Beard with Soot were ill bedight.
His Cole black hands did seem to have bin seared
In Smiths fire, spitting forge, and nails like Claws appeared.
II.
And round about him lay, on every side,
Great heaps of Gold, that never could be spent;
Of which some were rude Ore not purified
Of Mulciber's devouring Element.
Some others were new driven, and distent
Into great Ingots, and to Wedges square;
Some in round Plates withouten Monument.
But most were stamped, and in their Metal bare,
The antic shapes of Kings and Kezars strange and rare.
But this is a sort of Poetry of a different nature from Dramaticks; and
therefore the fancy must of necessity vary, because in one it is digested into
Characters, that are to speak before a carping Audience: and in the other,
perhaps, only to be read or spoken of before one or two persons. But suppose
the fancy to be good, that will not now serve turn; for in this Age it is not a
Poets Merit, but his Party that must do his business; so that if his Play
consists of a Witch, a Devil, or a Broomstick, so he have but a Priest at one
end of the Play, and a Faction at 'tother end of the Pit, it shall be famed for
an excellent piece. And the Mobile either encouraged by their Grandees, or
treated by the Poet, shall throng to it with as much zeal, as they once did to
the Committee, when the scale was turned, and Loyalty began to come in fashion.

This, my Lord, is the World, and the Worlds Nature; but you, I may boldly say,
value Merit for its own sake, and not through interest, or to please a faction,
you will not hiss or clap a Play in the wrong place, nor use an Arbitrary Power
to carry a Cause by Popular Interest or Parties: I say you will not do this,
and I wish all others were of your mind. But since they are not, your Lordships
acceptance and patronizing of this Comedy, is the greatest Encouragement and
Honor that can possibly happen to,

My LORD, Your Lordships obliged and devoted humble Servant, THO. DURFEY.

PROLOGUE.
HOW long, alas! must our unhappy Stage
Groan for the follies of this Plotting Age?
When shall our doubts and anxious fears have end,
That we may once more know a foe from friend?
Once more of Truth and Honesty make trial,
And not be Villains thought, for being Loyal.
When shall we see an Audience in the Pit,
Not swayed by Factions, that will silent sit,
And friends to the Poet, calmly judge his Wit?
Or when a Noble, Royal Party view,
That dare to mighty Caesar give his due,
Spite of the Numerous, Buzzing, Crop-ear'd Crew?
When these things happen, we shall calm our fears;
But no such blessing in these times appears.
Distraction rages now, and the frantic Town,
Plagued with Sham-plots, a very Bedlam's grown.
Like Lunaticks ye roar and range about;
Frame Plots, then crack your brains to find 'em out;
Like Oliver's Porter, but not so devout.
Our City-friends too, that over Coffee droop,
For fear the French should come and eat 'em up.
Brumicham-Protestants, that rail and grieve ye,
With names of Masquerader and Tantivy:
That, Plagued with natural and subtle fears,
Think all the Loyal Party Dogs and Bears,
Run mad with Pious Zeal for the good of the Nation,
And how to fix a godly Reformation.
Since then from these he never can hope success,
To you the Impartial Judges of Wits Case,
The Poet humbly offers his Address.
With you his fate's secure, and doubly blessed;
Apollo's Synod all; and for the rest,
That he shall know both Parties, now he Glories;
By Hisses the Whiggs, and by their Claps the Tories.

Dramatis Personae.
Wilding. -- A Loyal and Witty Gentleman, only addicted to rail against Women.
BY Mr. Clark. Townly. -- A Modish inconstant young fellow, in Love with, and
beloved by all Women, and courts all alike. BY Mr. Goodman. Sir Wall. Wiseacre.
-- An Opinionated Fool and Cuckold: A Lancashire-Knight, and in Love with
Livia. BY Mr. Jermaine. Capt. Porpuss. -- A blunt Tarpawlin, Captain, and one
that uses his Sea-phrases and terms upon all occasions. BY Mr. Griffin. Sir
Barn. Whigg. -- A Phanatical Rascal, one of Oliver's Knights; one that always
pretends to fear a change of Government yet does his best to cause one. BY Mr.
Powell. Benedick. -- An Intriguer, and Friend to Wilding. BY Mr. Perin. Swift.
-- Servant to Wilding. BY Mr. Cosh.
WOMEN.
Gratiana. -- Witty and proud, and one that values her self by railing against
men. BY Mrs. Corbet. Livia. -- Wife to Porpuss, cunning and wanton, and in love
with Townly. BY Mrs. Cook. Millicent. -- Wife to Sir Walter, in Love also with
Townly. BY Mrs. Moyle. Winifrid. -- A young Welsh Jilt. BY Mrs. Percival.
Waiters, Men and Women, Musicians, Officers and Attendants.
SCENE LONDON. Sir Barnaby Whigg.
ACT. I.
SCENE I.
Wilding, Captain Porpuss, Benedick, Townly, Gratiana, Millicent, Livia,
Winiford just ending a Dance. A Table, Bottles and Cards ready. Wilding. SO,
Madam, now the course is finished, and your squeaking Instruments are silent; I
hope a man may have the privilege to retire and fan himself a little. To
Gratiana.


Gratiana. Yes, and I believe without danger of a second engagement, unless you
could promise more skill than you have shown hitherto.


Bened. Nay Tom, for shame desert not so beautiful a Partner so soon.


Wild. Not Desert her! Gad he that catches me cutting a Caper again, I Will give
him leave to cut a leg off, that I may have a maim to remember my folly by.

The Captain is courting Winifrid all this while.
Gra. If you were to be maimed for every folly you committed, I question
whether you could find your fellow Cripple in any Hospital in Town.


Bened. So, there is one full hit, pray Heaven, my friend have skill enough to
defend himself.


Millic. Perhaps, Madam, Mr. Wilding (like an excellent Singer) thinks it is
becoming to undervalue his perfection: Pray, Sir, be real: Do you not love
Dancing?

Townly is Courting Livia this while.
Wild. Love it! oh extremely in a cold frosty morning, when a man has been at a
true Debauch the night before: I hold it to be the only necessary Diversion:
Dancing, Madam! why it is the very glowing-brand of Luxury that kindles the
temperate blood, heats and fires us till we are fit for the Modish business
'twas designed for: Then think not but I dote on it most violently.


Bened. Pox on him, now shall we have no more Dancing to night.


Millic. We Women find it otherwise; therefore value little what you think of
it.


Gra. Think of it! why, Madam, to think, is contrary to those of his
Complexion: I dare swear for the Gentleman, he seldom thinks of any thing,
unless it be how to excuse his being second in a Duel. Come, prithee come away,
he is pumping for a Repartee I warrant: but it shall not do Sir.


Bened. Ha, ha, ha; Why how now friend?


Wild. A commixture of pride, wantonness, and affectation handsomely bound up
together: Prithee what is she?


Bened. You shall know that anon: but see! yonder is Jack Townly courting the
Captain's Lady, and the Old Tar-pawling, I think, is making tenders to my
little Welsh Mistress.


Wild. The Autumn of Lust, and the blooming spring of Folly met in despite of
nature.


Bened. In despite of it indeed; but the comfort is, it cannot last long.


Wild. No, it is only superficial, and extends to thought, foppery in
expression; but no further: An old man's Love is like Snow in Summer, always
unnatural; and no sooner is, but it is not; the frigid nature of the one, not
agreeing with the kindly warmth of to'ther.


Capt. Once! I tell thee I do love thee: To Winifrid. by Mars I do; Prithee
furl thy Sails and let me view thee a little; I have no fine phrases, but by
Boreas I affect thee heartily, thy face, thy leg, thy shape, thy every thing:
When will thou come to the Tower, and let me salute thee with the great Guns --
hah? Bounce, bounce, bounce, thou shall have Royal sport my Girl.


Winif. I pray you Captains, of all Loves, no more of these creat 'ordes and
noises; for look you, her has put a poor weak prains, and never apide creat
Cuns, nor Pounce, pounce, pounce, her cannot apide pounces, look you.


Capt. Cannot her apide pounces! why her sall have Musicks, and Junkits, and
Dances then, if her cannot apide pounces: the Kettle-Drums and Trumpets shall
Divert thee, my little Juno: the Eagle shall clap her Wings in sign of joy, and
the Royal Lion shall Roar thee welcome.


Winif. Pless us awl, are you mads? if her hears Lions, her is dead: the ferq
and pictures of Lions makes her swoon'd, her eyes close, and her breath Ferk,
ferk, ferk, in her pelly with fits of Mothers and Fathers: I believe in my
Conscience, look you, the Captain's is distractious: A Lions! pless us awl, her
cannot apide the name on it.


Capt. Cads plut, her cannot abide nothing, I think: Put does her preaths and
her pelly's Ferk, ferk, ferk so much, does her say?


Winif. Pish, this is Simplicity's, look you, and Impertinencies. I pray you
forbear, Captains.


Capt. Diddle, Diddle, Diddle, she has a Tongue as glib as an Eel; but no
matter, she is Amsterdam built, and by Mars I love her for her Dutch Bottom.


Bened. Look! he has frighted her away already: I Will warrant there has bin an
excellent Harangue betwixt 'em.


Wild. Blunt to some purpose, without doubt; but I believe very savoury, and
full of good meaning.


Enter Sir Walter with Bottles in his hands, and a Girdle hung round with
Bottles. The Ladies go to a Table as designing to play at Cards, only Livia
stays with Townly. Sir Walt. Hey scowr, scowr my lads, and now for a
Health-Royal; so here my Jolly hearts, Wat is returned in triumph; view me
round boys, honest Watt has been scowring for you: Watt must have a
Health-Royal ere we part, faith: Hey, bring a Dozen of Glasses there.


Wild. Well, said Sir Walter Wiseacre, gad we thought you had left us.


Sir Walt. Left thee! what before thou were Drunk, Bully-Rock? Prithee don't
think me such an unnatural Rogue to leave thee in a sneaking, sober condition:
So, ho! where is this fellow? I was delayed below by a Damned Rascal the Clerk
of the Parish that came to me, Sir, for Church-duties; and I think I have paid
him, for I took him into the Cellar, Drunk six pint Bumpers, a Health-Royal to
him, tript up his heels with bonny Puntack, and left the Rogue singing Psalms
under a Pipe of Malaga.


Wild. Why God-a-mercy Clerk, y' says, and yet, Sir Walter, I see you are
fresh still?


Sir Walt. Fresh! not concerned I: fresh as the morning, and as gay as the
spring; ah! I can Drink like a fish man, and hold like a Kilderkin: but, come
my lads, choose, choose -- what Wine you like? this is Champaign, and this is
Burgundy, this Obrion, this Puntack; and here is a deer Bottle of Cohorse that
exceeds all.

Turns round.
Bened. There Is a fine name now to put off palled Claret, and cheat the subject
with.


Capt. Cohorse! a Pox of these barbarous notions, why it is all but Claret
still, and only the Vintners cheat to extort a shilling in a Pottle upon
account of the Prohibition.


Sir Walt. Prohibition! peace old Water Rat; peace I say, thou can not fathom
my depth old Plummet; for you must know, Sir, that I deal with an honest, civil
person, and great friend of the Governors of -- no matter where: Well, Sir, he
upon occasion has sore eyes: Wines come Incognito; my friend breaks the Law,
cheats the King, steals Custom, sells me a lumping penniworth; and, prithee,
what signifies the Prohibition? but come, every one his Bottle, and a
Health-Royal I must make you all Drunk: you know my way.


Bened. It Is not convenient to begin a match of Drinking in the Ladies company,
Sir Walter?


Sir Walt. Gad that is true, especially before my Mistress too; Come then, let us
drink a civil glass, and retire to the next Room. Captain Porpuss, here old
Sponge, thou art a man of a sound brain; Come, here is your Ladies Health.


Capt. Not mine, good Sir Knight; begin your own Ladies, we have not had that
to night.


Sir Walt. My Wives, Sir I Would have you know I Will have no such plebeian conjugal
Customs in my house; besides 'twill pall the Wine, and give an unsavory relish
to my mouth all the night after.


Mill. The pallat that is always out of taste, has no occasion to be made more
insipid; and your customs, Sir (like your Counsel) are often too shallow to be
very taking.


Sir Walt. Here, here, take this Bumper; prithee let me make thee Drunk, that I
may once see thee in a good humor; ah that she were gone once, that I might be
Jocose, and break a Jest or two with my deer Mistress there. Pointing to Livia,
whom Townly is talking with.


Capt. Your Servant Sir, I Will have no whispering here by Mars; I shall lay you
short by the Mizzen, if you think to grapple my Pinnace: therefore, hands off,
this, Sir, is my Wife, and this is my Sword; my name is Captain Porpuss, I
drink Claret, and therefore should Dispute as well as she, Sir: Come, state
your Question.


Town. What question, Sir? -- Plague of his Interruption. Aside.


Capt. What question, Sir? why a Mathematical question, terms of Navigation,
Card, Compass, Lading, any thing; Come, what a Devil have you seen of the
World, Sir? I have stood and faced both frigid and torrid Zones, plough'd up
the Bosphorus like a Molehill, kindled a Torch in the Sun, shot both the Gulfs
of Venice and Florida, and seen the Navel of the World, you Scoundrel.

Sir Walter starts.
Townly. Ha, ha, ha, a pleasant humor, y' faith.


Sir Walt. Prithee Captain leave this blustering: Gad thou have got so many
Damned, cramp, hard Sea-words, they are enough to fright an honest Country
Gentleman out of the Company.


Millic. Madam we want ye to make one at Looe.

They sit down to play.
Sir Walt. A Tarpawlin, a rude Sea-fellow, you must not mind him man; but, dear
Jack, do thou remember what I told thee to day concerning my Wife?


Townly. Very well Sir; but faith I wish you would choose some other man, for my
modesty is always so offenfive if I am to speak to a Woman.


Sir Walt. Modesty! alas poor fellow: I Will tell thee what I Will do then, I Will
make thee Drunk; prithee let me, I love it, I delight in it man: I make a dozen
or two Drunk every day; get but Drunk, and then Boy, never doubt thy
confidence; for a Collegian once intoxicated, is the most impudent creature
that ever I met with.


Townly. And are not you then guilty of a great Imprudence to trust me with
your Wife?


Sir Walt. Not at all man, not a Jot; for though to me she be palled, nay to my
grief a Wife all over; yet, Pox on it, I know she is honest, for she is a great
Churchwoman.


Townly. A Churchwoman!


Sir Walt. Ay.


Townly. Never the honester for that, to my knowledge.


Sir Want. Alas, poor soul, she prays continually; and as for her Virtue, she
keeps that secure, close shut up in a Purse; the great Devil, her pride,
pulling at one string, and Doctor Tickle-text the to'ther.


Townly. Well, Sir, you may command my service in any thing. Was ever such a
Coxcomb?


Sir Walt. Peace, not a word more, we are observed. -- Come, a Song there: What
say thou, Captain? Do love a Song?


Capt. Ay, a Battle, a Siege, a Storm, or so: Sing a Song that has some sense
in it, and perhaps I may condescend to bear a Bob my self.


Bened. Nay, then we shall have charming-stuff.


Capt. We have not had a good bold well-season'd Song, as Gad save me, since
Old Broom died: 'Woon's we can get nothing nowadays but Phillis and Chloris,
and Celia, and the 'tother Whore in the Strand, that was kept by 'tother Fop,
so long, till at last she was forced to keep him, Gads bud: Why now a Storm, a
Sea Fight, or such a Song would delight a man. -- Sbud there is both Body and
Soul in it; and a Pox on Phillis and Chloris, they were both Strumpets, I
warrant.


Wild. Friend farewell, my patience is outworn, and I must begone, I am like a
fish out of the water; methinks I gasp for breath, and grow sick by being so
long out of my Element.


Bened. Nay, faith, you must not stir without me.


Capt. I shall never forget a frolic we had about Twelve years ago: I was then
Captain of the Success, Heaven bless her, she was a brave Ship: ah how she
would scud in the Winds Eye, and have made the Sea foam again after a
Broadside: by Mars I never think of her loss, but the pearly Dew falls from my
Eyes.


Townly. Ha, ha, this is ridiculous enough.


Capt. To think what a Fighter she was; how she would spoom along; topsails a
trip; and then the best Saylor in the World: it is a strange thing, Gentlemen, I
have known that Ship sail tightly when she has had above Forty Culvering
Bullets in her; all shot through betwixt Wind and Water.


Wild. How, how Sir! betwixt Wind and Water?


Capt. All betwixt Wind and Water, as Gad save me: Ah you are Pilchers to me in
Sea-affairs: Well, she was riding at Soll-Bay, 'twas just before the sight
there (wherein I did such notable service); I had then a Lieutenant aboard, a
little Dapper fellow, but as stout as Hercules; and when we met a nights in the
great Cabin over a Jolly bowl of Punch, the Rogue would sing us the finest
Sea-Songs, and so Roar 'em out: I think I Have a fellow can remember one of them.
Sing sirrah.


SONG. A STORM.
BLow Boreas, blow, and let thy surly Winds
Make the Billows foam and roar:
Thou can no Terror breed in Valiant minds,
But spite of thee we'll live and find the shore:
Then cheer my heart, and be not awed,
But keep the Gun-Room clear,
Though Hell's broke loose, and the Devils roar abroad;
Whilst we have Sea-room here boys, never fear:
Hey, how she tosses up, how far!
The mounting Topmast touched a Star:
The Meteors blazed as through the Clouds we came,
And Salamander-like we live in Flame.
But now we sink, now, now we go
Down to the deepest shades below.
Alas! where are we now? who, who can tell,
Sure it is the lowest Room of Hell,
Or where the Sea-gods dwell?
With them we will live, with them we will live and reign;
With them we will laugh and sing, and drink amain:
But see we mount, see, see we rise again.
Though flashes of lightning and tempests of rain
Do fiercely comend which shall conquer the Main;
Though the Captain does swear, instead of a Prayer,
And the Sea is all fired by the Demons of the Air:
We Will drink and defy, the mad spirits that fly,
From the deep to the sky,
And sing whilst the Thunder does bellow;
For Fate still will have a kind fate for the brave,
And nere make his grave of a salt water Wave;
To drown, drown, never to drown;
No, never to drown a good fellow.

There now! there is life, there is soul, there is sense: as I Am a living man,
Gentlemen, the Rogue fox'd me three times, one after another, only by singing
this Song.


Gra. Now, Madam, your Ladyship owes me fifteen.

The Ladies are all this while at the Table playing at Cards.
Livia. But five indeed, Madam, your Ladyship was Loo'd last Deal upon my Blaze.


Gra. I beg your pardon, Madam, 'twas my Cozen here.


Winif. Upon my Souls, look you, her is not Loo'd; her had the good Kings
guarded, and won two or three tricks indeed.


Gra. Nay, prithee do not wrangle, I swear thou art the worst player at Cards.


Winif. Heaven deliver my Souls! is her distractious? was not her flushes of
Clubs upon her last Deal? besides a Mournivals of Queens, and another of
Knaves, for thirty Counters, besides the fifteen her Ladyship owed her? What
does her Ladyship think her will lose thirty Counters, look you?


Millic. By no means -- but pray let us give over now, for my part I am tired.


Wild. And I faith.


Millic. Come Ladies, there is very good Wall fruit in the Garden, pray let us
take a turn or two.

Exeunt all but Wilding, Sir Walter Benedick.
Sir Walt. Now follow her Jack now; dear Jack, this is a rare opportunity.


Wild. This is an odd humor, faith, what entreat Townly to follow his Wife?


Bened. There is something more in it than I understand, but the fool is leaky
as a Sieve; I am sure he can keep no secrets, we shall know all.


Sir Walt. Come, my hearts, 'tother dozen Bottles, and then we shall be fit for
the business of the night; Pox on it, it is so long since I was Drunk, that I Am
as dull as a Country Student, poring upon Littleton; Hey boy, bring the Wine
there.


Wild. Why you have spoiled the Drinking-match, Sir Walter, by letting Jack
Townly go.


Bened. Ay, he is so true a Son of Bacchus, he will do every one Reason, Gad I Will
go fetch him back.


Sir Walt. Gad but you shall not though, by your favor, for to my knowledge
he is busy; he is engaged with my Wife.


Wild. Engaged with her! what a Devil does the fool mean?


Bened. What! some Plot or other now I warrant: here is some Intrigue going
forward, in which he is to be Agent: What an unnatural Rogue art thou to keep
this from thy friends? Come, come, Discover.


Sir Walt. Why then, the truth is, I have an excellent design on foot, but it is
impossible you should fathom any thing of it, unless you were better acquainted
with with my humors.


Wild. Humors! why, prithee, what are thy Humors?


Sir Walt. Why, you must know, Sir, that I am famous over the Town for two
topping humors: look you; for making people Drunk, that is one; and making
Cuckolds, that is another.


Wild. Two very pretty topping humors, faith.


Sir Walt. You know it is fashionable for a man to be famous for something;
besides, I have the best Diversion in the world by it, for they reach to all
qualities and constitutions; for if I meet with a young modish Fop, there I
please one of my humors, and make him Drunk: If with a sober, grave,
judicious, married Coxcomb, then I please my 'tother humor.


Bened. And lie with his Wife? --


Sir Walt. I do so; I do y' faith, is it not fine? this last has been my humor
many years.


Wild. If I had a mortal aversion to Women, I could never think 'em so
notorious to consent to this.


Bened. Pox, a lye's as natural to him as Nonsense.


Sir Walt. Come, y' are both my friends, and I think I may trust you with my
secret: know then, that at this instant I have a violent passion for a Lady,
another man's wife.


Bened. So, I knew we should have it. Aside.


Sir Walt. But as the Devil would have it, Jealousy, that Canker of Wedlock,
that Aquafortis of Matrimony, that eats and eats so damnably, till it has
devoured all the love betwixt man and wife; incites, Sir, my plaguey Spouse just
in the nick to interpose betwixt me and my design.


Wild. Gad that was very unlucky indeed, especially in such a juncture.


Sir Walt. Juncture! -- nay we had joined, and joined again long before this, if
it had not bin for that man: Now, Sir, I had no way to help my self, but by
having Recourse to my cunning; and, by the way, let me tell you, Gentlemen, I
do positively believe I am the most cunning person that ever breathed: -- I
should have made a swinging Politician if I had but a Memory.


Wild. Your large ear and wry nose always signify thought, Sir Walter.


Sir Walt. For thinks I to my self, Love will root out love, and Company often
diverts Jealousy; and if I could oblige some young and honest friend, who by
pretending love to her, would amuse her a little; I might prosperously carry on
my Intrigue abroad, and she be diverted, and rest very well satisfied at home.


Wild. So that you would expose your own Wife to the Addresses of some young
Gallant, that you your self might have liberty to Debauch another man's?


Sir Walt. Ay I would so; Is It not a good one? and may I never more warm me by
those fair eyes I so adore, if this spring clearly from my own natural wit, my
own invention by this light? Is It not an odd method?


Wild. Ay, the Devil take me, is it as ever I heard of.


Sir Walt. Well, after a great deal of consultation whom to trust in so weighty
a business, I pitched upon Townly, but with a great deal of caution first; for,
Jack (says I) have a great care Jack of handling Cases about my Wife that does
not concern you: -- Yes, says Jack, demurely: (you know his way). And again,
said I, Jack be sure that you are not too forward in pressing my Wives
constitution beyond her fidelity; no, says Jack, again with a great deal of
integrity, before Gad.


Wild. Is Townly a modest fellow, or does he only wheedle this fool?


Bened. Modest! Pox on him, I knew a Surgeon that cured him of two Claps when
he was at Cambridge.

Gratiana and Livia return, and walk over the Stage.
Sir Walt. Uds so, here are the Ladies! I must wait on 'em home; Dear souls,
you must pardon me, and have a little patience, I must be civil to the Ladies:
he little thinks the Captain's Lady here is the Person I adore so much. Aside.


Wild. Sir, I have a Coach at the door, and shall need no Ceremony.


Sir Walt. Nay you shall be both Drunk long enough before night, I warrant you:
you know my humor, Ha, ha.

Exit with Ladies.
Sir Walt. Ay, enough of it to know thee for a damned Coxcomb.


Wild. And Cuckhold; I hope by this time, or Townly's an Eunuch.


Bened. The Rogue is as conceited as a Dancing Master; and though he be the
Vulcan of sense, yet thinks himself the Apollo of it.


Wild. I have ever observed, it is as impossible for an affected person to be a
man of wit, as for a mercenary Bawd to turn honest.


Bened. Or a good Poet to be Religious.


Wild. It Is so; but, prithee, what is that prink'd-up creature that went out
with Livia just now?


Bened. Oh I was about to tell thee before; She Is my Lord Lofty's Daughter, a
rich Heiress, Tom, and a vast fortune, and one that fantastically loves to rail
at men, as much as thou do at women: you two would make an excellent match;
faith I Would have thee go and court her.


Wild. I would, if I thought my words could have influence enough upon her to
make her hate her self.


Bened. What a strange humor thou art of; because one woman was false and
jilted thee, is it infallible that the whole Sex are so?


Wild. The whole Sex, by Heaven (if you love 'em): besides, the passion it self
is foolish and unmanly: Love is the sickness of the mind; a man has his Ague
and Fever both at once, and often despairs of remedy for either.


Bened. Thus like a sick man you think no Diet good, because your Stomach's
naught: Well, I thank my Stars, the constitution differs with me; I can
distinguish the great blessing of man's life, and in a pious zeal thank
Providence for its bounty. Beautiful Women were ever my Tutelar and Guardian
Angels, that give me an assurance of being ever happy in this world, and
immortal in the other.


Wild. A Coxcomb in the other.


Bened. Prithee no more of this; a young brisk fellow, newly an Heir too, and
Possessor of a plentiful Estate, whose good old Father was so gratefully civil,
to dye orderly, and in good time, that thou might inherit, to stand at
defiance with the only blessing of life, Women: I am ashamed of thee.


Wild. 'Twould be more advantage to thee to be ashamed of thy Mistress; for if
thou art not jilted, I am mistaken in her; She Will show thee a Welsh trick
sometime or other.


Bened. Oh, I Will venture that: hark 'e, will thou go with me, and speak to this
Lady?


Wild. She that went hence now.


Bened. Ay, I Would have thee rally her a little.


Wild. Well Sir, I Will give her a hearing, if she be not too impertinent.


Bened. Come on then, I Will introduce thee.


Enter Swift. Wild. How now! what noise is that below, sirrah?


Swift. Sir Barnaby Whigg, Sir, has been railing against his Nephew, Sir
Walter, for having never a Musket in's house.


Bened. Whigg is his name? Oh, I believe I know him, a huge fat fellow, one of
Oliver's Knights.


Wild. The same, and the most busy, seditious Coxcomb alive, one that will be
sure to Bet when he sees the best Trump, but ever shuffle and cheat, if fortune
be against him.


Bened. In all turns of State, change his Opinion as easily as his Coat, and is
ever zealous in Voting for that party that is most Powerful.


Wild. They of his Tribe say, theirs is the Church-Militant; but I say Money is
both their God and King, and the greatest Zealot amongst them for the sake of
the Popes Golden Slipper, shall not only kiss his Toe, but eat it, as the story
goes of the hungry Spaniel.


Bened. If I mistake not, this fellow values himself extremely by playing on
the Music.


Wild. Oh yes, but the Town of late has used him so unkindly, that he has left
it off, and now sets up for a grand Politician.


Enter Sir Barnaby Whigg. Sir Barnab. A care^ss Villain -- he shall not own the
blood of the Whiggs that neglects his Country thus: -- never a Musket a Rogue
-- in this Popish Age too, and but one Sword, na^, and in a family of sixteen
People uprising and down-lying -- a Dog -- a Rascal -- but one Sword?


Wild. Now Sir Barnaby, pray why this anger?


Sir Barn. There Is reason for it, Sir, as times go: how does your good Father,
or rather your good Mother, Mr. Wilding? her zeal did once fructify and
increase, to my knowledge: Come, she was a good Woman -- a Son of a Whore, never
a Dagger neither, nor a Case-knife sharp at end -- nor nothing -- not so much
as a Penknife?


Bened. You seem disturbed, Sir, pray what news abroad?


Sir Barn. Only we are lost, undone; that is all Sir; and (like faggots) the
bands of zeal being broken, must fall hudling to destruction -- a Pox upon him,
never a Musket?


Wild. How, to Destruction, Sir!


Sir Barn. Come, come, things go ill, Mr. Wilding, things go ill; you have not
Bulk enough to bear State-matters, or else I could tell you in your ear that --
how do you rate this Beaver, good Mr. -- a --?


Wild. At a friends acceptance, Sir: have you a mind to it?


Sir Barn. No, no, not I by no means, not I: the Hat's well made though: I knew
your Father long ago, Mr. Wilding; he was always a free, generous soul indeed
-- but (betwixt you and I) would not be ruled: he would still be on the wrong
side: Come, come, he loved the King too well; had he not loved the King, he had
been a brave fellow.


Bened. Otherwise called a Rascal.


Sir Barn. Come Sir, you are all misled, and will be all pickled ere long; I
can tell you, that if our soul-saving Party do not settle the Nation, I say
'twill track, 'twill unhinge -- whip you 're gen, old Antichrist will have your
Lands and Bodies, and the Devil your Souls.


Wild. Your soul, I hope, will be in no great danger however, Sir.


Sir Barn. No, not mine, I never carry mine about me: mine is always in the
heart of the City -- in Lumbard street.


Bened. The Rogue has once in his life spoke truth.


Wild. Incorrigible Villain! but I have made an Observation, That Fanaticism
Intoxicates like Wine, and has much the same effects: For as a true Drunkard
cannot keep a secret, but must make some discovery, so your true Presbyter
never talks of State Affairs without a Tang of Treason.


Sir Barn. I was yesterday with an Astrologer, a learned man, and one of our
Tribe, and (Lord bless us) he tells me we shall have a Famine.


Bened. A Famine! why, that is worse to you than Damnation.


Sir Barn. It Is so, as Gad save me, I swoon'd away twice at the very
apprehension on it; and had not a Suppose brought me some comfort, on my
Conscience, had dyed: A Famine! Mercy on us; Come War, Pestilence, Fire, Sword,
any thing but that; the Gut-Plague is sure more terrible than all those of
Egypt.


Bened. This Epicure I see never considers life any further than the pleasure
of eating and drinking.


Sir Barn. Were matters carried well, we should have none of this; no Meteors,
nor Comets, nor Pestilences, were not our sins Contagious; were faith and
frugallity among us, no hungry Tuscany-Stars would threaten neither: There Is an
Old saying, The Devil promises like a Merchant-man, but performs like a Man of
War: 'Twas not so in the blessed year of 48, to my knowledge; I say no more --
but -- would I were at the Helm.


Wild. So, Treason again! you at the Helm! yes, of a Ship I would thou were, to
be thrown off, and plunged to the bottom for a Mutinous Traitor.


Sir Barn. Ha -- what the loud Traitor to a man of my kidney? a Portly, Jolly,
Fat man; a man of Faith and Belly: Away fool, it is your lean, your scraggy
fellows that Plot mischief; if the Pope himself had been a fat fellow, he had
been honest.


Bened. Yes, as your Noble Ancestors the Sussex Whiggs were, or that Cursed
Crew your Brethren of the Amsterdam-house, that cool their Coffee with the
Breath of Rebellion, and hourly damn themselves by Whispering Treason.


Wild. Come, Sirs, here is the Kings Health: Long live his Sacred Majesty: kneel
down, and cast your Bonnet.


Sir Barn. Not I Sir, you must spare me: I never kneel (not I) but to pray:
besides, I can drink no Healths, I am in a Milk-Dyet for the Scurvy.


Wild. For the Pox I believe; Come Sir, it must be done, therefore uncover, and
kneel.


Sir Barn. Sir, we never uncover, it is not our method; we never use any
Ceremony: with my Hat on -- Let him live -- But --


Bened. Let him live -- But -- these are rare Rascals.


Wild. A word more of Refusal, and my Sword shall pare that body of thine into
shape.


Sir Barn. Well Sir, I submit: But, Sir, tell not me: I understand my self:
Moles (though blind) can hear: let him live; but I wish for the Nations sake --
I wish my Council. --


Wild. What! more muttering of Treason? your Council?


Sir Barn. Well, I acquiesce: Drinks. I am silent: you will awake when the
Sword's at your throats; you will I say, and repent this profane drinking of
Healths; and so farewell to you.

Exit Sir Barnaby Whigg.
Wild. Ha, ha; I knew there was no way to silence him but this: but see! Enter
Townly and Millicent. here is Jack Townly coming with Sir Walter's Wife: Come,
faith it is uncivil to hinder an Intrigue; prithee let us go.


Bened. It Is almost time now to visit the Lady Lofty: I long to see you two rail
a Courtship out.


Wild. I Will be as good as my word, faith.

Exeunt.
Townly. The Captain's Lady say you, Madam?


Millic. She Sir, the beautiful Livia.


Townly. What! in love with me?


Millic. I know not what you call in love; but, to my knowledge, she was lavish
in her Commendations of you just now in the Garden; sighed and looked pale if
your name were mentioned: and these are signs of something extraordinary.


Townly. Kind Chance: She Is the person I love more than Health: But I must sift
her further, this may be a trick. Aside.

To Millicent. It Is a blessing, Madam, I am not ambitious of, since the charms
of your Wit, Beauty, and Conversation, are to me all that can be extraordinary.


Millic. Mine! Sir, you have but an ill stomach if you can subsist with the
thin dyer I can afford you: I am of a Volatile temper, and only admit of this
Gallantry of yours for the sake of the mirth it brings with it: but the
Captain's Lady has a passion for you, languishes, loves you; therefore if you
would share in my applause, go instantly, and Address to her: A young Gallant
should (like a Towering Falcon) fly at all games: I hate a dull, sneaking,
constant, tiresome fellow, that pins himself to one Ladies train, and will
spend 14 long hours in praising the Dew on her under-lip, or the color of her
shoostrings, whilst she is all the while cursing her company, and heartily
wishes him hanged.


Townly. What a Devil does she mean by this? God's Death I was never so puzzled in
my life. Aside.


Millic. In a word Sir; if you would purchase my good opinion, go and court
this Lady: Come, I command you to do it: perhaps I have some reason for it.


Townly. Nay, you know, Madam, I want power to deny any Commands from you: Let
me consider a little.


Millic. So, it begins to take, and by this means I shall get my Husband a
Rival, too handsome, not to be beloved as well as he. Whether Livia loves
Townly, or no, I know not: Commend him she did, and that may in time induce
Love. -- Well Sir, have you thought?


Townly. I have, Madam, and for your sake will Address to her: I will storm her
ears with a peal of Rhetoric: accost her with a number of whining, amorous
phrases.


Millic. And all lies: Well Sir, she is now at the Lady Lofty's: go, and get
your Coach ready, and about half an hour hence I Will meet you there.

Exit Millicent.
Townly. Of all Intrigues that ever I knew, this is the most quaint and
pleasant: Here of one side is a fantastic husband, that courts me to court his
wife: On the other side, his wife commands me to address to another Lady, and
(luckily) to the very person I love equal to my soul: Gad I think I Am a happy
fellow: what she designs by engaging me thus, I know not, but am resolved to
proceed for the sweet sake of variety. One, I am informed, loves me, and
therefore must be courted; and the other is not inexorable, but may be courted.

And where two Beauty's in compliance move,
The Devil's in that man that pines for Love.
Exit.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir Walter, Gratiana and Livia. Great. SIR, I am now so happy to tell ye
your trouble is at an end; I am at home. --


Sir Walt. Would my wits were at home too, that I might make a decent repartee
-- your Servant, Madam, 't no trouble.


Livia. Your Ladyship has a very, ^etty apartment here, Madam.


Great. Small, but convenient, yet shall henceforth have a greater share in my
Esteem, because you like it, Madam.


Sir Walt. A Plaguey sharp-witted creature, this, Gad, I Am almost afraid to
speak to her, she always runs one down so confoundedly.


Livia. Your Ladyship does me too much honor.


Sir Walt. For my part, I hate a Lodging next the street; the Coacheskeeps such
a perpetual Rattling, one had as good live in a Mill.


Great. I think these are private enough, Sir.


Sir Walt. Private as Virgins thoughts, Madam. -- Ah, this would be a rare
place for my humor.


Great. What Is that, Sir, to game in?


Sir Walt. No, to be Drunk in, Madam; that is my humor; it is the Talent of all
the Wiseacres; our family has been famous for it above this Five hundred years.


Great. I think you give a bottle, Sir, for the Crest of your Coat.


Sir Walt. No, Madam, we give no Bottles, we drink off all the Bottles -- we
give the Cap of Fortune for our Crest.


Great. Otherwise called the Fools Cap. -- Aside.


Sir Walt. Sir Jollynose Wiseacre, my Great Grandfather, Madam, was the first
man that bore it; and my Father Sir Toby Wiseacre being a Favorite at Court,
got it adorned with three Golden Bells in humor and imitation of the City-Cap
of Maintenance.


Great. How I hate this Fop, that has nothing but dull Repartee, and vented in
defiance of Wit and good Language. Madam, when the Gentleman's story is ended,
I shall expect you in the Garden.

Exit Great.
Sir Walt. What a whimsical creature is this -- She Is never two minutes in a
humor.


Livia. She Is always uneasy, Sir, in men's company.


Sir Walt. What, not love a man! Alas poor Animal, she is miserable enough,
faith -- Not love a man! why she loses the only blessing of her Creation.


Livia. Rather say she reaps the only blessing, for Love in this age is as much
sophisticated as Wine, and I think has as malignant effects.


Sir Walt. Madam, the Wine I drink your Health in, is always unsophisticated,
and so is the Love I bear you; I am compounded, Madam, of nothing but Love and
Wine; my heart is a mere Bunch of Grapes, from whence you may press the first
running, luscious Juice, together with the true spirit of affection unpall'd,
or uncorrupted.


Livia. There is nothing more corrupted than the love that Wine creates;
therefore it is impossible you should love well, that are so grand a professor
in drinking.


Sir Walt. Oh the better for it, for you must know, Madam, I Am a sneaking dog
when I Am sober -- but I make Love like a Turk when I Am drunk.


Livia. Like a Turk indeed, for nothing but a Seraglio of women can then serve
your turn; and if I am not mistaken, your Lady has Jealousy enough to resent
such actions.


Sir Walt. Nay, Gad, a Country-Copes, that has married a Player, cannot be more
jealous; that is the truth on it: but I care not this for it; I laugh at it,
faith, and that so mads her: besides, I have now laid a snare for her: I set
Jack Townly to court her, that she may have the less leisure to disturb my
passion for you: Did you praise him to her this afternoon, as I desired you,
Madam?


Livia. Extremely Sir, and left 'um alone in her Closet; Ha, see yonder they
come.


Sir Walt. Ay, it is so, I see the Rogue Townly follows my instructions: Well,
adieu dear Madam, she must not see us together; what, so familiar already --
Gad my design goes on rarely.

Exit.
Livia. Though the Love I had for this fool is vanished, yet I am resolved to
comply with him a little, if it be only to revenge my self on his Wife for
being jealous of me: here she comes.


Enter Townly and Millicent. Mill. Always thus retired, Madam, and melancholy;
sure this solitude must needs be prejudicial to your health; nay, and not only
to your self, but me, and all your friends, that lose the pleasure of your
company: Come, I have engaged Mr. Townly here to wait on ye, handsome Mr.
Townly: one I assure you, that is the most agreeable, most obliging, and best
company of any man in Town.


Townly. Your Servant, Madam, I hope your Ladyship will prove this to her, for
my part I am dumb.


Livia. I know the Gentleman too well, Madam, to be ignorant of his
perfections; I know he discourses Elegantly, Dances finely; then his carriage
is easy and courtly, besides a most excellent quality he has in Singing.


Townly. So, she has found out a quality for me that I never knew in my felf,
faith, that is Singing, for the Devil of any thing I can sing but the Ballad of
John Dory: and oh the wretched damned Sham-plot, etc.


Mill. Pray observe, Madam, what a delicate shape he has; what an attractive
languishing; and then the prettiest leg and foot -- O Venus -- but it is in vain
for me to praise him. Apart to her.


Livia. It Is as Sir Walter inferred, she does love him; Aside. and then, look
Madam, he has the finest molded face, the most taking features and graces; and
each limb about his person so particularly graceful, that were I a woman of
that brisk, free humor to entertain a Gallant -- sweet Mr. Townly should be
the man I would prefer before the world.


Mill. Her freeness in his Commendations declares her love to him: and thus far
my designs has happy success. Aside.


Townly. Though I was not so happy as to hear the last of your Discourse,
Ladies; yet, faith, I guess 'twas all in praise of me; for it is a vanity
natural to us men, that when any one is commended by the Company, whatever
whisper arises afterward, is imagined to be only a pursuance of the first
applause, and therefore it is requisite I make some return -- Hum -- hum --


Livia. Come Sir, begin, then we will stand ye fairly.


Townly. First for you then, Madam, To Livia. your Eyes are the glittering
Deities that command all hearts -- And your Skin -- smoother than Venus Doves,
and white as Innocence -- And you, Madam, To Millic. have a voice so ravishing
sweet, that Angels peeping down to listen to it, would think the Music of
their spheres a discord, and then each feature has so much of Divinity in it: oh
Heaven! And for your part, Madam, To Livia. nature out did her self when she
framed you, your Face is the Epitome of Elysium, a delicate fore head, high,
smooth, and white; a little straight nose, a breath Rosy and refreshing; a
pretty, ruddy, soft, round, dewy, melting under lip; and such a hand, so white,
so plump, so little, and the fingers so round, long, straight, and small -- d's
death, such a sight has power to make a man of fourscore chatter, and frisk
about the room like an overgrown Monkey.


Mill. and Livia. Ha, ha, ha.


Townly. For your sake, Madam, to Mill. I could sacrifice my own life, and for
you, Madam, to Livia another man's; should you be offended with me, to Mill. I
should hang my self, or stab my self, or poison, or drown my self; and should
you, Madam, to Livia I should hang, stab, poison, and drown my self altogether.


Livia. And she must be a very unreasonable person that expects more: but, Sir,
in return of your Gallantry.


Townly. No returns, I befeech you, Madam; nay, faith, take a little pity on me
now, you see I am out of breath: besides, to deal faithfully with ye, the
weights of my Wits are all run down, and the Clock, by consequence, must awhile
stand still.


Mill. So, -- now they are engaged -- I Will strait away, and cunningly, by some
means or other, inform my husband of her treachery to him, and love to this new
Rival.

Exit.
Livia. It Is a sign you spoke on an unpleasing subject, you else doubtless
could have held out longer.


Townly. Rather, Madam -- the greatness of the Theme disabled me only through a
modest apprehension of my defect in expressions, when they should be so
divinely employed.


Livia. What, is my Lady gone?


Townly. I hope so, faith; she is a very well-bred person, and I see understands
manners: And now, Madam, behold at your feet a man that loves you more than his
immortal part, his soul.


Livia. Nay, if Railery come to love once, the jest is gone.


Townly. My Lady Millicent did me the honor to inform me of some expressions
of yours in favor of me; each syllable of which is engraven in my heart; nay,
the very thought of it has transported me ever since.


Livia. My Lady Millicent inform him -- What should this mean? Commend him,
it is true, I did, but 'twas more on her account than my own; and why she should
let him know it, is to me a wonder.


Townly. Release your Martyr from the Rack, dear Madam, and pronounce him happy.


Livia. Are you really then so miserable a creature as to love me?


Townly. Love ye, Madam, I do most infinitely, but can never be miserable,
because it is impossible you can ever be cruel.


Livia. Do You believe so?


Townly. Ay, and have all the reason in the world for it, faith; you can no more
be unnaturally rigorous to a young Lover, than you can passionately dote upon
an old Husband.


Livia. A very fine, sweet-natur'd opinion you have of me, Sir.


Townly. Gad I think so.


Livia. That to expel all unnatural cruelty, would oblige me to Cuckold my
Husband by the way of Jest.


Townly. No, faith, I meant by the way of Earnest; I hate Jesting mortally in
such cases.


Livia. And are not you a lewd fellow for this -- a damnable lewd fellow? Come,
speak.


Townly. Why, faith, I am so so -- indifferent; we are all mortal, Madam, and
subject to frailties; but I have this comfort, Gad, I sin brave and nobly; and
like a generous Robber, if I do venture damning, it is for a prize of value:
Pox, I hate a sneaking Crime, it gets a man no credit.


Livia. An agreeable fellow this is; and if Millicent had known the real worth
of the Jewel she Ironically commended, I question whether I should have had the
first refusal.


Townly. I wait your doom, Madam, in a cold sweat, Mercy, I beseech ye.


Livia. If I should take you into grace now, and prevent the approaching Ague
and Fever, are you sure you could be most passionately constant.


Townly. Steadfast as a Rock, Madam, fixed firm, not to be moved; I!


Livia. And will you say your Prayers every Morning and Evening, and thank
Heaven for the timely blessing?


Townly. Ay, upon my Soul will I, with more zeal than ever I prayed in my life.


Livia. Well, let me see you in the Park this evening, and then a Mistress, or
no Mistress, a match, or no match; you shall know my mind, mum, -- not a word
-- yours -- bow and make your Exit: very well.

Exit Livia.
Townly. So, I find I must bend my neck to the yoke, if I intend to plough in
the Soil, for she means to use me as the Turkish Princesses do the Bassa's;
first make them their slaves, that they may afterward be fit to be their
husbands: but come what will, Love is my Captain, and I must forward now.


Enter Benedick. Bened. What, Jack, art thou missing when there is such
excellent sport yonder?


Townly. What sport, prithee?


Bened. Betwixt Wilding and my Lady Gratiana; he has so teiz'd her yonder in
the Garden, and there has been such bitter Jests between 'um, that now she has
quitted the place: Hark! I believe here they come; prithee observe 'um a
little, I am now in pursuit of my little Welsh Mistress, or I would keep thee
company.

Exit.
Townly. The Scene must be pleasant, for he rails as much against Women, as the
greatest Men: but I have no time to throw away at present.

Exit.
Enter Gratiana, followed by Wilding. Great. Is there no place free from
impertinence? I Am resolved I Will change my Lodgings to morrow; I Will rather
exclude my self from all society, than be thus tormented.


Wild. Modest sense is ever thus slighted -- it is the noisie follies that are
received, and take with your true women: Nay, there is so much indignity in ye,
that ye are often destitute of common civility; and against all rules of
breeding, shun a person that only makes ye an innocent visit.


Great. A Fop, like a mad dog, should ever be shunned, there is danger and
infection in his company.


Wild. A Fop! I see your Ladyships fancy quickens extremely; I beseech you, how
long have you and your sex professed so much wit.


Great. Ever since you and yours lost it: what think you, Sir? does it not
become me rarely?


Wild. Faith, no, it is not seen enough; you should spot your face with it,
instead of your patches, if you would have it discerned.


Great. I thank ye, and so I should have you and your humourous brother Coxcombs
continually buzzing about me to pick 'um off again.


Wild. If we were upon any Treacherous design, I confess we might have
occasion; for a woman's wit, like a Lawyers, is never considerable, but when
absolutely bent to do mischief.


Great. Then there is some applause due to us however: But I swear it is otherwise
with you men, for you ever commit mischief without wit.


Wild. To our selves indeed, when we can be so weak to admire a piece of white
point, a varnisht skin, and a corrupted heart; that indeed is mischief without
wit.


Great. And yet I have seen a person that has set up for a wit, wear his
stockins out with kneeling, and kiss the dirty Glove of a tawdry creature in
the 18 penny Gallery, though the Owl had a charming wife of his own, whose
fortune a week before purchased him a Barony.


Wild. Nay, it is true, the Devil has power over us sometimes; but if ever I
lose more blood in lo^ing of a woman, than I can get again with drinking a
bottle, I Will give him leave to execute the worst of his malice, and make me the
first example.


Great. A dear blessing to women, for none sure can be sorry when a disease
leaves her.


Wild. Pretty indifference! d's death, do not I know you cannot subsist without
us? you would all dye like cramb'd chickens of the Pip, were it not for us men.


Great. You would not only dye, but be damned, were it not for us women.
Passionately.


Wild. No, we should be as free as Air, our bosoms calm, serene, and
undisturbed, as Infants sleep, or peaceful Innocence. -- Ah, it is the life of
Angels, the only happy estate; a woman, Gad, is the unnecessary Parenthesis of
Nature.


Great. And a man without that woman is a silly Cipher: Mark me, Sir, a Cipher!
that perhaps, when a material figure is added, may make a considerable sum; but
alone is still a cipher, and signifies just nothing.

Exit Smiling.
Wild. So, I have got much by railing -- very much: If I could have been worded
to death, I had, ere this, been past the help of Doctors. -- How now! who have
we here? what, my old Sponge of Rebellion! is he unshakled still?


Enter Sir Barnaby. Sir Barn. Oh, Sir, have I found you -- you are one of those
that believe nothing -- you fear no harm, not you; you are of the Tory-party,
let the people be hanged, you care not -- the Nation is secure, you say: but,
come Sir, I shall undeceive ye -- oh impious Age, I shall convince you, Sir, I
shall.


Wild. Thy Ravens voice perhaps may bode ill fortune, but as yet I know none:
Come, what is the matter now?


Sir Barn. Matter! rare matter -- why, we are ridden, spur-gail'd, Jayl'd; the
Turk, the French, the Moors, nay the very Devil will have us: Oh that ever the
Noble family of the Whiggs should live to see this day -- we are beset, the
Enemy is coming -- and yet we are asleep: we are surrounded, and shall be
confounded: ah (Gads woons) (forgive me for swearing) it was not so in Oliver's
time.


Wild. No, your villainous designs then kept you waking.


Sir Barn. These wicked times keep us more waking; the wise fraternity,
together with my self, as boldly, as pithy and politickly have now given our
advice; but I fear in vain -- no satisfaction, no return; no, though I have
penned it my self, and were I rightly rewarded, deserve --


Wild. To be hanged -- for an audacious and impudent Libeller -- what you,
forsooth, are grieved, and yet not for your self, but for the Nation? why, how
dare thou judge of Government? though of no more brain or birth than the Calf
of the Shambles, yet you would be a Statesman; and if each passage suit not
with your judgment, the times go ill; all is lost, you will mutiny; a sneaking,
stigmatized, accursed crew, drawn lean by vice, or like thee swollen and bloated.


Sir Barn. I bloated! what, because -- I am plump, plump, a man of kidney, or
so -- I bloated.


Wild. Villains, that can rail at Monarchs, and not blush, upbraid him by whose
Clemency you live, that fearless lets you indulge your horrid Treasons, nourish
the musty seeds of Old Rebellion, so sure a guard is Sacred Royal Virtue; ye
souless Insects, ye rotten sheep, that first your selves, and then infect a
Nation.


Sir Barn. Have you done yet? I think the Devil's in the fellow, he will give no
man leave to rail but himself: Sir, you talk largely, you do Sir; and let me
tell you, though I am fat, I dare fight, Sir, -- I can foyl as good a
George-a-Green as your self: but more of that as occasion shall permit; and to
let you see you do only chatter Magpye-like, without thinking, there is the
Paper with all the Wise men's hands to it -- Now read, and then judge; the wit
and method I composed my self.


Wild. Wit -- why thou double Traitor, dare thou assassinate that too -- thou
contrary to Wit as Loyalty.


Sir Barn. Have I no wit? what! and have fined for Alderman; that is fine indeed
-- Come, read Sir, we shall have the note changed presently.


Wild. A plague on your Wit and Method; here is not a line but tends to Villainy.


Sir Barn. Sir, I shall not be ashamed to own it; there is no man there that
will hide his face upon occasion.


Wild. To stir up Rebellion, and wound the bosom of his Country.


Enter the Captain. Capt. The best sport, the best voyage sure that ever man
had.


Wild. Oh, here is the Captain now to be another spectator!


Sir Barn. If he be a wise Captain, he will be of our side.


Capt. Mr. Wilding -- Sir Barnaby, prithee old Boy tack about to Windward, and
harken to me: Sailing a hunting this morning, we had not Cruzed above a League
or two, but we found a Hare a-ground.


Sir Barn. Tell not me of Hares, Sir, -- if you had hunted a Bishop out of the
Nation, I should have said something to you.


Wild. It Is but manners though to hear him out, Sir, by your favor.


Sir Barn. Hear him you may, but it is impossible to understand him; for he
stuffs a story so full of Sea-terms, the Devil himself cannot tell what he means.


Capt. Sir, may I never enter the Straits mouth again, if it was not the best
sport that ever man saw: Oones he is for nothing, not he, but railing at
Government, and cheating the People.


Wild. Right, nor will have any reward but hanging: Come, pray Sir, let me hear
it, I love it; you have been a hunting, you say.


Capt. I Sir! and as I was saying we had not Cruzed above a League or two, but
we found a Hare a-ground.


Wild. A Hare! so, Sir.


Capt. Finding her thus, we presently turned her a-drift; and then she stood
off, and the Dogs stood after, and we stood after the Dogs; West Sou-West, Tail
and End.


Sir Barn. West, Sou-West, the Sea-Calf thinks he is on Shipboard.


Capt. After this, Sir, the Hare luff't, and the Dogs weatherd her again; and
then a stiff gale blowing, she bore swiftly round us, and we went after large
Topsails a trip, though one of our hearts of Gold making a shot at her, raked
her fore and aft; then, Sir, springing a Leak, she bore down to the hedge; and
there powdering in, we all boarded her: but, as the Devil would have it, my
horse running swiftly ahead, Gads bud, I tumbled overboard.


Wild. Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Barn. Did not I tell thee what a Tarpawlin-story we should have?


Wild. It Is better than your scrowl here, however, and has more sense in it.

Tears the paper.
Capt. Sense! why, does this Tun of moldy Garbadg pretend to sense? Harkee,
Guts, dare thou drink a Gallon, the Kings Health; Load the great Cannon, or
ungrapple a Fire-Ship? if not, you are a Rascal, and draw.


Sir Barn. Well, Sir, when I have drunk a Gallon, I can draw.


Capt. Would I had thee a Shipboard to excuse the boys penance, and be lickt
for a fresh wind: what a stirs here with Religion! Come, if you are that godly
person you say, ye are to follow me, and make one at a Bowl of Punch; I find
Lime-Juyce and Brandy.


Sir Barn. Not I Sir, I hate all Heathen Liquors.


Capt. Then if thou love Christian Claret, come sup with me; I make a
Collation to night, and invite my friends; and in plain terms, if you will come,
you shall be welcome.


Sir Barn. What, my Club I warrant: well, for their sakes I may chance to visit
you; and so farewell.


Wild. I Will go too, but upon another design: Sir, I Will wait on you.

Exit.
Enter Benedick and Winifrid. Bened. One pretty smile will recover all yet:
come, I know this is but feigned, thou art too well bred to be ill-natured.


Winif. Upon my Souls -- her is well enough preads to take cares and cautions
of being cozened: look you, Shentlemens have creat deals of lies and
fraudulences now adays, and cheats poor Maids out of honor and virginities:
pless us all.


Bened. By Heaven he has not a grain of human nature in him that could wrong
thee; believe me, and be grateful: by this dear hand I love ye like my soul.


Winif. Like your Souls -- Ay, that is fine falcity and equivocations: Look ye
now, for you, Shentlemens, always loves your peddies petter than your own
souls, a thousand times.


Bened. I would sacrifice my body for a kind look from thee.


Winif. I heard a Lords once say so much to a pegger-wench, I vow.


Bened. Imagine some Action that may be meritorious, and then lay your Commands
upon me.


Winif. Her cannot commands, look you: Winny's hearts and posoms is too soft
and tender to use Exercises of Discipline: Will her make Positions and Oaths,
that her can be most confoundedly constant. --


Bened. Most zealously.


Winif. And will her weep, and sigh, and languish, and kneels at her feets one,
three, four and twenty hours to wheedle her self into her passionate affection
and good crases.


Bened. I Will sigh enough to raise a Storm at Sea, and weep another deluge.


Winif. I pray you of all Loves then, weep now, for there is nothing in the
creat 'orld that mollifies Winny's hearts and bowels, -- so much as tears and
weeping. -- I pray you, Sir, begin: now weep, I beseech you weep.


Bened. Now am I such a dry Dog, I cannot squeeze a drop out to save my life --
Pox on it, I have forgot my Onion too.


Winif. In her own Country, that is, cood Montgomrey-shire; the Lovers will
whine, and houl, look you, and make ferry ugly faces for whole days together:
Come, let me see, does her weep?


Bened. I must do something; I beseech ye, Madam, do not make me too much unman
my self. Howling out.


Winif. Upon my soul here is waters upon her cheeks: that is true, this is no
dissimulation; ferry good, ferry good: weep on, I pray you, till night, but be
sure come not from your knees, it will be preparations for Love and Passion:
look you, and then her will visit you again, and pless you with some brave
consolation and advices: Ha, ha, ha.

Exit.
Bened. Consolations and advices -- 'death, this Jilt plays upon me; I find it
now, but, Gad, I Will after her, and tell her my mind more plainly -- for I see
there is nothing to be done by fair means with any of that Country.


SCENE II.
Enter Townly and Livia. Townly. THis is the strangest adventure, Madam, that
ever surpised a Lover: Are you the charming person that Sir Walter adores?


Livia. He tells me so, Sir, and for whose sake he has engaged you to address
to his wife.


Townly. Why, faith, I must needs say he has been very civil to me in that
point: But I am so much a man of honor, I never desert the person that has
first engaged me: I never change parties -- not I.


Livia. Not if you have the odds of your side, I believe, Sir; and yet a
Command from my Lady Millicent would make you venture hard.


Townly. A smile from you would make me venture much more; I know not what
influence she may have upon me: but heaven keep you in a loving humor, or l'm
afraid I shall never dye decently in my bed: Ten to one I shall swing to the
other World with a silken string of your colors.


Livia. And what a pitiful object will that be to the female spectator -- to
see so proper a man, and so constant a Lover, hang dangling like a Puppy out at
a Garret-window.


Townly. Gad it will be a most dismal, melancholy sight, that is the truth on it:
then for you to be attainted of Homicide -- how can you hope to be saved?


Livia. By pleading not guilty, Sir; for if the Devil and you fall out about
the purchase -- and you happen to be suspended by the by -- how does this
concern me? am I culpable? -- But, come -- to prevent effusion of Christian
Lovers blood -- for once I will be merciful.


Townly. Ah blessing, and ten thousand Joys, and transports on thy heart for it
-- Gad it came very seasonably, for I was just a falling into a swound for fear
of a repulse, I was seeking out for the Bottle of Mirabilis: but now all my
disorders vanish, and this heavenly Cordial retrieves my dissipated spirits,
and makes me all over Ecstasy.

Kisses her hand.
Enter Sir Walter. Sir Walt. My Wifes words have vexed me, it is true, but she
speaks nothing but the effects of Jealousy.


Townly. Confusion! -- what shall I do now? a bottle of Mirabilis would be very
necessary in this juncture, whatever 'twas in the other.


Sir Walt. What Is this I see? As I Am a true Son of Bacchus, here they are, he
kneeling and kissing her hand: here is fine work; I Am bob'd -- downright bob'd,
fooled, made a Chouse -- a double Cuckold, as Gad save me: Nay, nay, do not
leave him, Madam, -- the Son of a Whore, your Gallant, there -- has more to say
to ye yet: More, more, much more.

She flings away, and Exit.
Townly. I have a thought sprung up however, and I hope 'twill prosper.


Sir Walt. Your servant, Sir, -- Pray, with submission to ye, give me leave to
ask ye a question: Are not you a Rascal, Sir? Ha --


Townly. A Rascal, Sir!


Sir Walt. Ay, a Rascal, a Traitor, a Villain, any thing; nay, I shall come
home to ye, if you provoke me.


Townly. Pray hold, Sir.


Sir Walt. Sir, I shall not hold, Sir, -- I am mad, and I will fight; you have
wronged me -- and abused your friend; and, now I think on it, I will beat you
damnably: -- And, now I think on it again, I will consider first -- Ah, most
abominable Varlet what, two at once: Come, come, prepare.


Townly. Prepare! for what, Sir?


Sir Walt. To be killed, Sir, only to be dissected, anatomized like a
Chichester Cock-Lobster, or so; that is all. --


Townly. All in the Devils name: -- But pray, Sir, do but hear me speak.


Sir Walt. No, Sir, not till I Have ^t your throat, Sir; it is not my way; when I
have done that, you may have the privilege to speak what you please.


Townly. Nay if you are so resolute, I must not dye defenseless: Come, -- come
on, Sir.


Sir Walt. Come on, Sir, come you on, Sir; -- what a Pox, sure I understand
what I have to do: -- But hark you Jack, to argue coolly now upon this matter:
Come, put up; Was I so obliging to cause an intimacy betwixt thee and the wife
of my own bosom? and would thou affront me and her so much, nay be so
ungrateful -- so false, so treacherous, to desert her, and seek to corrupt my
Mistress?


Townly. Your Mistress!


Sir Walt. Ay, Sir, my Mistress, the Idol of my soul, the Cordial of my heart,
the Light of my eyes: My Mistress! what a Pox, do you question that? Come,
draw, Sir, draw.


Townly. Well, Sir, you see I dare draw; but assure your self, I was ignorant
of your being concerned here; and my business with her, was only an humble
suit, that she would do me what good offices she could in commending me to your
Wife.


Sir Walt. And was that all, faith? What a Dog am I now to abuse so honest a
fellow. Come, put up again: But was that all, faith, swear, bounce out a swinger
by way of confirmation.


Townly. By the God of Love, and the more Celestial Beauty of that Divine
Creature, your Wife -- I swear. -- Pray Heaven this lie don't choke me. Aside.


Sir Walt. Why, look now -- what a Dog am I -- Deed Jack I beg thy pardon: I am
somewhat hasty. -- But I only make an offer, or so; -- I would not have fought
with thee for all my jesting.


Townly. I do believe thee, I ^aith, Aside.


Enter Millicent. Mill. Either my ears deceived me, or I heard my husbands
voice -- Ha, it is so, yonder he is, and Townly familiarly talking with him;
nay, then I see my Plot has taken little effect -- I Will stand aside and listen.


Sir Walt. To morrow, Jack, I Am obliged to wait on my Mistress, therefore be
very careful in addressing to my Wife.


Townly. Well, Sir, since you will have it so. --


Mill. His Mistress -- rare Gentlemen.


Sir Walt. I Will vow the Domestic Animal at home is grown so jealous of late,
there is no enduring her.


Townly. It Is pity, Sir, she has that fault; she is very handsome.


Sir Walt. I, were she but another man's wife, she were a blessing; but the
Devil's in it, she is mine: Jack, she is mine; I Am fed up with an everlasting dish
of Mutton; yesterday she was Mutton, to day she is Mutton, and to morrow she
will be Mutton; and for a man to feed eternally upon Mutton, -- a Pox on it,
it is unreasonable.


Townly. Sir, though she be Mutton to you, she is Venison to another man; every
look from her is a delicious banquet; and a man must, as you say, be her
husband to be cloyed with it.


Sir Walt. Come, we shall find her at the Masquerades to night; then, dear
Rogue, do but wheedle her finely, and thou will oblige me for ever.


Townly. If I fail, let me be an Eunuch; so I think I Am a lucky fellow.


Enter Millicent. Mill. Is it for this then I have been so constant? for this
have slighted still the young and brave, and like Penelope, kept my tempted
virtue, maugre the vice of this deluding age: nay, does my beauty deserve only
this? My May of blood would give my cheeks a blush, greater than would appear
on proof of Infamy, did he but know I had an Imperfection. And am I slighted
thus? thus left -- sold to another, and by my husband too -- whom I have loved
-- far, far beyond his merit. Teach me then, ye Powers, Revenge, and Jealousy
instruct an injured woman: It Is done -- Townly shall be the man; I Will instantly
write to him, and let loose all my Charms to retrieve him from Livia. Then
shall my husband find too late, that Marriage should have a relish of Love, as
well as Duty.

For may I prove the fool that he designed,
If I make not him the greatest of mankind.
E^it.
Finis Actus Secundi.
ACT. III.
SCENE I.
The Captains House. Enter Townly with a Letter. Townly. HAppy the man, most
happy must he prove,
That lives like me, crowned with success in love.
A thousand blessings wait on his Desires;
Bliss glads his heart, and kind Occasion courts him.
Beauty, the Goddess of the Universe,
Unarms her killing eyes, and meets him equal.
Whilst fierce Delights, and Joys profusely given,
Shoot through, and almost cloy his Soul with Heaven.
Was ever Luxury in love like mine? What! two at once? and two such Beauties as
Livia and Millicent? By heaven it is too much, and I grow jealous of my
happiness; and yet my Assignation with the first, and this Letter from the
last, confirms the certainty. Well, if this be not a false scrowl -- my honest
friend Sir Walter must excuse me in a certain punctilio about his Wife; I shall
never be able to keep Covenants; Gad I must beg his pardon.


Enter Millicent. Mill. Whose pardon is this you are so zealous to beg, Sir?
and what Covenants are these that are so difficult for you to keep?


Townly. Those betwixt my heart and you, Madam; and therefore of whom should I
beg pardon but you? for though you have charmed me with the prospect of
transporting hopes, yet so frail is humane nature; and I, amongst the rest, so
faulty, that my soul hovers in the Purgatory of doubt, not knowing what I
deserve, nor whither I am to go.


Mill. A great proof of your desert, Sir, may be made by your service; and we,
women, like Merchants, guess a servant's Merit by his fidelity -- let me see!
Have you been careful in the first point, and kept my Letter safe?


Townly. Safe! Judge you else: 'twas here quilted in my Coat, next my heart, and
done up with as much care as a Miser does his broad Gold, when he is afraid of
robbing.


Mill. And designed to be sent as a Trophy to your new Mistress Livia.


Townly. My new Mistress!

Jealousy -- good -- Aside.


Mill. I vow I heard you were under the Surgeons hands for a strange bruise in
your knee, occasioned by your incessant kneeling to her.


Townly. Gad I was afraid she had heard I had been there for something else.
Aside.

I kneel to her! why, Madam, I never had such a thought; I never made such a
motion, never bowed, hardly ever pulled off my hat; and if I spoke any flashy,
unballanc'd words to her, 'twas only in obedience to your Commands: my heart
adored you, though my tongue flattered her.

So, now I Am going to be an excellent Rascal. Aside.


Mill. Nay, Sir, I did expect you could sing to this tune: you can outflatter a
Town-Poet, and out-lye a Mercer of Paternoster Row. Thus clouding Deceit under
a pretty, modish, methodical way of Gallantry, you prove equally treacherous
both to her and me: What say you? would you not prove such a villainous sort of
a creature?


Townly. 's death I Would be a Dog first: Treacherous! no, Madam, it is to your
Altar I sacrifice: to you, and only you my heart pays tribute: Livia's a thing
remote, when you are by; unknown, a very stranger; I hardly ever spoke to her,
but when I was half asleep.


Mill. Now have I a great mind to be credulous, but that lying face of yours
does so startle my Resolutions: but come, for once I Will put you to the Test,
and give you leave to visit me; then, if you prove a Jewel --


Townly. You will wear me: Nay, nay, that must of necessity follow.


Enter Livia. Livia. My Lady Millicent! Don't you intend to Dance? they are all
ready to begin.


Mill. Ha! Livia! -- I was just coming to wait on you, Madam, He Is confused:
now I shall note their carriage. Aside.


Townly. If she have overheard any thing now, I Am in a fine condition. Aside.


Livia. Mr. Benedick has bin giving me a Song yonder: Mr. Townly, pray come
hither and sing it, you have a good voice.

Ungrateful man! Is this your constancy? Aside.


Townly. So, there is one shot already; I shall be peppered. Aside.


Mill. We shall sup late to night, it is past sev'n of Clock.

Mr. Townly, you have skill in Watches, pray give me your Judgment in this.

You cannot hold out I see. Aside.


Townly. The Devil take me if I know how I should at this rate. Aside.


Livia Sings. He bows to Mill. Livia. Nay Mr. Townly, pray come hither: a good
Singer is so hard always to be entreated.

You are very ready to obey her. Aside.


Townly. Not I faith, Madam; I designed only to be civil.

Goes to her.
Mill. Mr. Townly, pray help me to set the Hand right here, I shall spoil my
Clock for want of skill.

Struggles to go, and Livia holds him.
Livia. Come, Sir, Begin, begin.


He Sings. Mill. What! are you deaf of the sudden?


Townly. 's death what shall I do? Aside.


Mill. Pray make no delays, Sir, but come hither.


Livia. Pray make no delays Sir, but sing.


Mill. Madam, I beg your pardon, he has some skill at this.

Pulls him.
Livia. Madam, I beg your pardon, he has more skill at this.

Pulls him.
Townly. god's death I shall be quartered. Aside.

Why then, by heaven, I have skill at neither. I am plagued with an eternal
Cold, and the most ignorant Artificer in the world beside: Hark, the Music
begins, we shall be too late. --

Anon we shall have more leisure. To Livia.

At night we shall meet alone. To Mill.

Come, come, to the Music, to the Music.

Exit, leading 'em.
SCENE II.
A Table and Musicians. Discovers the Captain, Wilding, Sir Walter, Benedick,
Townly, Gratiana, Millicent, Livia, Winifrid, seated. Sir Walt. COme, let us
have the other Dance, the Ladies are not warm yet.

Dance.
Capt. Come, now let us talk of Shipping: Dean has built a brave Frigot, they
say.


Sir Walt. Prithee Tarr show none of thy Sea-breeding now: Dancing is a gentile
quality, which you Sea-sharks understand not: Come, shall thou and I go and
drink a quart of Brandy to warm our stomachs.


Capt. More drink still! why thou art grown a mere sponge, do nothing but
suck in, and squeeze out all day long: but I must confess it is natural to you
all; and a man may as well know a foolish Country-Knight by his downright
drinking, as a Yeoman of the Guard by his infallible eating.


Sir Walt. What! another Sea-joke? Ha, ha, well said Tarr. --


Wild. Do you not wonder, Madam, that having been so baffled at our (...) last
meeting by your Wit and Disdain, that I have the confidence to appear again?


Great. Not at all for your true Spaniel; the worse he is used, grows still the
civiller.


Bened. Come, Gentlemen, now another Lesson, the Ladies are impatient.

The Gentlemen sit down as to play.
Sir Walt. Oh! 'uds so, here comes my Uncle, now we shall have a full Consort.


Enter Sir Barnaby. Capt. Sir Barnaby, welcome, come pray let us have some of
your skill.


Townly. Prithee observe with what state he takes place.

Sir Barnaby seats himself at the upper end.
Wild. Caesar in triumph looked not half so big.


Bened. No, nor thought himself so worthy: hark you Sir Walter, a word with
you; prithee deal ingenuously, Does your Uncle play well on this Instrument?


Sir Walt. Oh to a miracle, Sir, and has the best grace you ever saw.


Bened. Say you so?


Sir Walt. His touches are always so soft and gentle: besides, I have observed
(Gentlemen) that your thick squab-hand and short thumb-like fingers always
become a Lute extremely.


Wild. Ha, ha, ha, that indeed I never took notice of.

Exeunt Ladies.
Sir Barn. Strike F-fa-ut sharp, and sing the Song.


SONG.
FArewell my Loved Science, my former delight,
Moliere is quite rifled, then how should I write?
My fancy's grown sleepy, my quibling is done;
And design or invention, alas! I have none.
But still let the Town never doubt my condition;
Though I fall a damned Poet, I Will mount a Musician.
II.
I got Fame by filching from Poems and Plays,
But my Fidling and Drinking has lost me the Bays;
Like a Fury I railed, like a Satyr I writ,
Thersites my Humor, and Fleckno my Wit.
But to make some amends for my snarling and lashing,
I divert all the Town with my Thrumming and Thrashing.

Wild. I have a trick to get him away instantly.

What is it you say, friend? an Army raising, and 20000 in Arms already?


Bened. That there are, I saw 'em mustered.


Sir Barn. For the destruction of the Saints! this is but cold news.


Townly. They will not leave a Rebel in the Land.


Sir Walt. Nay you must march, Uncle; you must swing; I do not doubt but I
shall see you exalted for the honor of our family.


Sir Barn. Unnatural Rogue! do hope to see me hanged? Hanged! -- Gad that
word has a plaguey sound: but come, let the worst happen, I can but turn; the
Saints may revoke, if the game be near losing: Come, come, I can turn, I can
turn.

Exit.
Wild. I knew that news was worse than an Ague to him.


Capt. A Pox on it, the Women are all gone too, and I have had never a buss of my
Welsh Mistress; I must go seek her.

Exit Captain.
Wild. Do You hear that, friend?


Bened. Let him go; the old Hound hunts upon a false scent, for I have her in
chase my self.


Sir Walter goes to the Door, and returns. Sir Walt. Jack, Jack, my Wife's gone
away alone man: Go, go for shame: -- nay, prithee dear Jack, go now.


Townly. Well Sir, I follow her, since you will have it so. But the Stars point
otherwise to night; I am elsewhere engaged, I thank my fortune. Aside.

Exit.
Sir Walt. Now if that Fairy have but Welsh Devils enough to charm the Captain
for one hour, I shall love Mountgomery the better as long as I live for it.

Exit.
Bened. Prithee no more excuses, but consent to go with me to morrow.


Wild. Have thou the conscience to desire me to be stung again by that Wasp,
that Viper of Women, Gratiana?


Bened. I have, nay and thou shall not deny me neither.


Wild. Sir, I must; I had rather Duel three hours, than Ward her words three
minutes: her Tongue is like the Pendulum of a Clock, and she wants nothing but
talking in her sleep to make it a perpetual motion.


Bened. And yet for all that thou love her, if the truth were sifted
thoroughly.


Wild. Love her! yes, as I do bad Wine, or an unsound Wench.


Bened. Come, I know thy humor, and can make this Position; Thou never
railed'st heartily at any Woman, thou did not then, or afterward fall in
love with.


Wild. Perhaps her Charms do not equal others.


Bened. Nay she is beautiful every way: however, do an honorable courtesy, and
go to assist thy friend, for my little Winifrid is to be with her.


Wild. Pox on thee, thou art ever engaging me in such affairs: I confess I have
an inclination to see this Woman again; and if I prove his words true, and fall
in love with her, how this unmerciful Rogue will laugh at me: I am untainted
yet, and am sure can hold out one skirmish more, whatever happens after.


Bened. Well, have thou thought, shall I trust thee?


Wild. You will have your humor, Sir, and I Am obliged to serve you.


Bened. Here let us part then, and to morrow I Will call upon you at your Lodging.

Exit Wild. I think I heard her voice just now here abouts, perhaps this old
Kite has snatched her up before me: Gad I must go and see.

Exit Bened.
Re-Enter Sir Barnaby. Sir Barn. It Is as he said; there is an Army raising, a
great one too, and the fraternity will be swing'd, I profess: Well, stay then
Brother Barnaby, what will you do, Brother, to save your neck? why look you,
Brother, you must Conform; and as you have swore up your own party, now you
must swear 'em down: It Is true, Brother, you are a Rascal; but so are many more
that are preferred, therefore you must now speak for the King: Disguise your
self; get a Commission, and fight for the King: Impeach your quondam Brethren
that were against the King, and so, dear friend and brother, you may save your
self -- by the King.


SCENE III.
Enter Benedick, Groping about. Bened. I Have mistook, and followed a wrong
Woman, and now cannot find the way out again: Hark! somebody is coming; perhaps
it is the Captain, what shall I do? Oh, here is a door open, I Will go in and hide
my self till they are past by.

Exit into the Closet.
Enter Townly, and Livia after him. Livia. Where are you, Sir?


Townly. Here divine Creature, waiting for the blessing with more Zeal, than
Pilgrims a reward for their Devotion: Where (where) 's your Husband Sweet? your
husband! your property I mean, that rusty Animal; abroad, or asleep, or drunk,
or where?


Livia. Speak lower, Sir; he is not so far off, but Jealousy can quickly spur
him hither: Go, get you in here, I must be your Jailer, and lock you up for
awhile, till I see how my Husband is employed: Come, haste, haste, the door is
open already.


Townly. If every man for so delicious a sin had no severer a penance, the
World would grow monstrous wicked in a short time.

Locks him into the Closet.
Livia. If my Cause were to be tried in a Court of Equity, I question whether
the most Reverend Head could blame my proceedings: in my opinion the scales are
equal; for if my Husband slights me, to seek a Mistress that slights him; it is
but reason that I should slight him, to love a man that adores me: but then
Honor and Religion start up, two Bug-bears, and fright me terribly: but then
again, I love Townly more terribly: Honor is a fine thing, but Townly is a
finer thing: What shall I do? Well, I Will first go and see whetehr my husband be
safe, and then reconcile my self to Honor and Religion as well as I can.

Exit.
Enter Sir Walter with a Light. Sir Walt. Townly is, I hope, by this time at
home solacing my Spouse: so she is safe, Gad that is a very honest fellow, as
good a soul as breathes; and the very life of my design, because it is a
harmless Rat, a bashful, unflesh'd young fool: why, I might have bin a Cuckold,
had another man undertook the business but he; were she as loose as Lais, he would
not understand her: This it is to have Judgment to distinguish men now: -- Well,
he I say is with my Spouse, the Captain is gone out after his Welsh Mistress,
and I am coming in here to his Wife; she must be there in her Closet, for I Am
sure I saw her come up Stairs.

Knocks softly at the door.
Townly. What! come already, my life, my soul?


Sir Walt. What Is here a man? ha! Townly! the Devil! it is impossible. Oh
Rascal! Oh Traitor! what and concealed in the Closet too! Townly runs back and
shuts the door. Impudently lying here perdue, for my Mistress, like a Villain,
when he should be at home courting my Wife like an honest fellow: Oh the Devil!
this is a treachery insupportable; and do you hear, Sir, I shall storm your
Castle; I shall demolish; I shall slit that dog's nose of yours, incorrigible
Rascal!


Capt. within. -- So, ho, -- where sits the Wind? what noise? what storm is
this?


Sir Walt. Ha! the Captain returned? already too? had that Welsh Gipsy no more
sense than to leave her Cully so soon? A Pox of their Mungril Welsh courtship,
they make love like Sparrows; the Intrigue is no sooner begun, but ended.


Enter Livia. Livia. My Husband returned -- Oh, I Am undone.

Exit.
Enter the Captain, and Livia peeping. Capt. How now! who is there? -- ha! -- a
Sword drawn? where are my Servants? Lock up all the doors there, here is a
Jesuit, a Thief, a Fox in my Bedchamber.


Sir Walt. Hold, hold! it is I, Captain, it is I, Watt, Watt, honest Watt, do
not know me? why it is I man, thy friend Watt, I tell thee.


Capt. Friend Watt, with a Pox! what does my friend Watt do in my Chamber of
this time of night, hoh?


Sir Walt. I come to bring thee news, old Culverin; thy well-rigg'd Frigot is
grappl'd, her Sails unfurled, her Gun room blown up, and all her treasure in
the Hold rifled and plundered.


Capt. My Frigate! why then I say, my friend Watt, with a Pox to him, is a
damned lying Rascal; for my Lieutenant came from Sheerness this morning, and
told me she was as tite as ever, and ready to set Sail.


Sir Walt. Sheerness! ha, ha; well said apprehension: here is the wit of a
Tarpawlin now; one ruffling Storm frights away all their brains, to make room
for the fumes that make them Valiant; but know, friend, that I mean a Frigate of
another nature; thy Wife, thy Wife man!


Capt. My Wife! why what of her?


Sir Wall. Nay, no great matter, only she is beset, made unlawful prize, and to
night to be grappl'd and boarded, that is all.


Capt. All in the Devils name! a very pretty All, faith: but hark you Sir Watt,
or Coxcomb, or what may a man call you? if you run your Lancashire-Jests on me,
I shall swinge you; I shall thrash you, in plain terms. Do You see, Sir,
therefore be serious: -- My Wife do you say?


Sir Walt. Nay if you are so Choleric for nothing, I care not this for it; be a
Cuckold, grow ridiculous; despair, and then hang your self on the top of the
Mainmast: Gad I Will not value it the cutting a corn, since you are so uncivil.


Capt. 'Sbud speak to the purpose, or by Boreas I will eat thee up, as I would
do a Sea-bisket.


Sir Walt. What a damned Canibal-Rogue is this? Gad he looks as if he would eat
me indeed -- why then I say again, thy Wife, thy Helen, thy Octavia, was this
night to be engaged in an Intrigue; the business and place is only supposed,
but the voracious Pirate is by my industry surpised, detained a Prisoner of
War, and confined to that Closet there.


Capt. How! a Rascal surpised in my Wives Closet? So, ho: bring out the
Mortar-piece there: 'Oones I Will surprise him with a vengeance.


Sir Walt. Hold, hold, here comes your Lady; -- urge her to a Discovery;
command the key, and observe her excuses: So, so, I think I shall be revenged
now.


Enter Livia. Livia. If this project fail, I Am undone.


Capt. Your Servant, Madam; pray if a man may ask a civil question, What news
from the Straits? it seems (good Pinnace) you were to be Boarded to night --
hah!


Livia. Boarded, Sir?


Capt. Grappl'd, clapped a-stern; nay, and in danger to prove a Fire-ship --
forced to a surrender by a through-shot betwixt Wind and Water, and then to be
Manned by the Enemy in the Fore-Castle and Poop -- with a Pox to you.


Livia. I wish you would give your meaning, Sir, in plainer terms, for I am
utterly unprovided of an answer to this.


Sir Walt. Ay, alas poor Innocence, she knows not what you mean, not she.


Capt. No, no: Come give me the key of this Closet, I Will show my meaning
presently; What, do you tremble? Come, the key, the key, where is it?


Livia. What key, Sir?


Capt. What key, Sir! the key that unlocks the Bawdy door to your Stallion,
that lies there in the Bilbo's: I Will feez him: 'Sbud I Will have him condemned by
a Jury of Tarpawlins; first flayed, then hung by the heels at the Yard-arm, a
dreadful example to all such Cuckoldmakers: -- the key I say, the key.


Livia. Now, dear fortune, be propitious. Aside.


Capt. Come where is it? by Mars, my Lady Strumpet, I shall give you a salt Eel;
I shall show you a touch of my Sea-office if you trifle any longer.


Livia. But why thus angry, Sir? you shall have the key, and instantly; but
show so much humanity to your poor Wife, one that has loved you (Heaven knows
too tenderly), to let her speak: give her time to unfold this mystical matter;
let her plead her Innocence before she be condemned.


Capt. Innocence! ay, a Whore has a wonderful stock of Innocence indeed: you
are devout, are you? this is your zeal, is it? 'Sbud I ever thought there would
come no good of your Devotion, you were so early at it.


Livia. Is my Integrity supposed my Crime then? must that be my Accuser? my
Husband should have kinder thoughts; and you, my friend, are too much a
Gentleman so to condemn me; Heaven knows how little I deserve this Ignominy.

Weeps.
Capt. Ay, ay, weep: this rain shall not lay the dust, the Stallion must be
produced; he must Spouse, he must.


Sir Walt. I am her Friend now, but I was her Fool and Coxcomb an hour ago.


Livia. Produced, Sir: Can you think I would conceal him? Can you believe your
Wife, the partner of your Bed, and dearest thoughts, could know a secret that
concerns your Honor, and keep you ignorant? See here the whole discovery; my
heart was too full of grief to let me speak the fatal story, and therefore I
committed it to Writing.

Gives a paper.
Capt. Your heart too full! your crime was too foul rather: but come, let us
see; here is a pretty modest scrowl, no doubt.


Sir Walt. The Devil's in these Women; they had rather do that business, than
talk of it any time.

They read the paper.
Livia. Here, here is the key; now do it cunningly, and gain my love for ever.
To Silvia. Aside.


Capt. reads. If Love were to be judged by Jealousy, then Jealousy were to be
excused by Love; but the reason of the one, and the unreasonableness of the
other, makes passionate Love suspected, and Jealousy hated; though to be
jealous, is really to love, as to love is to be jealous, argued largely in the
Amor of Min Here Van Belgor, Admiral to the States General; and the
Skinckimurra Brachia del Pegoe, Wife of Prester-John.


Capt. What the Devil is all this? Oones I cannot understand a word on it: Do you?


Sir Walt. Hum! Skinckimurra Pegee, hum! ay, it is as you said, Captain, a very
pretty modest scrowl: Come, let us see further.


Read. Courtesy is only a pretense, and Friendship grown a deceit, for your
friend, Sir Walter, has bin these six months soliciting me unlawfully -- Livia
makes signs to Silvia to open the door. Ha! say you so -- I understand that,
Sir, -- hum!


Sir Walt. That, Sir! pray let us see it. This damned Jilt will discover all.
Aside.


Capt. 'Sbud this is a very fine business, pray read on, Sir.


Sir Walt. reads. Your friend, Sir Walter, has bin these six months soliciting
me unlawfully.


Capt. Friend! ay, a sweet friend, fine damned friend -- hum.


Sir Walt. reads. And you are conscious to your self that you were formerly
very familiar with his Wife -- Hah, hum -- who must understand that? there is a
business -- hum -- who must understand that, I say? Familiar with her; not
solicit, but familiar, intimate, profoundly acquainted -- familiar with her:
you have no Offspring, no Issue, no Sons of Whores begotten on her body, have
you, Sir? Hah, hum.


Capt. I! prithee leave thy prating: why, I hardly know her: I never came
within shot of her in my life; these are Tricks, Wheadles, Clokes to cover the
main matter, pray, Mistress, come to the point, the Rascal in the Closet there,
the bawdy Intrigue -- Where Is that? where is that?


Livia. Be careful now, or we are lost. Aside to Silvia.

Here, here, Sir, pray observe it, fix your eye here steadfastly.


Capt. Well, what is here?


Livia. And you, Sir Walter.


Sir Walt. I warrant you, I warrant you.


Livia. reads. The design being woven thus between you, about one another
Wives, Townly makes a forcibly Entry upon the Premises, by order of my Lady
Millicent, who, in a kind of a disorderly manner, orders Mr. Townly and I to
state a question in the Mathematics, with design to put us all into disorder;
but Sir Walter politickly sifting into the matter, and well knowing that
Townly, and my Lady Millicent, had instructed Sir Barnaby to wheedle the
Caprain into a belief, that Welsh Winifrid and Benedick were playing at
Hot-Cockles in the Mulberry-Garden, confirmed the matter to be carried on by
Wilding and Gratiana, who were to be exposed, and Townly confined to the Closet
upon due consideration: Do You understand me? Whilst she is bantring them with
this Letter, Silvia opens the door, and lets out Benedick instead of Townly.
So, she has done it.

She holds her hand behind her, and Silvia gives her the key again.
Capt. 'Sbud, the Devil, though he were a Scrivener, could not understand this:
Do you, Sir Walter?


Sir Walt. Not a syllable, not I, as I am a true Knight.


Townly. Oh confounded misfortune! some damned Rascal, that had hid himself
here, has made his escape instead of me. Peeping out of a window.


Capt. Pox on it, this is another whim; it is plain now, there is not one word of
sense in the whole Letter; thou Spawn of a Siren, give me the key without more
Demurs, or by the North Star I will so mawl thee. --


Livi^. Why then there it is: you can stoop and take it up to make your
discovery, I hope.

Flings the Key on the ground.
Capt. How! my Lady Impudence! are you in earnest? Aloud.


Livia. Ay, Sir, earnest; why thou base, ungrateful, jealous-headed, rusty,
snoring, fumbling creature, thou worn out stump, thou very husband: -- had the
Devil so much power over thee, to make thee suspect my honesty? What! a person
of my Candor, Religion and Virtue; a person of my birth and education; a person
of my modesty and wife-like patience; and for the Assertion of that useless
Tool there, that Knight of the Burning Pestle, that Lancashire-spoke for a
Spinning-wheel, that fool of Quality, thing of title, and nothing else.


Sir Walt. So, so: she is in her Altitudes now, but we shall fetch her down
presently, Captain.


Livia. Had it been from a witty man, 'twere to be excused; but from him is a
sin of Ignorance, not to be pardoned.


Sir Walt. Good! very good: Come, Sir, the Closet, the Closet, the Gentleman
wants company.


Capt. It Is a merry Gale now, but here is a Storm coming.


Enter Silvia hastily. Silv. Oh, Madam! we are all undone, by a strange
mistake; instead of Mr. Townly, I let Mr. Benedick out of the Closet, who it
seems had hid himself there.


Livia. Ha! what is Townly there still then?


Silv. Too true I fear.


Livia. The Devil has a mind to expose me, and I strive against it in vain:
Cursed, hellish, spiteful chance, it is impossible now to retrieve it, I have so
railed at them.


Capt. Plant your self there, Sir Walter, in a posture of Defense, whilst I
tack to Windward, and give the first Broadside.


Livia. Stay, Sir, stay a minute, as you would have me live, come back a
little: Kneeling. Ah, can you then be so cruel to shame me for ever? what
though I have bin indiscreet, and spoke too much, will you expose your poor
Wife for her first fault? Consider how I have loved you, with what a tender
kindness I have nursed you, kissed you, hugged you, cherished you, combed your
head, air'd your shirt, and laced your nightcap, clasped you in my arms, and
let you snore with patience; and though you were then a heavy lump, a Statue,
I Have made you, stir, and move, and live a little.

Sigh^.
Capt. Oh! sits the Wind there already? no Mermaid, Siren; I Will stop my ears to
all but Revenge, thou Bankside Mawdlin, Disease of Matrimony, unworthy the
honor of being my Wife, and only fit for the Boatswain, or Swabber.


Livia. Can nothing mollify your heart? Sir Walter, be you merciful then, it is
in your power to save all yet.


Sir Walt, In mine! what a Ninny, a Lancashire-tool, a Spoke for a
Spinning-wheel? hum -- in my power say you?


Capt. Sir Walter guard the door; and if he strives to escape, kill him.
Housewife, come you and hold the Candle. To Silvia: they enter the Closet.


Townly. There Is no way but to leap over the Balcony -- and I must venture.

Leaps down.
Sir Walt. What thinks your Ladyship of an Intrigue now -- a Love-combat, a
Juggling trick? Hey, pass, come aloft here; what! I am a fool, am I? Townly is
the man, the taking-man, and I am a thing, a thing of nothing; but you shall
find now, that he shall be nothing, nor (y' Gad) have nothing before I part
with him. How now! who comes here? Give the word.


Enter Silvia. Silv. It Is I, Sir.


Sir Walt. I Sir! it is well you spoke, Gad I would have whipped you through the
guts else.


Silv. Look up, Madam, and smile, there is no body in the Closet; Mr. Townly is
gone, and as I believe, made his escape over the Balcony.


Livia. Then Fate's my own again, beyond danger of Relapse, and I will use it
most triumphantly.


Enter Captain. Capt. Oones here is no body.


Sir Walt. What, what! no body? that is a good Jest indeed, Ha, ha, no body?

Goes into the Closet.
Livia. Your servant sweet Sir, Curt'sies to him. with all the submission and
respect due from an obliging Wife to a scurvy, jealous -- no Husband: let me
desire to know how Mr. Townly does, and how you have dealt with Mr. Townly, and
how Mr. Townly has dealt with you: -- Heaven avert my doubt, I fear you have
murdered him, Ha, ha, ha.

Feigns to weep, and then bursts out a laughing.
Capt. 'Sbud I Will mawl this foolish Knight, I Will teach him to play tricks with
me.


Enter Sir Walter in a sneaking, ridiculous posture. Sir Walt. Well, what now?


Livia. Your servant sweet Sir; Curt'sies to him too. the last courtesy you
did me, in concealing my Intrigue was so generously performed, that I vow there
is no favor you would demand, that I think I could deny: Curt'sies to him too.
Pray, Sir, speak, I beseech you let me be grateful.


Sir Walt. Well, Madam, though the Devil is your friend, and so forth, yet I
have eyes, Madam, I have eyes.


Livia. So has an Ass, from whom thou differ'st not, but by thy Ears: thou
wicker-bottle, edg-less knife; thou Ape of generation, whom Providence shuffled
hither in an unthinking Age, for no such fools are created nowadays: Did
thou dare to blast my Virtue, my Integrity, thou laughter of our sex, and
football of thy own? If I were a man, I would cut that Carcass of thine into
as small a quantity as thy Wits; I Would make you an example.


Sir Walt. Nay, now she has got the whip-hand of us, the Devil's in her. Well,
I must take another time, it is in vain to contend now.

Exit.
Capt. What, is he gone? 'Sbud I Will after him, and have satisfaction, or I Will
whip him through the Mid-riff, by Mars.

Exit.
Livia. Thus when extremes of fear too near advance,
Some Courtly God looks down and lends us chance;
Turns the great Scale, let us longing Lovers meet;
And dangers past, make coming Joys more sweet.
Exit.
ACT. IV.
SCENE I.
Spring-Garden. Enter Gratiana and Winifrid. Great. COme, prithee let us be gone;
I wonder what delight thou can take in this Garden, a place so intolerably
pestered with Flies and Fops.


Winif. By St. Tavy, Fop was fery coot Difersions, to Winny; there is fine
tittle tattles, and pribbles and prabbles, that makes Winny laugh till her
pones aches again.


Great. This place is the Retreat of Lewdness, the very Mart of Debauchery: Here
the raw Country-Fop treats the Town-Bully; the sneaking Cuckold his ugly Wife,
and more ugly Off spring; the Spindle-shank'd Prentice his dirty Drab, and the
Court Flesh-fly his Miss of Quality.


Winif. And is not all this fery coot Difersions, look you? Pless us awll! sure
your plood is corrupted with Flegmaticks and Melancholies.


Enter Wilding and Benedick. Bened. Here Is some encouragement however: that
smile shows they are in a good humor.


Great. See, Madam, here is some of the company you wished for.


Winif. Are these fools? Pless us awll, how they stare at us?


Wild. She begins already, I find we shall have a blessed entertainment.


Bened. Prithee have patience.


Wild. When Beauty in the Conquest bears a part,
Who can have skill enough to guard a Heart?

Great. When Impudence in man exceeds the Devil,
Who can have skill enough to make him civil?

Bened. There Is a relish for you my friend, you shall have more anon.


Wild. An honorable Zeal to serve a Beauty, was never accounted Impudence till
now: we are no Satyrs, Madam.


Great. If you had their hoofs, as you have their manners, 'twas the best name I
could call you.


Bened. Nay, nay, no struggling, for by St. Winifrid Hur will, and must be heard.


Great. I know not what ails me, but of late I have no mind to rail against this
Wilding: sure he wears some Charm about him.


Wild. The Devil's in her: that such a shape should harbor so insufferable a
humor.

Madam, though I hate Intrusion, it would appear a grand rudeness in me not to
entertain you in this juncture; for a good Wit (like yours) should never be
alone.


Great. And no Wit like yours should, Sir: and so your Servant.

Exit.
Wild. Dam her, her Wit has Daggers in it, and every word she speaks stings like
an Adder: Well; Come what will, I Will follow her, and rail victoriously this
once, though I prove ever Dumb hereafter.

Exit.
Winif. What! is hur Cozen gone, and has left hur?


Bened. Gone into the next Walk, it is a piece of civility in her to give Lovers
opportunity.


Winif. Opportunity's! Pless us awll, for what? you will not Ravish hur, will
you? nor rob Winny of precious Jewels and Virginities, I hope.


Bened. Upon my soul but I will though, and yet do thee no harm neither: --
Come, prithee be willing, and save the trouble.


Winif. The Tevil shall have thee first; hur will not save the trouble,
therefore let hur have liperties and freedoms, or hur will cry out, and
scratch, and bite, and kick, and sprawl; Oh heavens! what Ravish hur -- at
these years? Would he were in earnest, I vow. Aside.


Bened. Oh I Love a Ladies voice that cries out on such an occasion extremely:
and as for biting and scratching, it is better than tickling to me, the greatest
motive to raise my appetite in the world: Come, come, you were made thus
beautiful to be beloved; and it is a sin to let your Lover languish for what you
once must part with, or be wretched.


Winif. Ay, put then there is Marriages in the case: Look you; if hur were
Married, then let 'em Ravish hur a Cods name.


Bened. Marriage! why, it is the Antidote of Love, the very thought on it makes
me cold and spiritless: I Am stupid, numbed now, that Damned word freezes more
than the coldest blast in the North of Greenland.


Winif. Prea let hur go. This is a fery dull fellow, I swear. Aside.


Bened. You kill me if you speak on it: Come, come this way.


Winif. Why sure hur will not force hur.


Bened. I will not force thee: I know thou will consent, my Dear.


Winif. Hur cannot, dare not, must not consent; Oh, my heart, how it peats --
is there no Honors nor Faith in men? Let hur co now, hur will be kinder
another time.


Bened. Oh, I dare not trust to that, some peevish fit or other will happen,
and then, like a true woman, you will recant, and perfidiously break your
promise; and a man may as soon get Money of a Jew upon Charity, as a Lovefavour
from a Woman, when she is out of humor.


Winif. Why then hur thinks hur is in humors now?


Bened. No, but I think you will be before the business is done; that is my
comfort.


Winif. Prea do not fex hur thus: kind, sweet Sir, upon hur knees hur pegs hur
to let hur go.

Kneels.
Bened. Will you be kind then next time? Swear upon your Soul. --


Winif. And upon hur Soul's and Podies hur will.


Bened. And love me?


Winif. Teerly.


Bened. And be so grateful to deny me nothing I shall ask?


Winif. Nothing that you shall desire.


Bened. This civil kiss then, and farewell: -- nay go instantly from my sight,
for if. I look on thee, there is a Dancing Devil in that Eye would make me turn
Apostate, spite of Ten thousand Vows and Promises. Apart.


Winif. A the Tevil take thee for ferv fools; what! believe what Woman says in
such cases, and talk of kisses and civilities? Farewell; Well Winny's shall
never tesire thy dull Conversations more upon hur Souls. Aside.

Exit.
Bened. When there are sure hopes of a surrender, there is the less need of
force; besides, Compliance and Free Will is the Soul of enjoyment: for it is a
folly for a man to snatch greedily a raw ill-dress'd morsel, when for a little
patience a well-cook'd savoury Dish will court his appetite, and is purposely
prepared for him. How now, Tom! is she gone?


Enter Wilding. Wild. Dam her: she is got amongst a Herd of She-Foxes yonder,
and is not possibly to be hunted from 'em; but I have set my Footman to
dog-where she goes, and am firmly resolved for another Tongue-combat.


Bened. My little Welsh Rogue is gone too; well, some grand mischief will
certainly happen to me, for I Will tell thee what I did just now. -- I missed the
critical minute, and let my adored creature go, merely out of a high point of
hohour: What think thou? is not this a damned Omen of more damned luck, ha?


Wild. It Is, I confess, as usual with thee to be so civil, as it is to say thy
prayers; but vet the Omen may be propitious enough, all things considered.


Bened. Dam consideration, would I had her again; but I must be civil, forsooth,
and so lose my Mistress: Civil, and value punctilio's of honor and virtue:
Virtue, that Vanity of women, and Bugbear of fools.


Wild. Virtue, that was so civil to possess thy heart, which thou did not
desire; and so uncivil to hinder thee ^om enjoying a Beauty, which thou did.


Bened. True, by you Stars! cursed, foolish plebeian notion.


Wild. Ha, ha, ha: How now! who comes here?


Enter Sir Barnaby flauntingly, Dressed like an Officer, with a Footman. Sir
Barn. Sings. Let the Roundheads Plot on,
Till at last they are undone
By hurting their Brains to Decoy us.

Bened. Hah! what, my quondam Rabbi Achitophel, Sir Barnaby Whigg?


Sir Barn. Captain Whigg, if you please, Sir:

Sings. Let the Roundheads Plot on, etc.

Wild. Ah, you are a precious Turn-coat Rascal: What! now the Storm is coming,
you are for the King, I warrant?


Sir Barn. Ay, ay boy -- you are in the right: S'woones who should I be else
for, hoh? --


Bened. He blusters, and pretends to Swear too.


Sir Barn. No faith, I Am but a learner yet; I cannot mouth an Oath worth a
farthing, for I have bin so used to uds-nigs, uds-chitterlings, and the like,
that my mouth is quite spoiled for Swearing; but I don't doubt in a little
time. --


Wild. This upstart in Debauchery, is wicked enough to Damn an Army.


Bened. From a Saint to a Devil, is but an odd Conversion.


Sir Barn. Peace: Tace; not a word of that: -- If thou had the Pox, would
thou love to hear on it? besides, what I do, is not so much for my own sake, as
for my poor Wives.


Wild. Your Wife! your Whore you mean.


Sir Barn. She was my Whore once, it is true -- but I have now Married her.


Wild. Lawfully are you sure?


Sir Barn. So Parson Clammy says: you know him.


Bened. What is this Clammy?


Wild. O, a fellow of the true tone and cant, and famous amongst the longear'd
Rout for his oily hand, goggle eyes, and stinking breath.


Sir Barn. His Doctrine was not very savoury, that is the truth on it, for all
his double way of exercising.


Bened. His double way! prithee what is that?


Sir Barn. Why his holding forth to the Men all day, and to the Women all
night; that I call his double way.


Bened. A precious brother indeed.


Wild. Then the green Ribbon Club I find is now dispersed: pray, where is your
late friend and brother Sir Miles Mutinons?


Sir Barn. Where? why in Nowgate.


Bened. How! Newgate! who has Impeach't him?


Sir Barn. I, I my self, man: Impeach't him! and more than that, intend to hang
him next Sessions.


Bened. A fine, friendly, Christian-like Act, in troth.


Sir Barn. Ay Gad -- friend or father in such a case: up they-go to save my own
neck: I don't love hanging, for my part -- others may.


Wild. Well, thou art altered in thy nature, I see; prithee what Religion art?


Sir Barn. Oh, Orthodox, good, sound, substantial: I love Bishops with all my
heart; Gad they keep excellent Tables.


Wild. And it is for that, if the truth were known. Well, Sir, look to it, for if
I find you change this Opinion.


Sir Barn. If you do, Hang me, Impeach, Carbonado, Fricasee me: -- I tell thee
I am fixed firm as a Rock; and so farewell. I have ten quart Bumpers to drink
to the Kings Health to night, and they shall off as I Am an Orthodox Captain;
and so a Pox of all Roundheads: Come away, boy.

Exit.
Wild. Who dares trust mankind that sees this fellow? I am resolved to have a
trick upon him; I Will sift him once more; my Footman shall be my Agent.


Bened. And here opportunely he comes.


Enter Footman. Footm. Sir, I dogged my Lady Lofty to the Captains house, and
heard her order her Footman to fetch the Coach thither.


Wild. Why then hey for a trial of Skill: Come friend; Sirrah come you hither
too, you must do a business for me: You can Act a Scotch Priest, cannot you,
sirrah?


Footm. Bread a Gad, Can I, Sir? and weel too.


SCENE II.
Enter Townly in Women's Clothes, led in by Captain Porpuss, and Boy after.
Capt. FAir Lady, welcome aboard, heartily welcome, as a man may say: what, ho,
there in the Cook-room? where is my Wife? have a little patience, Madam, and
I Will fetch her instantly. --


Townly. 'Sdeath how I tremble?


Capt. Oones, what a strapping Quean's this! what a Bulk she bears! and true
Flemish built, I see that, by her Forecastle: Gad she is a brave Frigot, and by
Castor and Pollux I Will give her a Broadside presently.

Exit.
Townly. The Devil cram thee into one of thy own Guns, and shoot thee off at
the Turks, e're thou liv'st to fright ^e so again.


Boy. Where did you meet him, Sir? I Am sure he did not come by me.


Townly. A Pox on him, at the Garden-gate, just as I was whistling to get in;
and seeing me peep about, he bluntly asked me who I would speak with? At that
word I gave a start, that I believe would have shook off Nature from a weaker
constitution, and made shift to tell him, his Wife; and (I thank him) he is now
going to fetch her to me.


Boy. The merchandise had need be good, I Am sure you venture hard.


Townly. Sirrah I had no way to get to her, but by this disguize: but, do you
hear sirrah, go you instantly to my 'tother Mistress, the Lady Millicent, and
desire her to meet me at Lockets this evening; and excuse my absence, and tell
her I Am involved in a damnable Suit of Law, and have this day had a Trial
before the Judges in Westminster Hall: you Dog, you could tell a lie handsomely
once with a Pox to you.


Boy. O, Sir, never doubt me, I Am still Master of my faculty.

Exit.
Townly. I hope I shall be Mistress of mine, if I continue in this habit two
hours longer. -- A pretty, decent Garb this faith, and very proper to the
business; for a Petticoat is as necessary for one that designs to run to
another man's Wife, as Breeches are for a woman that intends to run from her
Husband: But hark! here they come; now to my posture.


Enter Captain and Livia. Capt. Here is my Spouse ready to embrace thee, fair
Siren of the Rocks.


Livia. Madam, I beg your Ladyships pardon, I have forgot you.


Capt. What Is that! forgot her?


Townly. Hell and the Devil! I shall be betrayed; she does not know me. Forget
me, Madam? what, your dear Sister? Whispers.


Livia. O, dear Madam! is it you? I beg your pardon a thousand times; my dear
(dear) Sister!

Kisses him.
Capt. Oh! is your memory come again? forget her Quotha! that is a good Jest
indeed.


Livia. The solace of my youth, soul of my joys, my life, my heart, my dear,
dear, sweet, charming --

Kisses him.
Capt. Ah poor Rogues, they make my mouth water to see 'em: 'Sbud, Madam, I Am
but a rough-hew'n Courtier; I cannot prate, nor complement, nor chatter
fragments of Damned Poetry, not I. -- But if you will have a taste of my skill,
you shall: you shall hear me say, and Box my Compass.


Townly. Plague that will be insufferable. Aside.


Capt. Nore, Nore and by East, Nore, Nore-East, Nore-East and by Nore,
Nore-East: Nore East and by East, East, Nore-East, East and by Nore, East: East
and by Sou, East, Sou-East, Sou-East and by East, Sou-East: Sou-East and by
Sou, Sou, Sou-East, Sou and by East: Sou, Sou and by West, Sou, Sou-West,
Sou-West and by Sou, Sou-West: Sou West and by West, West, Sou-West, West and
by Sou, West; West and by Nore, West, Nore-West, Nore-West and by West,
Nore-West: Nore-West and by Nore, Nore, Nore-West, Nore and by West, Nore.


Enter Rachell. Rachell. I must have a trick to get this old Porpuss out of the
way, Sir; Captain Bluster has sent his Man to desire your company at the Three
Cranes about earnest business.


Capt. Business! a Pox of his business, what does he trouble me for? Cannot he
get a Commission for Convoy, cheat the King, and so forth without me: Prithee
tell him I Am engaged here with this Fairy, this Cherubin has engaged me:
Gads-bud, well remembered, I Will secure you both my self till I come again; faith
here is an Alcove, the best in the World for that business: Come, Madam, nay no
drawing back; by Mars it is a frolic, and I am resolved to have my humor.


Townly. I shall laugh, I shall never contain my self.


Capt. Spouse, be sure you be kind to her; do you hear; give her a Buss for me:
Do You smile, Rogue? do you smile? I Will be with you presently, says: Get you in;
go, get you in: Locks 'em in. So, if my business is not done now, the Devil's
in it, for I Am sure of her till my return; then, if she yields upon a fair
Summons, so; if not, I Will blow up her upper Deck, by Jove; I Am a true
Tarpawlin; I Am for no Parlies. But now I Will go to the Three Cranes, and see
for Captain Bluster.


Enter Sir Walter. Sir Walt. The old Blunderbuss is gone, though long first; I
have bin stowed up in a Cole-hole under the Stairs for these two hours; the
Spiders and I have Roosted together only to watch his going out; for I am
resolved to know the meaning of his Wives last project, for the Devil take me
if I understood her; and who knows but it might be a Love-trick, a Sham, only
to blind her Husbands eyes; I Am sure I used to be a lucky Dog at these matters.
Hark! sure I hear her voice.


Within. Livia. Prithee let us laugh: I swear this was the pleasantest
Adventure I ever knew; Ha, ha, ha.


Within. Townly. To bubble your Husband too, Madam, and make him the Procurer;
Ha, ha, ha: Oh I could laugh eternally.


Sir Walt. The Devil! what is this I hear? Townly in the Alcove?


Within. Townly. And then to gull that Coxcomb, Sir Walter, of his Mistress
too, that Tool of Knighthood, that Copper-farthing with the Kings stamp on it;
to cheat him too is a true Scene of pleasure; Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Walt. Is it so, damned Rascals? O, for a Pistol now charged with white
Powder, that I might kill 'em both, and make no noise on it.


Livia. Could the Insect imagine I loved him! what I love a fool?


Sir Walt. Fool! Ha, ha, ha; oh the damnable ignorance of Women.


Enter Captain. Capt. I have bin at the Three Cranes, and the Devil of any one
is there to speak with me: sure the Jilt abuses me.


Sir Walt. The Captain! so, now for revenge: now Jilt, now Rascal, I Will requite
your treachery: now show a Jugling-trick and vanish: now shoot (like Atoms)
through the keyhole, or like Mice under the door, if you can; I Will watch you,
faith.


Capt. How now! uds bud what is here? this damned Coxcomb-Knight nosing my game
already? what business have you here, Sir, ha?


Sir Walt. Hush man, speak lower; and if you have any regard to your honor,
now look about you, for to my knowledge there is in that Alcove a person with
your Wife, whom --


Capt. Whom perhaps you love? Oones I love her too, make your best on it.

Offers to Draw.
Sir Walt. Pish, prithee have patience, and hear me: why thou think you are
in a Storm sure by this blustering and swearing: I tell thee there is a person
in that Alcove -- that --


Capt. That I desire should continue there still.


Sir Walt. Continue, Sir! what, with your Wife, Sir?


Capt. With my Wife, Sir.


Sir Walt. What, Townly! that Villain Townly?


Capt. Hey day! Townly! Ha, ha, ha, the fool's distracted; prithee is Townly a
Man or a Woman, ha?


Sir Walt. Nay she can best tell by this time.


Capt. Ay, ay, I Am a Cuckold, Ha, ha, ha, I Am a Cuckold, and Townly is with
her, Ha, ha, ha?


Sir Walt. What a Pox do you laugh at? I tell you he is with her, I heard his
voice.


Capt. Well, Sir, let him be there, he will do no hurt, Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Walt. Do her no hurt? is the Devil in him? why, believe your eyes then;
I Will open the door.


Capt. Sir, stand off, I Will not have 'em disturbed, it is not civil.


Sir Walt. Not civil! a Pox -- he is bewitched sure; what, to be revenged of a
man that lies with your Wife, not civil?


Capt. I say, not civil, Sir.


Sir Walt. Then you allow it?


Capt. Yes, Sir, I will allow any thing they do.


Sir Walt. And you saw 'em go in?


Capt. Ay, Sir; and more than that, I locked 'em in, and here is the key.


Sir Walt. One is too little; all the Devils have possessed him: and you will
be a Cuckold then? you are resolved on it?


Capt. Now you lie, Sir, and so I lower your top-fail; go, scud away quickly,
or (do you hear) I shall grapple, I shall board you; by this hand I shall, Sir
Watt.

Strikes off his Hat.
Sir Walt. Why, Captain, are you mad? Do but hear me mun.


Capt. Away I say, before Durandon be unsheathed.


Sir Walt. I tell you I heard him there; what a Devil ails him.


Capt. I shall swinge you confoundedly if you stay.


Sir Walt. Let me but open the door, and if I fly --


Capt. Ho, Bounce: there is a Gun then. Bounce: keep your Deck hoh.

Strikes him.
Sir Walt. What a Devil ails him? why, Captain! --


Capt. Hey boys, she flies -- Scowr, scowr, scowr; Runs him out. so, so, now
the fool's gone, come out Chickens, come; Unlocks the door. and how does my
Mistress do? ha! what almost tired I warrant.


Enter Townly and Livia. Townly. No indeed, Sir, I Will stay another hour if you
please.


Capt. Good faith no such matter, l've a cup of Sack within came from Teneriff;
come, we will go and make a Collation, and sing, and kiss, and be merry; come
sweet Pinnace: Gadzooks she has the finest Buttocks; come Duck, come.

Exeunt.
Livia. Thus far all is serene and clear; pray heaven no Storm happen
hereafter, for I must venture to go and part 'em, though I find it will be
di^icult: Call within, Livia, my Dear. Hark! it is my Lady Lofty's voice. But I
must beg her pardon now, I Am engaged.

Exit.
Enter Gratiana and Wilding. Great. Livia, Livia, where are you?


Wild. An ill-natured beauty deserves to want company; who is it you seek?


Great. It Is my misfortune to find one I don't seek always.


Wild. Your notion is as treacherous as your humor: you would find me, I know
you are in love with me.


Great. Obliging Vanity; for what I pray?


Wild. My Person, my Humor, Language and Wit; all which you have the vanity to
believe you can best judge of.


Great. Yes, so well judge, to know your deficiency in either of these, I thank
my Stars.


Wild. Can you disprove me?


Great. Yes.


Wild. Do.


Great. First for your Person then.


Wild. Come, what of that?


Great. Heaven keep me from profaning it; it is a lend, foppish, censorious,
noisy person, a mere piece of puff-past, a flesh-bag, that carries God
a'mighty's fool to the Worlds great Mart, there sells him to the Devil by Inch
of Candle for a Suburo Whore, and a Bottle of Champaign.


Wild. So, my Language?


Great. It Is more barbarous than Dutch; your words are creeping, the very
Reptils of Language, and one would guess your Tutor was a Waterman.


Wild. Very well. My Wit?


Great. Premeditation only; you are like a narrow-neck'd Bottle hastily turned
downwards; upon surprise one can get nothing out of you. You, Sir, (amongst all
men) should love Plays, and pay double when you go; for 'twas a Comedy, and not
a College that set you up for a Wit.


Wild. Excellent! Gad she has put me into a sweat. If abusive railing may pass
for Wit, Madam, I confess, you have shown some now.


Great. What! and to one I Am in love withal? Consider, Sir.


Wild. Nay, do you consider, Madam, you that are the very Mint of falsehood, in
whose face treachery and smiles are promiscuously joined to cheat the
adventurous fool that comes to barter -- You are --


Great. You are.


Wild. Nay, Gad, now you shall hear what you are, [if I have a heart to speak
it. Aside.

You are one that nature doggedly designed a plague to vex mankind: have at you
in Verse, y' faith.

Your Virtue, which as little has
Of Beauty as your face,
Was given not as a blessing, but a guide
For men to see your vanity and pride.
Had you bin perfect, as just heaven Decreed with care you should not be,
I blush to think, how your Disdain would feed upon mortality.
But since you are not good, nor kind, nor wise, whence can this pride arise,
That makes best graces seem Deformities.

Great. So: these I dare swear, Sir, are the fruits of your own Muse by their
little wit, and much ill nature: and, I vow, I am so ill at Rhiming, that I
have only one poor Couplet to return by way of Answer.

You Are Pleasure's slave, whose heart wild passions rule;
To fools a Wit, but the witty Woman's fool.

Wild. 'Sdeath I can hold out no longer: If so many graces appear when she is
angry, what must she be when pleased.


Great. Come, Sir, your Repartee -- what! are you grown dull of the sudden?


Wild. I see then, Madam, you will never have done: Come, speak on.


Great. I take no pride in speaking of this subject.


Wild. That you glory to affront our Sex, I have proved by my self.


Great. When you glory to begin Discourses of this nature, it is rather you that
give the affront.


Wild. Mere design, upon my soul, on my side, and only to try your humor and
wit: why should we differ thus, Madam, and waste those hours in tedious and
unpleasant wranglings, that should be spent in the contrary extreme, kind wit,
obliging looks, and tender notions.


Great. And would you kill your Darling Satyr then? Satyr, your bosomfriend! and
(if you are to speak to a Woman) the very key of your Eloquence, and soul of
your Wit and Fancy.


Wild. Madam, this Satyr you speak of is a Cupid, blessed, sweet, and charming:
you saw it only in Disguise, which now pulled off, the God himself appears,
kind, beautiful, and young, to glad my heart with love and tender passion.


Great. Love! of what in the name of Virtue?


Wild. Of you. [Heav'n be praised it is out at last. Aside.


Great. Of me! Ha, ha, ha: I swear you are a fool then.


Wild. I am so, who can help it; yet still I must love on.


Great. Swear.


Wild. By this dear hand.

Kneels.
Great. Again.


Wild. These dazzling lovely eyes, that pretty powting lip, that Angels face,
and Wit more sacred, I do; so help me Love, and so may I thrive and prosper.


Great. You have brought your self into a fine condition.


Wild. The happiest and most sacred of my life. Loves entire self is here: my
Heart's his Palace, and every artery and vein about me is full of Love,
nothing but Love: Does not the sympathetick power Charm you? Do you not feel
him, Madam?


Great. A little.


Wild. It will be more e're long: the Deity is now just blowing up the Coals
that are to Thaw that proud, hard, frozen heart; I know it will be mine: Come,
banish (Madam) the Virgins pride and coyness, and let the Goddess, like her
self, appear: Say then you love, you will; say instantly, for every word
against it carries Fate.


Great. Well, Sir, to save your life I will; but --


Wild. Ah dear, charming, heavenly creature!

Embraces her eagerly.
Great. Nay, hear me out; for it concerns you nearly, besure you are constant: I
say, be sure you are, for I am monstrous passionate, and extremely jealous, and
hate a Rival even to Death and Hell; take heed to oblige in this, and then --


Wild. Is there a pleasure like Content in Love? No, it is impossible.

The Warrior seeks the paths where Honor trod,
The Miser courts the wealthy dazzling God.
But the Lover still the greatest joy does know,
By Beauty blessed, gains Paradise below.
Exeunt.
ACT. V.
Enter Wilding and Benedick. Bened. THis comes of Railing, Tom: Did I not
prognosticate the result of this business? have I not hourly cultivated thee
with that old phrase, Amantium irae Amoris? and art thou snapt at last? Ha, ha,
ha.


Wild. You are merry, Sir; but he that laughs when there is no Jest, is like
one that has a damned serious face, but no business, it is equally ridiculous.


Bened. Ha, ha, ha, to rail one self into a passion, is the oddest method I
ever knew; it is a fit subject for a Scene; I intend to commend it to a Poet of
my acquaintance.


Wild. Take heed, and pray that I get thee not at an advantage; for if I do, I
will be a perpetual plague to thee. A Coward that by chance has won a prize,
brags not so much as I will Tyrannize.


Bened. Ha, ha, ha; but see yonder is your man disguised, coming with Sir
Barnaby: I find the trick takes.


Wild. The Rogue has dressed himself like a Dominican; now for a Trial of my
Roundheads Orthodox-honesty; I believe I shall find him a Recreant-Knight.
Come, let us retire, and observe.

Exit.
Enter Sir Barnaby and Swift. Sir Barn. How, Father? a Bassa's Widow, say you?


Swift. Good feth is she, Sir, and Neice tal the Grand Vizier.


Sir Barn. What, and in Love with me?


Swift. Sick, Sir, even to death for you; nay, if she were not almost past
recovery, ye should not so soon have known it, Sir; poor Lady, she was bred from
an Infant under my Guardianship; I was her Confessor at Rome; and lately being
enjoined a Penance here into England to visit St. Coleman's Tomb; it is her
hard fate to fall in love, Sir; nay, is likely to throw away a vast fortune
upon a Heretic, a Protestant I fear; and if so, she is undone for ever.


Sir Barn. Od's heart here is luck now: Nay, good Father say not so, I am her
Vassal, her humble slave, her dog, any thing.


Swift. Ay, Sir, there may be love enough; and though you are Married, we can
get a Dispensation: but where is the Blessing? where is the Sanctification? Pray
what Religion are ye, Sir?


Wild. So, there' the Choak-pear; now listen. Peeping.


Sir Barn. What Religion am I? hum? why, faith, to tell thee the truth, Father,
I am -- hum -- Of what Religion am I, d' you say?


Wild. Ah! damned Rogue, now the word Orthodox cannot get out of's mouth.


Swift. Ay, Sir, what Sect? what Opinion?


Sir Barn. Opinion? why, look Father, I Am of Opinion that -- but by the way
first, if I may be so bold, pray what Estate has this Lady? you say she is very
rich.


Swift. Why, Sir, if you happen to prove an honest, godly Roman Catholic, she
shall have Ten thousand pounds; but if you are a Protestant -- Angrily.


Sir Barn. Not I man, I Am no Protestant, not I, nor never was, nor never will
be, not I -- 'Sbud Ten thousand pounds. Aside.


Swift. Or own any Allegiance or Power but his Holiness the Pope, and See of
Rome.


Sir Barn. Not I, faith, the Pope's a very worthy, civil Gentleman; and for my
part, I ever loved and honored him.


Wild. So thou would the Devil if he brought but Money enough.


Bened. Without doubt, and own him, the same civil, worthy Person.


Swift. Son, Son, I fear you are not sound at heart; I fear the weed of Heresy
has infected you, and you cannot dispense with our Doctrine.


Sir Barn. Pish, I can I tell thee with all my heart man, the Doctrine's a good
Doctrine; yes, faith, I like the humor often well enough, and will dispense
with it, bate me but the wearing of a hair Shirt, and using father Whitebread's
unconscionable Cat of Nine-tails.


Swift. Not for the World, Sir; to what height would that flesh rise, were it
not sometimes Disciplined? you are full of sin, Son, Fat, fat, very fat.


Sir Barn. Portly, portly, like the Ancient British Race, a Vessel of choice
Wares, a Man of Kidney.


Swift. See how Fate orders things; I never could persuade this Wise Lady to
love a Lean man: by St. Andrew she never could endure 'em.


Sir Barn. Gad she is a witty Woman, a most ingenious person I warrant her: and
Ten thousand pounds too! -- Uds bud there is a Sum, there is luck, there is
fortune: Go thy ways brother Fat, Gad you are a brave fellow: but, Father,
where is she, Father? I Am impatient; let me fix; let me see her.


Swift. First fix your faith, Sir; here are your Beads, the Consecrated tokens
of your Conversion; be constant, and use 'em well; pray often, then be happy.


Sir Barn. Faith I Will do what I can; but, Father, you will do me a very great
favor to oblige me with half a score good taking prayers: for to deal
ingenuously with you, I am at present a little out of sorts; you know we
Soldiers are seldom very devout.


Swift. My care shall still attend you, Sir, -- Good feth. --


Enter a Seaman with a Letter. Seaman. For Father Sawney, these from Rhodes.


Swift. Hah! and come in most happy time from her Uncle the Bassa, without
whose consent she has formerly Vowed not to Marry: and this Letter doubtless
contains his pleasure.


Reads. Letter. Since my Neice is driven to such extremity, and that her ill
fortune obliges her to Love one whose Nation I hate; I am forced to consent
to it, but upon these two Conditions: First, that he be found of Quality; and,
secondly, that he immediately turn Musselman, or else my Curse and Mahomets
follow her.


Swift. Woons what is here! why, this is worst of all, base, irreligious, worse,
worse than any thing.


Sir Barn. What? what is that? what, does he say I must turn Mustardman?


Swift. Oh! more impious, barbarous, far beyond the vainest of all Sects and
Heresies, a Fiend, a Mussle-man.


Sir Barn. Mussleman! what a Fisherman?


Swift. Worse, worse still, far more criminal than the basest of Functions; he
says you must never Marry his Neice, unless you turn Turk.


Sir Barn. Turk! Well, well, since it cannot be helped, I Will turn Turk, man,
Jew, Moor, Grecian, any thing: Pox on it, I Will not lose a Lady, and such a sum
for the sake of any Religion under the Sun, by Mahomet not I. --

Throws the Beads away.
Swift. But does not your Conscience prick you a little?


Sir Barn. Not a jot, faith. Why you old fool, our Conscience is our Interest
always, and I have not been a Rebel so long sure to have any squeamish fits at
these years.


Seaman. Our Express from the Levant brings word of a Fleet of Turkishmen
coming hither, and it is supposed upon some great design.


Swift. There Is your way, Son; and since it must be so, obey Mahomet; sight for
the Grand Signior, and win the Lady.


Sir Barn. I Will do it by Alha, by Mahomet I will; I Will go presently and corrupt
my Men; some with bribes, some with promises and fair words, others with
preferments: Then sow Sedition amongst the Mobile, win 'em with Pots of Ale,
and Penny Loass, to commit Ryots, Murders; there is your Policy! I Will do it I say;
I Am sure I Am safe, for my Astrologer has secured my life, therefore I Will go
on; and when Signior Turk and I plunder the City, the Lady Mine, and Mine the
Potent Bullion, then Grandsire Grey-beard shall thou be my Bassa.


Enter Wilding, Benedick and Officers. Wild. But e're that happen, grand
Raseal, you shall be hanged.


Sir Barn. Wilding! then I Am undone, and all the Stars have failed me.


Wild. By Mahomet have they, and most basely too; Thou Turn Coat slave, where is
your Orthodox Opinion now, your Healths in Ten quart Bumpers to the King? you
are now first for the Pope, and then for Mahomet, either, or any side, so
there is but Money: Plunder the City, raise the Mobile, Plot with a Priest here,
otherwise called my Footman, and Coachman the Tarpawlin: What think you now,
Sir?

Pulls off their Disguises.
Sir Barn. His Footman! was ever Politician so o're-reacht.


Justice. Secure him as a Traitor, and carry him to my house, where I Will take
his Examination, and accordingly make his Mittimus to Newgate.


Sir Barn. Well, I see I must be hanged, and there is an end often; but my
Astrologer's a damned Dog for telling me I should be a Duke though. But come,
since it cannot be helped, I Will even say my prayers, and suffer patiently, as
the rest of my Tribe have done before me.

Exit.
Justice. Away, away with him.


Wild. Was there ever such a Rascal?


Bened. Yes, Thousands in their hearts; but some are stanch Politicians with a
Pox to 'em.


Wild. Rogues that speak Treason by allusion and smile; a new way they have
got, would there were a new way of hanging too: but come, it is late, my
Mistress treats to night, thou shall sup with me there.


Bened. Your Mistress! oh, is it come to that?


Wild. Yes, Sir, and shall continue so, I Am now Converted.

Exeunt.
Enter Millicent and Townly's Man. Mill. Was not that Mr. Wildings Coach that
went away just as we came in.


Serve. Yes, Madam, and I heard him bid drive to my Lady Lofty's.


Mill. Pray heaven he did not see me: Friend, your Master is a very naughty
person to occasion me to venture my reputation in such a censorious place.


Serve. He Will repair that fault, Madam, when he delivers his business.


Mill. Lord, what an odious house it is! sough, what a stink is here of Tobacco?
Can this be a place of pleasure for men of sense?


Serve. Now, Madam, I hope you will believe me: here is my Master.


Enter Townly in Women's Clothes. Mill. This he? what, and Metamorphos'd to an
Exchange-Wench?


Townly. So Jove, the Sire of all the Gods above,
Transformed himself to gain Europa's Love.
Madam, I see you are a Woman of Honor by being thus punctual, and ought to be
trusted another time.


Mill. I doubt that is more than I can safely say of you; I hope your
Lawbusiness is ended, Sir?


Townly. Yes, I have overthrown my Adversary at last; but we had a long bout
often first, faith.


Mill. And you came just now from Westminster Hall in this garb?


Townly. No Child, in this garb, no: I only devised this to be secure from
discovery; for if I am not mistaken, I saw Sir Walter below in a Ground-room;
and he and I are fallen out of late.


Mill. Sir Walter! What a fright am I in? are you sure he did not see me?


Townly. No, nor me neither; he was very busy playing at Tick-tack with one of
the Drawers.


Enter Servant with Clothes. Serve. Sir, the Porter has brought your Clothes.


Townly. So, so that is well: Come, sirrah, help me to Unrig: Pull off these
damned Cobweb-Caps here, and give me my Peruke.


Mill. And did you really disguise your self thus for my sake?

Puts on his Wigg.
Townly. Upon my soul did I; and if you don't think this a proof of my Love and
Constancy, Gad, Madam, you're ungrateful.


Mill. Nay, rather than be thought so, I will believe you.


Townly. You have reason I think; you know I hate Lying. Come, sirrah, give me
my Coat.

Boy helps it on.
Enter the Captain. Capt. I dogged my beloved Pinnace to this house, and have
now lost her: 'Sbud I Am afraid she is no better than a Fireship, and ten to one
comes here to be Manned. How now! who are these?


Townly. Dammee, Sir, is this civil to intrude? Hah! the Captain!

Starts.
Mill. Oh! fatal Chance!


Capt. Oones, what is here a Man! Oh! I Am undone! abused! a Cuckold! oh! damned
Whore, what turned to a Man?


Serve. How! the Captain? nay, then all is discovered; but I Will run and Inform
Madam Livia, it may be she may help my Master.

Exit.
Capt. A Hermophrodite, a Man! Oh! Villain, I Will give thee a Chase Gun
presently, a damned Son of a Whore.

Draws.
Townly. A Man! what d' you mean, Sir? why I Am a Woman I assure you, and a
near Relation of this Lady's, upon my Honor.

Court'sies.
Capt. What, a Woman?


Townly. Yes, and this habit is only a preparation for a Masquerade to night;
pray reform your Error, and do not fright me, Sir; I tell you I Am a Woman.


Capt. 'Sbud show, show, I Will not believe you unless you show.


Townly. 'Sdeath what shall I do; nay more than that, Sir, upon my Honor I Am
quick with Child.


Capt. How, Quick! that is very likely: Oh! Dolt, Dunce, Fool, not to perceive
the cheat before. Quick in the Devil's name.


Townly. This is strange-rudeness, Sir, to one you never saw before.


Capt. No, no, I did not bring my Wife to you this afternoon, did I?


Mill. How, bring his Wife to him?


Townly. To me, Sir? Oh! the Devil now all comes out. Aside.


Capt. No, no, nor like a Sea-Calf as I was, I did not lock ye both up together
in the Alcove, did I?


Mill. It Is plain now, this disguise was not meant to me, but Livia. Oh!
perjured Traitor!


Capt. That I am a Cuckold, is most certain and a notorious Cuckold, and by my
own contrivance too; had I been translated to a Sea horse, a Dog, a Calf, or
any beast but that, I should have been contented: but a Sea-Cuckold, 'sbud it is
the most horrid Monster it has.


Townly. A Cuckold! why then, Sir, upon my faith I Am incapacitated for any
such business.


Capt. A plague of your Capacity, I Will scowr your Midships presently; thus,
Sir, and thus Monsieur Rampant.


Enter Sir Walter. Sir Walt. How now, what is the matter?


Capt. A Rascal, a Cheat, a Cuckold-making Villain.


Sir Walt. How, Townly?


Capt. What, Townly? Oh! Damned Rogue, is it he all this while too?


Townly. So, I Have made a fine business on it.


Sir Walt. Oh, Traitor! have we caught you at last? Mawl him, Captain, Mawl
him, he has Mawl'd you in the person of your Wife, to my knowledge. Hah! what is
there my Spouse too!


Mill. My Husband! Oh! cursed minute!


Capt. Nay, he has mawl'd us both if the truth were known.


Sir Walt. My Wife found with him in an Eating alias Bawdy House: Ay, it is
evident now I Am a Cuckold both ways.


Capt. However this Horn of mine shall knock his brains out.


Sir Walt. And mine.

Strikes him.
Townly. 'Sdeath I shall be Murdered.


Enter Three Officers. 1 Offic. Here he is: Sir, I arrest you at the Suit of
Timothy Turpentine, in an Action of 500 l. Come, you must along with me.

Gives a paper.
Townly. Sir Timothy Turpentine? what a Pox is the meaning of this? I know no
such man: It Is Livia's hand; oh! the dear Creature.


Reads. I question whether you deserve this; however, knowing your necessity, I
have contrived to get you off; meet me at the corner of the next Street, and
hereafter (if possibly your sex can) be grateful.
1 Offic. Sir we are not used to delay; come, Brother, take him away.


Sir Walt. Ay, and the Devil go with him*


Townly. Well, Gentlemen, stay till I put on my Breeches, and I Will obey your
Authority.


1 Offic. Oh! Sir, we will take care of the Breeches, never fear: Come away, away.


Capt. No remedy, no revenge upon this Rascal; have I boarded and took a
Galiass of the Turks with 800 Men in her, to lose my Honor here at home by a
damned Fly-boat, with one Gun, a Fisherman, a Flap-Dragon, a Plague upon his
Capacity.


Sir Walt. This comes of Pimping, Captain; you must keep the door; 'twas not
civil to disturb 'em; a fine time to use manners in, by my troth: And a man of
sense, as I was, was not to be believed; your own Judgment, forsooth, must
pass, not knowing that it is as unnatural for a true Tarpawlin to have Wit, as a
true Wit to have Money.


Capt. This comes of Matrimony. On my Conscience I had been an Admiral before
now, if it had not been for a damned Wise.


Sir Walt. Come, prithee let us go and make our selves drunk to put us in heart.
It Is some comfort to me however, to know that this blustering fool is a Cuckold
as well as my self. Aside.


Capt. A Queen, a Jilt; Oons I Will go home and flea her.


Sir Walt. And so will I mine: and, Captain, do hear, we will have two pair of
Gloves made of their skins, and make a present of 'em to the Devil, to keep us
from any more such bargains.


Capt. With all my heart, Gads bud.

Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Enter Winifrid and Rachel. Winif. RAchels.


Rach. Madam.


Winif. Give me the Pomatums and her Night-gloves; her hands have bin fery
exceeding rough all this day.


Rach. There has been a sharp Air, Madam.


Winif. Got pless me, how pale her looks! It has made her lips chap too.


Rach. All will be smooth and beautiful to morrow, Madam.


Winif. No, I vow my pewties, I think, is in decays, as Moons in Wanes, or
Flowers in Autumns. Rachels, how do thou like me in these Dresses? should
thou have heart-burnings and passions for me, if thou were a Gentleman's, hah?


Rach. I would I were one to put you to the proof.


Winif. Nay, without doubt these Pinners must be pecoming in beds, where there
is good faces, look you; but what nauceous, ugly Night-dresses the men have, as
got pless me; I never see a man's with his Crop-ears and his Night-caps, but I
think upon crete Rogue, one Shinkin, ap Powell, ap Shone, ap Davy, ap
Cadwaller, that was hanged in Montgomery.


Rach. Will not Mr. Benedick go down with you, Madam? he, I hope, has a face
that would set off any Dress.


Winif. Dull faces is the worst of all I vow, he is the fery Snail of his Sex,
and much fitter for Lawyers, than Lovers; he would lose Mistress for
punctilio's, like a silly Rogues; and as, got save me, he that loses one
critical minute, should never be happy by another for Winifrid.


Rach. I ever took him for a brisker man than to lose any Love-occasion.


Winif. Fery good, then you do not know him so well as I, Rachels; pesides, he
has put wrongs and affronts upon Winny; and when her Welsh pload's up, Gads
plut Revenges shall follow: Therefore, Rachels, persure you perform my Orders.


Rach. I have made ready the Hanging-bed, Madam, and Oiled the Cords and
Pulleys, as you bid me, but am wholly ignorant of your design.


Winif. Designs is cood and fertuous, I would expose lewd fellows to Eyes and
Observations, and Jeers and Laughters, look you: Hark what noise is that! it is
he I hope: and now for Welsh tricks and fallacies.

Exit.
Enter Gratiana, Townly, Livia. Townly. Most certainly he has discovered us,
for he saw us take Coach.


Great. And, Madam, are you sure he pursued you hither?


Livia. Ah! too sure, Madam, he is at the door by this time; and being almost
drunk, is possessed with the strangest fury and ill nature, that unless you
conceal me, who knows what his Barbarity may incite him to. Ah! Madam, Heaven
keep you from such a Husband.

Weeps.
Townly. Ah! Dear cunning Creature! Aside.


Great. If these are the blessings incident to such a life, I think the Prayer
is necessary. Come, Madam, be comforted, and all the assistance I can lend you
be sure of. Poor soul, she weeps extremely.


Townly. Weep! I, Millstones.


Great. You are not involved in this business; I hope, Sir, the Captain has no
reason to extend his rage to you.


Townly. Not to me, 'dsheart I am plunged deepest of all, Madam; he designs to
cut my Throat, to Stab, to Pistol me only for taking her part.


Great. Madam, that door opens into a private, back Apartment; go and lock your
self in, whilst I try if I can pacify him: Hark! I think I hear him, in, in
quickly: Nay, not you, Sir, I tell you it is a private Apartment, and not fit to
entertain men.

Exit Livia.
Townly. Entertainment! The Devil take me, Madam, if I expect any.


Great. You Will not be rude I hope, Sir; pray come back, I wonder what you take me
for.


Townly. Take thee for? why a good, fair, charming: Ah! Plague here shall I
stand chatting punctilio's till I have a Bullet lodged in my head. For Heavens
sake, Madam; if not there, show me some other place; for if he sees me, I Am
undone.


Great. Oh! you can shift, Sir, you can shift; your sex is excellent at it; and
were you distressed, I know could climb a Chimney as dexterously as e're a black
boy in Shoreditch.


Townly. Yes, choked with Soot, e're I got half way, come tumbling down like a
smoak't Flitch of Bacon.


Great. Or upon occasion to show your Agility, leap from a Window; these are
large, and wide, Sir, and fit for such a purpose.


Townly. Ay, and high enough to break ones neck too; 'Sdeath, Madam, d' you
make a Gib-Cat of me, and think I can leap three Stories, and pitch upon all
four; Fie, fie, I beseech you have Charity.


Great. What, lock you up in the dark with another man's Wife; a very decent
piece of Charity indeed: but by this fear of yours, Sir, I guess you to be some
Criminal; I have heard she had a Gallant; and now I think on it, it may be you
are the Man.


Townly. Now a lucky lie to help me off, or I Am ruined: Tom Wilding, Madam,
indeed was suspected: but for my part, I never had such good fortune, I.


Great. What is it he says, Wilding? who, Sir? Pray that again.


Townly. Mr. Wilding, Madam, a witty man, and the best at a Wheedle and
Town-Gallantry of any one I know.


Great. Perjured Traitor! how often has he swore he never Loved any one but me?
And, Sir, are you sure he is the man?


Townly. Madam, why all the Town knows it: I know he is too cunning to confess
any thing: Come, dear Madam, some Lobby or Closet, something Hark! what noise
is that?


Great. There is no Faith in man; none, none I swear; for when they vow, they
lie; and if they weep, it is Crocodile-like, after they have done a mischief.
Once more then farewell, soft passion, and all my tide of Love now turn to
Anger.

Exit.
Townly. Nay, Madam, Madam, -- What gone at last, and left me, the Devil's in
these Virtuous Women, they are ever ill-natured. An honest, good-humored Whore
would have been damned e're she would have left a Man so, but would have found
some hole or other to put one in. Well, here is hangings however, Gad I Will creep
like a Rat in here, since there is no other hopes.

Exit.
Enter Millicent and Rachel. Mill. Is it possible there can be such Treachery?
are you sure you saw him here with Livia? Angrily.


Rach. Mr. Townly is a Man so generally known, Madam, that you need not fear my
mistake.


Mill. It Is plain now, the Arrest was only a trick of hers to get him off; Oh!
subtle Devil, she out-wits me every way. Well, bring me but to him, and I have
my wish: there is a Purse for thee; an Earnest of a greater reward, if I find
thou can keep a secret.


Rach. So these are the infallible keys that unlock the Consciences of all my
Function: This is certainly one of Townly's conveniences; a Miss of Quality,
as he calls 'em, that is grown jealous, has dogged him hither, and designs
hereafter to make him pay for his Treachery. Madam, I have considered on it, and
will do my best endeavor to serve you; pray follow me softly, I Am sure he is
not far off.


Mill. Believe a man when he swears? No, I Would believe the Devil sooner, if he
should take a Ghostly Oath for Reformation.

Exit.
Enter Benedick and Winifrid. Winif. And will you Marry me, as Got pless you?
will you always have Loves and Fidelities indeed?


Bened. Oh! will I live? will I be happy? prithee do not doubt me.


Winif. I fow my heart does so tremble and peat, and her was so ashamed.


Bened. Of what, my Dear? there is no cause.


Winif. Oh! there is crete Causes; for when firginities is gone, what will
pecome of my poor Souls, look you?


Bened. Thy Soul! why, it shall be exchanged for mine, and, happy we, shall by
the Transmigration be Immortal.


Winif. I swear you are fery lewd man's to tempt me thus.


Bened. I swear you are more cruel to deny me thus.


Winif. Oh! Heavens! but her was afraid it is grievous sins.


Bened. 'Pshaw, 'pshaw, a Sin! no, no, a Trifle, no more than telling a lie, a
Venial Error. Gad I must make haste, for if she get once into a Religious vein,
the Devil cannot retrieve her. Come, come dear creature, delay is death to me.


Winif. Well, get you to that ped there, I Will go and dispose Rachels out of the
way, and then if you will be so unnaturals.


Bened. Do not believe I will. Go fly then with all the Wings of Love, for I
shall wait thee with impatience.


Winif. Alas poor fools, her shall return too soon if her knew all. Now for the
rest of tricks and projects, and then Winny shall laugh, and take revenges of
dull fellows, that lose Plessings, and Critical Minutes, and Love-seasons.

Exit.
Bened. Consent adds as much to the Joys of Love as Beauty; it is the life, the
soul of Enjoyment, when a dear-bought Amor, by talking, toyling, sweating and
struggling diminishes half the pleasure; and is just like one that rides a
tedious Journey upon a damned trotting Horse, to possess an inconsiderable
profit, not worth a quarter of his pains. She stays long, pray heaven she does
not fall into a Fit of Religion again, that is all my fear.


Capt. within. -- There Is a Room locked; by Mars I Will see what is there.


Bened. Hark! what noise is that? a plague on her trifling; if she'de come and
lock the door, we should be safe.


Cap. I Will hear no Excuses, either let me search fairly, or I Will send for my
Lord Chief Justices Warrant.


Enter Livia. Livia. Was ever poor Woman so distressed? if I had staid a minute
longer in that room, he had certainly found me, for it is unfurnished, and has
no place of shelter. Where I am, I know not, nor what way to escape. Oh! for a
favorable Window now, but one Story high, opening into a heavenly Garden; I Would
venture a Leg or an Arm with all my heart: Hark! he is coming, oh! whither shall
I run. -- Ha, what is here a bed? I think it is so; I Will wrap my self in the
Bed-cloaths, it may be some obliging Deity will pity me, and cast a mist before
his Eyes.


Bened. She keeps her word I see.


Livia. Ah! what is here a Man. Bened. goes to embrace her, she shrieks and
starts back. Pray Sir, let me go, I am not the person you expect. Here the Bed
is drawn up. What Is here a Chest? I Will get in here, it may be this may secure
me. Gets into the Chest.


Capt. Search you that Cabin, Sir Walter, whilst I go in here and sound yonder
Sugar-Chest.


Bened. Hah! that is a man's voice, somebody is coming in hither sure; but, by
way of prevention, I Will go and bolt the door. How now! what a Devil is the
meaning of this? where is the Floor? I believe the Devil is building, and has
taken it away to supply his Domestic occasions.


Enter Captain and Gratiana. Great. Jealousy, like sickness, is ever forming
monstrous fancies: Pray what have you found now? would he had her, for I hate
her for that Traitor Wilding's sake. Aside.


Capt. She Scuds before the Wind now, but I shall weather her anon: How now?
what have we here a bed, and hanging in the Air by Geometry?


Great. My Nieces bed, Sir, made after the manner of a Welsh Hamock; I believe
she is in it too, you had best be rude now, and disturb her.


Capt. Hamock? why how the Devil can she get into it? Oons can she fly?


Great. No, Sir, and yet make use of it when she has occasion.


Capt. Come, come, I Will search, I Will see who is there. -- Well, what News, Sir
Walter?


Enter Sir Walter. Sir Walt. News! rare News, blessed News; why I have found
'em at last; there has been hopeful doings yonder behind the Hangings.


Capt. Between whom?


Sir Walt. Even Townly and your blessed Wife; they have been Communicating, it
seems, for your good, Captain.


Capt. Oh Dog! oh Rascal! steer me to him quickly -- 'Sbud I Will flea him as I
would do an Eel.


Sir Walt. I can but laugh to think how demurely, how sneakingly the Rogue
stood up in the corner among the Cobwebs.


Capt. A Pox, bring me to him; do that; let me see him.


Great. So this will be some revenge upon her however. Aside.


Sir Walt. They are secured, and I Will show thee the place; but I Will not be seen
in person, for a private reason, best known to my self.


Great. Nor I neither, though I wish her the punishment she deserves; I Will not
be accessory. Aside.


Capt. I care not, away, Port hard, and put the Keel a-Weather; away, scowr.

Exeunt.
Livia. So, now I hope Fortune will smile upon me.


Bened. 'Sdeath here is a whole Troop coming, and Wilding amongst 'em; is there
no way to escape?


Enter Sir Walter, Wilding, Winifrid, and Servants. Wild. Ha, ha, ha; there in
that hanging-bed, say thou?


Winif. Yes, I fow in Altitudes and Expectations of Win^y's company's; Alas!
poor Shentleman's.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha.

All laugh at Benedick.
Sir Walt. How Benedick?


Winif. Cood morrows, cood Sir, methinks Loves, and Passions, and kind
Pedfellows makes her look fery pale and wan, cood Sir.


Sir Walt. This comes of Whoring, Benedick; this comes of Whoring.


Wild. How? is she angry, say thou?

Enter Rachel, and whispers Wilding.
Sir Walt. Ha, ha, ha.


Bened. I shall be angry, Sir, if you pursue this humor; but for thee, I Will
only give thee this Curse, may Pride, Pox, and Poverty possess thee till thou
art nauseous to thy own Sex, and contemptible to ours.

Exit.
Winif. Ah, say your prayers petter, and choose plessed minutes and
opportunities, you never else will win fair Ladies, upon my Souls, look you.


Enter Captain and Townly fighting, Millicent Mask't, and Servants. Sir Walt.
Udso, the Porpoise appears now, cheer up my hearts, here is a Storm a coming.
So, Captain, you have found 'em I see. Parting 'em.


Capt. Found who, Sir? what mean you, Sir, Hoh?


Sir Walt. Mean, Sir, hoh? I mean you're a Cuckold, Sir; what a Pox should I
mean?


Capt. With your favor, Sir, I ever give precedence to one of your Quality;
you are a Knight, Sir.


Sir Walt. But my Wife is no such Strumpet, Sir, to follow a man about the
Town, Sir; Ha, ha, ha. Nay, Madam, you must not leave us, faith.

She Is going, and he holds her.
Capt. No, faith Madam, you must not leave us, you must unvail first; yours is
a face, the Gentleman may know if he looks twice upon it.


Sir Walt. Yes, yes, I have had the Honor to see her: -- What Is here? what my
Wife!


Capt. No, no, a Strumpet, a Queen, that follows every man, Ha, ha; ha.


Sir Walt. My Spouse! oh! Impudent! oh! Salacious Varlet! Jilt! Jesabel! let me
come to her.


Townly. Pray hear me, Sir.


Capt. Ay, pray hear him, Sir.


Sir Walt. Yes, you're a precious fellow to be heard, Sir: Oh, Rascal, did you
not swear by Gog, and Magog, and two or three Devils more, never to Violate the
Person of my Wife.


Townly. Nor have I, Sir, upon my faith.


Mill. This is my time to escape, if ever, and I see I must make use of it.

Exit.
Sir Walt. And did I not for this reason read her over, as it were a Lecture to
thee? nay, there is never a Wart nor a Mole about her but I described, like a
Son of a Whore as I was.


Townly. I confess it, Sir, and my Fidelity both to her and you, I hope, has
been apparent.


Capt. Ay, ay, behind the Hangings very apparent indeed. Well, since this is
the fate of Wiving; 'Sbud, for the future, I Will even revenge my self in the
same manner; I have two Whores that lie yonder at Wapping, they are well
washed, and tallow'd, and want only Rigging: by Mars I Will board 'em to night.


Livia. What, both, Sir? both I beseech you, spare one till to morrow. Peeping
out of the Chest.


Capt. My Wife here too, and concealed in the Sugar-Chest.


Livia. Shall not I have the Honor to warm their Night-Cloaths, or untye their
Shoes, Sir? a poor Cast Saylor of yours that wants employment.


Capt. No, Mistress, you are Boarded already, it seems by a new Officer there,
and no doubt but he has given thee Press-money.


Livia. Not yet, Sir; I am not prepared; I am not Washed nor Tallow'd, as your
two Whores are at Wapping.


Capt. Plague on her, the Jade has got the Wind on me.


Livia. Behaving your self so honorably toward me, could you not forbear
being Jealous, Sir? nay, and of Mr. Townly too, when had not his Intrigue with
my Lady Millicent a little freed me, Lord, what a Storm poor I should have
suffered under your boisterous imagination.


Sir Walt. Thou notorious Varlet, did not I positively enjoin thee to rules of
modesty, and not to touch any thing bare above her ankle, hah? Hold up your
hand; art thou Guilty, or not Guilty? hah?


Townly. Not Guilty, my Lord.


Sir Walt. Well, though I know thou lie, a Pox take thee, I will believe
thee, because it is for my quiet; but I will fight with thee too, because it is
for my honor; make thee beg thy life, and afterward kill thee to satisfy my
revenge; for thou have, I vehemently suspect, made me a double Cuckold both in
Wife and Mistress, and therefore double shall be the punishment.


Capt. Nay, it shall be Treble, for I Will have a snack of him, by Mars.


Townly. So I shall be cut into steakes sure, and fried for their Suppers:
Look, Gentlemen, pray no more words on it; as far as my Sword can go, it is
heartily at your service.


Sir Walt. When this is done, I Will bid farewell to this damned debauched Town;
for my part, I Will scowr down to Lancashire and reap my Barley.


Capt. And I Will to Sea again, I and my Jolly Crew.


Livia. Whores and all, Sir?


Capt. Yes, Buttock, Whores and all; there will I Conquer some flourishing
Island, where I will plant a Colony, live out the rest of my days merrily, and
defy the Devil and Fortune.


Livia. And I, poor melancholy Widow, will devote my self to my Closet, and
spend the rest of my days in Prayers and Contemplations.


Winif. And that is fery sollitary livings and recreations, upon my soul is it,
look you.


Enter Wilding and Gratiana. Wild. Not to hear my defense, is barbarous.


Great. It Is Justice when the wrong's so palpable.


Wild. Your humor makes 'em so, although they are not.


Great. You are rude, pray keep your way.

Flings away.
Wild. There Is no such Pride as Woman's!

The Ambitious Statesman gay, and fond of Rule,
The Witless Courtier, and the Upstart Fool
had never half this Vanity; yet you shall see your Error. Hark, Sir! did you
tell this Lady I was a Servant to Madam Livia there. To Townly.


Townly. So, here is another Thunderbolt: A Pox on my Lying tongue, it will be
my ruin one time or other. Aside.

Why, faith Tom, to deal freely with thee, I confess I did tell her some such
business.


Wild. Then, Sir, you are a Raseal, and follow me.


Townly. Not a foot, by this light I will not fight with thee, Tom, before
Supper: But to put an end to the business.

Madam, what I told you was a damned Lie, and there is no truth in me.


Wild. That Is not enough, Sir: did ever I speak to thee of that Lady?


Townly. Never, never, the Devil take me if thou did.


Wild. Now, Madam, what satisfaction must I expect?


Great. A man of Honor will be contented with what is reasonable: there is my
hand.


Wild. Heart and Lip too, or else the Article's not Sealed.

Kisses her.
Great. Besides, if you love me, 'twill be the easier to pardon.


Wild. I swear I love thee; but this haughty humor, this Cloud that shades the
Sun of Perfection, does somewhat cool my passion: for believe me, Madam, and
let your Sex all heed this Observation.

Fools may love Pride, and a coy face adore;
Just Spaniel-like, though beaten, cringe the more.
To such be proud and vain, but shun the Offense,
If you would e're attract a man of Sense.
Pride hinders there the Joys his Love would bring,
As Storms and Frosts keep back the kindly Spring.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE spoken by a New ACTRESS.
SInce Wit and Merit never can have the Grace,
To make you Pleaders in the Poets Case;
Nor this Collation gratefully to take,
Who knows but you may do it for my sake:
For though in vain men for your favor sue,
We Women often have a trick will do:
And therefore I am sent here to engage
Friends to his side, and calm the Critics rage.
If I should fail, he would be apt to say
That I was in the fault, I damned his Play.
I that till now never so exposed have bin;
Nay, and if hissed, will never Act again.
Then blast not, Sirs, the blossom in its prime,
Pray let me not be damned before my time;
I never bubbled ye, never made a League,
And after Jilted ye with false Intrigue;
Never balk'd your Passion with Sham^ (female) Plots,
Your Pocket's picked, or stole your laced Crevats;
Besides, with your Opinion too I Am blessed,
I Will take it on my Salvation I Am no Priest:
Nor did Religion e're my brains control;
I am like you, of none, upon my Soul.
Great Interest to me the Golden Shore is,
Interest that makes you Fools, and Whiggs and Tories:
It Is that obliges me with kind behavior,
For the Poet humbly sue to get your favor.
I could command, but that is not yet my due,
Nor will not be (perhaps) this year or two.
But if you fail, look you your ground maintain,
For there will come a time when I shall reign.
A time will come, when Chloris shall be haunted,
Then all your Joys and Raptures shall be scanted,
And what you long wish for, shall never be granted.


