A COUNTER-BLAST TO THE PHANATICKS, Those Prodigious Catter-pillers, Hatched by
the Jesuits, whose Father is the DEVIL, and Godfather the POPE.
On their last Insurrection against the Life of his most Sacred MAJESTY,
CHARLES the Second, KING of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, etc.

HOw? the Phanaticks sway? they stab the King?
Dam'nd fools! could they imagine such a thing?
Then, Sprats shall conquer Whales, the guilty Owl,
The Eagles, and the Mice shall Lions rule.
Courage my friends; Phanticks, like Venus mole,
Do add a luster to a Loyal soul.
Like Wisps, which scour better Vessels, They
Do brush our sins, and then are cast away.
They are but sauce to sweeter meat; by their
Vices, more pleasing our Virtues are:
Spawned by Beelzebub, brought up from Hell,
In Christ his Name, Christianity to Quell:
King Jesus they are for, (so the damned Crew,
That Murdered him, was for King Jesus too)
Fond Bedlams! what! could they think that Heaven,
Would taint the world with Phanatick leaven?
That Christ would be Crowned, King, and Sovereign,
By'th' wicked, silly, base Phanatick Train?
Are these St. John's, to cry, make straight the way,
And in the mean time Murder, Kill and Slay?
Think they, that God, his servant Charles would save
From Tyrant Oliver's and grander Rebels grave?
To give him up, to such poor Mirmydons, as these,
Whose very looks would breed a new Disease.
Away, vile brood of Heretics, go tell,
Your master Jesuits (those Imps of Hell)
That force of Gunpowder treason.
Gunpowder could not destroy,
Nor hurt, the sacred line of Charles le Roy:
Much less such Schismatics, as you; whose race
Is unto Dunn, and Tyburne a disgrace.
But, why should I blurr paper with such blots
Of impudence, the Kingdoms pest, and spots;
Dreggs of the baser sort, whose only fame,
Is to act wickedness, in God's good Name?
My Muse, abjure such Dunghill birds, as they,
And leave them to infernal Hawks a prey.
Behold! your gracious King! whom I am sent,
To give all honest Israelites content:
The Royal line! and their mirac'lous fate!
These, these, are best for thee to Celebrate.
It Is true, two branches of the Royal Oak,
Are Since the Restoration.
past to Heaven by the Fatal stroke;
But three remain; thus God does grace,
Both Men and Angels with the Royal race.
Phanaticks judge their death a curse for sin, why?
Because for sin it is that Phanaticks dye,
Yet sure, if none but sinners dye, why fade
Phanatick Saints? for what was heaven made?
But cease my daring Muse; the very word
Phanatick, makes a true man draw his sword:
It Is able to hatch Witches, nay make Pluto
Doubt where he is the greatest devil, or no:
He Is a single Devil, but in this one,
Phanaticks, dwells more then a Legion.
It Is sins Epitome, of ignorance the sum
Of Evils genus generalissimum.
Like Sampsons Foxes by the tail, All sin,
And sects do join in a Phanatick 's skin:
Phanatick, and not be poisoned, to quote,
A man had need first drink an Antidote.
But since such Vermin hang, and Charles does Reign,
I Will sing the praise of my Dread Sovereign:
Who though a Prince disguised, or sun 'ith clouds,
He sojourned a while with foreign Crowds:
Yet now his Own have Owned him their King,
All Nations to his grace shall homage bring.
Kings; nay victory it self, shall deem it pride,
To be made subject unto such a guide:
His presence is a heaven, in him's the sum,
Of all our hopes, past, present, and to come:
Comparisons by him get a degree,
For he is greater then the greatest, He
Has made the Gods seem impotent, for they
Cannot give us greater bliss, then Charles his ray:
Nor Rider's words, nor Tulli's Eloquence,
Can half express his grand magnificence,
He Is more then Men or Angels can rehearse,
The fame and Phaenix of the universe.
In brief.
He does as far Excel all men in Piety,
As the Phanaticks do in Villainy.
Giles Duncombe of the Inner Temple Gent. Author of Scutum Regale, the Royal
Buckler. Or, Vox Legis, a Lecture to Traitors.

London, Printed Anno Dom. 1660.


