A SUMMARIE ACCOUNT OF Mr John Dury's FORMER and LATTER NEGOTIATION: For the
procuring of true Gospel Peace, with Christian Moderation and Charitable Unity
amongst the Protestant Churches, and Academies.

^ABORE ET CONSTANTIA printer's device of Plantin Press

LONDON, Printed for the Author, in the year 1657.

A SUMMARY ACCOUNT OF Master JOHN DVRYE's former and latter NEGOTIATION.
WHen in the year 1628. John Dury was in Prussia Minister to the English
Company of Merchants residing at Elbing, he was sent unto, The first occasion
of this work was at Elbing.
dealt withal, Godeman a wise, godly, and learned man, one of the King of
Swedens Privy Counselors, and Judge of his high Court in those parts, to
second him in a business of Ecclesiastical Unity amongst Protestants, which he
said his King and Master would be glad to advance. So good a motion being
readily entertained, it came to pass afterward, when Sir Thomas Roe was sent
Ambassador Extraordinary by his Majesty of Great Britain, Mr. Durre's being
at Elbing.
to agree the Swedes and Polonians (which also he did successfully perform)
that both Doctor Godeman and Master Dury did make him thoroughly acquainted with
all the passages of their Negotiation. Whereupon he according to that generous
disposition, which did lead him to favor all good endeavors of a public
nature, did very willingly assist them with Counsel, Duryes entreaty, conferred
with the Lord Chancellor Oxenstiern, to see how far he would show himself in
the business, and what course might be resolved upon to proceed jointly to the
effect thereof. The Lord Chancellor manifested a good liking to the work, and
promised to my Lord Ambassador to join effectually therein toward his King,
and the Lutheran Clergy of his best acquaintance. Upon this ground, my Lord
Ambassador encouraged Master Dury to proceed; and when his Lordship was gone
into England, the Lord Chancellor sent for him, heard his particular Proposals,
conferred with him about the same, testified his willingness to give assistance
thereunto, and desired Master Dury to give him information of the passages of
the work in time to come; so he went from Elbing into England in the year 1630.
England.
Chiefly, Elbing was dissolved, by reason of the inconveniences which war had
brought upon the Trade in that place: and because Sir Thomas Roe had promised
to move the chief Prelates in England to assist him in the work of
pacification. Mr. Dury's being in England.
Being then arrived there, he first acquainted his most familiar friends of the
Clergy with his purpose, and showed them some Declarations written by the
chief Preachers of Dantzigh to make it appear, that they were not only ready
to join in such a Negotiation, but also desirous and in hope that the Divines
in England would in like manner concur; which being done, he came to Sir Thomas
Roe, who was mindful of his promise, and became every way as good as his word
toward him. For he recommended the business toward the King, who was pleased
to refer the consideration of the matter to the Bishop of Canterbury, and to
the Bishop of London, that they should hear Master Dury, and declare their
resolutions to his Proposals. This was done accordingly; and he was commanded
to write unto the Divines of his acquaintance in Prussia, and to the Lord
Chancellor Oxenstiern, to testify first the good inclination, and resolution
which the Clergy of England had, to cooperate in due time toward so good a
work. Secondly, That their Counsel for the present was only this, that to
prepare a way for future Treaties, the Magistrates of both sides should inhib^^
railing disputes in the Pulpit, and put down the names of partiality, so far as
could be done, and not suffer any public Disputes to be fomented about matters
of Ceremony in the form of public Worship.

This he did, and after a good space, when news came, that the Protestant
Princes in Germany had leagued themselves together for their mutual defense,
Mr. Dury's being in Germany.
and that an amiable conference of their Divines had been holden with good
success at Leipzigh to compose their differences in Religion, Master Dury was
permitted to go into Germany, that he might see how the Divines of all sides
might be disposed toward a Conjunction of Councels, and endeavors in the Work.

To make a way for this purpose, he had beforehand by the means of Sir James
Spense Lord of Oreholm, and General to the Scottish Nation in the Swedish
Army, given notice to his Majesty of Sweden, what his aim was in the business
of Reconcilement, and how it might be effected: Therefore when he came in the
year 1631. into Germany, he found the King somewhat prepared, whom soon after
the Battle fought at Leipzigh, he spoke withal at Wirtsburg. His Majesty was
pleased to give him large audience, At Wirtsburg.
and by conference received full information of all those deliberations, and
particular ways, whereby the Work could be prosecuted; of which, the Summary
resolution whereunto his Majesty gave assent, was this: That the Counsel given
by the Prelates of England was to be followed, for the inhibition of Disputes
and partial names: and that as Master Dury did intend to labor with the
Divines of the Reformed side to dispose them, to join unanimously in the means
and ways of amity, so his Majesty would recommend the same endeavors to be
undertaken by some Divines of the Lutheran side, who should in like manner work
upon the rest of their own party, and afterward when a fit preparation should
be found on both sides, then His Majesty did offer to give unto Master Dury his
Letters of public recommendation toward the Princes of Germany, and chiefly
toward the Elector of Brandenburg, and Landgrave of Hessen, that with his and
their concurrence, and the help of foreign Divines, the business might be
brought to a solemn conclusion. Dury dealt first with the Divines of Hessen,
then with those of Hanaw, and of the Palatinate, and of Deuxpont, and of the
We^teraw, till he heard the King of Sweden was dead; which evil news, although
they made a stop in some part of his resolutions, yet they made him not leave
the same, but altering a little his course, he procured from all the foresaid
Divines certain Letters and Declarations, whereof some were inscribed to the
Bishop of Canterbury, some jointly to him and to the Bishop of London, whereby
they showed their serious intention to labor for unity, with a desire to be
assisted by the Church of England.

Whiles this was a doing, At Heilbron.
Sir Robert Anstruther arrived as Extraordinary Ambassador from his Majesty to
the Princes of Germany. With him Master Dury (having now gained the consent of
some of the chief reformed Churches in those parts, and thinking it fit to deal
with the Lutheran side also) went to the meeting of the Protestant States,
which was appointed at Heilebron, Lutheran Statesmen to insinuate to the
Divines of that side certain Propositions, which made known unto them his
purpose. This first motion was not without effect toward many, Mr. Dury's
being at Franckfort.
and chiefly toward those of Strasburg and Norimberg, and some in the land of
Wurtenburg. The meeting being ended, and the League framed at Heilebrone, he
returned from thence toward the quarters of Franckfort, and dealt with two
superintendents, Doctor Dunner who was set over Mentz by the Lord Chancellor of
Sweden, and Doctor Le^sering who had the inspection of Darmstat, and with the
Senior Pastor of the City of Franckfort, Doctor Tettelbach. All these were
brought to recommend the Work unto their Brethren, and in the mean time the
Churches at Paris, Geneva, Metts, and the University of Sedan, sent their
answers (for Letters formerly had been written to them) wherein they assisted
Master Dury with Counsel. Some also of the Lutheran side declared in like
manner a forward zeal and inclination to the work, by certain Declarations
imparted to that effect unto him. Therefore when a larger opportunity to work
more effectually upon all, was offered by another meeting of the Protestant
States, which was appointed at Frankfort, he thought good to make his intention
known unto the convocated Ambassadors, and desired their assistance to further
the same; whereupon a resolution was taken to this effect:

Whereas Mr. Dury having desired of the Confederate Evangelicall States,
permission to treat with the Divines and Pastors of their Churches, concerning
the means of Peace Ecclesiastical; Although the Ambassadors then present had
not gotten any particular Instructions concerning this matter from their
Principals: yet nevertheless their opinion was, that if the Lord Chancellor
Oxenstiern would by his authority adv^nce this matter, that their Masters who
wish from their hearts for this Unity, will be so much the more ready with all
their endeavors to give assistance thereunto, according to the beginning made
at the Conference held at Leipzigh, whereunto the Lords States, who are now
present, in like manner unanimously do compromitte.

Having gotten this approbation of the Work, and recommendation thereof by the
States unto the Lord Chancellor; and being much encouraged by the private
promises of assistance, which the several Ambassadors from all parts made
unto him, he thought fit to write Letters to all the Lutheran Universities, and
to those of the Low Countries, to acquaint them with his purpose of seeking
Unity in matters of Religion. Which being done, when afterward another meeting
was in agitation to be held at Erfurt in the Spring, Mr. Dury's being at
Frankfort.
he thought it fit (because he was minded to return in the mean time for
England) to move the Ambassadors of the Palatinate, of Brandenburg, Deuxpont,
and of Hessen; in case that any meeting should be held before he could come
back again, that they would be pleased to frame amongst themselves some course,
how this matter might be prosecuted thereat; lest so good beginnings might be
without effect. They consented to this motion, and met to consult about the
matter. The effect of their resolution was this, That they would labor, in
case a meeting should be called, to cause insert in the Letters invitatory this
Clause:

That every one of the Princes would be pleased to bring along with him a
Divine or two, instructed and authorized by his Churches, to give advice about
the means of procuring Unity, and composing differences in Religion; and if the
States should not meet there, that nevertheless in time and place convenient,
some particular Convocation of their own Divines should be brought to pass,
wherein these two Points should be put to deliberation;

First, Whether, yea, or no, the Acts of the last Conference held at Leipzigh,
should not be received by all the Churches, so far as they contain an agreement
of the Articles of the Confession of Ausburg?

Secondly, Whether, yea, or no, the heads wherein a disagreement may be yet
remaining in that Conference, cannot admit of a Reconciliation; if yea, what
that Reconciliation may be; if no, then it is to be inquired, whether or no,
those remaining differences of opinion, be of such importance, that by reason
of the same, a Schism should be upheld betwixt the Churches.

These things the Ambassador, and Chancellor of the Elector of Brandinburg did
take upon him to set forward by the means of his Prince. Mr. Dury's being in
Holland.
So then Master Dury went through Holland (where he saluted the chief Divines
to whom he had written out of Franckfort, and some others of his acquaintance)
and arrived at London about the end of the year, 1633. There he found D. Laud,
In London.
Archbishop of Ganterbury in his Predecessors place. Therefore the Letters and
Declarations of foreign Churches and Divines were presented to him, with a
brief Narrative of more particular proceedings. All was well liked, and a
resolution agreed upon, that Master Dury should proceed, and return again into
Germany; which that he might do with greater advantage to the work, he dealt
before his departure with Doctor Morton the Bishop of Durham, Doctor Hall
Bishop of Excester, and Doctor Davenant Bishop of Salisbury, who gave him
certain Theological Declarations for the advancement of his purpose. Ireland
to Dr. Usher, Archbishop of Armagb, and Primate of Ireland, and to the two
Bishops of Kilmore and Ardach, who in like manner did afterward jointly assist
him with their advices to the same end. In the mean time Letters were sent also
from Helvetia, and from Norimberg, giving such testimony of concurrence, as
were fit to encourage him to proceed. For which cause also when he was ready to
go back again into Germany, the Bishop of Canterbury gave him in answer to the
Letters which he had brought from the German Protestants of both sides, two
Letters, the one to be communicated unto the Reformed, the other unto the
Lutheran party, wherein he did acknowledge the receipt of their Letters, and
moving them to proceed in the good purpose which they had undertaken, he
promised in due time his further cooperation therein. With these Declarations,
together with a Recommendatory Letter unto Sir Rob. Anstruther, who was then
Ambassador for his Majesty in Germany, In Germany. At Hamburg.
Master Dury went from London to Hamburg, where he found Sir Robert waiting for
a new Commission to go for Frankfort; and whilst his Lordship stayed, Mr.
Dury's being at Franckfort.
he took occasion to acquaint the chief Divines of that City in their
Consistoriall meeting, with his Negotiation; who having promised to join
endeavors, he went from thence toward Franckfort, to a great and solemn
meeting of the Protestant States, where he arrived in my Lord Ambassadors
company in June, 1634. There he dealt in particular, first with his best
acquaintance, and then made a Proposition in general to the Assembly;
thereupon the States were moved to depute out of every College some, to take
his business into consideration. These came together, gave Master Dury
audience, received informations of the circumstances of this Work, and perused
several declaratory Writings, which diverse Universities and Divines of both
sides in Germany, as also out of Germany in foreign Churches, as England,
France, Helvetia, and Transylvania, had given to him, which moved them to take
the matter into serious consideration, and make a Decree, whereof the heads are
these:

First, That Master Dury having been heard by a solemn Committee, and the Writs
which he produced, taken into consideration by the rest of the States, all of
them with unanimous consent, did judge his Work most laudable, most acceptable
to God, and most necessary and useful to his Church; yet seeing it was of
great and weighty consequence, and that many of the Ambassadors had not
received any Instructions thereabout from their Masters, therefore no final
resolution could be taken by them at that present, but that they would
faithfully relate and recommend the business unto their Masters, to bring them
to some effectual resolution.

Secondly, That others who had received Instructions from their Principals
about the matter, had proposed two ways of proceeding in the Work; some thought
it expedient, that the manner of proceeding which Master Dury had suggested
unto the States, Mr. Dury's being at Francksert.
should be followed in bringing a Conference of peaceable Divines to pass, that
a fundamental agreement in points necessary for salvation, according to the
example of the Conference held at Leipzigh might be settled; And that to this
effect, the States of the four Upper Circles should give up unto the Prince
Elector Palatine, their more particular advices toward the furthering of the
matter; and that the Declarations of the two Saxon Circles should be given up
to the Elector of Saxony and Brandinburg, who then should agree amongst
themselves concerning the time and place of a Meeting, which might be named
unto the rest, and afterward invitatory Letters should be sent to foreign
States and Princes, to move them to send thither also some of their Divines.

Thirdly, That others thought it no less expedient to proceed thus; namely,
that the Electors of Saxony and Brandinburg should be entreated by the States,
then met together, to reassume the amiable Conference which was begun three
years ago, betwixt their Divines, and those of Cassell; and to this effect,
that (if not sooner, at least then) when the Treaties of Peace Universal should
be set on foot, a meeting should be appointed, whereunto peaceable Divines on
both sides, both within and out of the Empire, should be called: In which
meeting this should chiefly be aimed at, That an agreement should be made in a
common Confession of Faith, containing all the Fundamentals of Religion
necessary for Salvation, setting other points of Scholasticall dispute aside.

Fourthly, That the Ambassadors who had no Instructions did promise to relate
unto their Principals these advices, Mr. Dury's being at Frankfort.
and procure fit resolutions thereupon, which should be sent unto the Civil
Electors, professing the Protestant Religion.

Fifthly, Moreover, that it was fully consented unto by some, and by some taken
ad referendum, that in the mean time all Christian moderation was to be used on
both sides, as well in preaching, as in writing; lest if this was not done,
some hinderance might befall unto their Unity, and being done by this means,
the Civil Peace also might so much the more be advanced.

Sixthly, That Prayers were to be conceived in the Churches of both sides, to
entreat Almighty God to bless these attempts.

This was made an Act the fourteenth day of September,

Of this Act, the Original sealed and subscribed, was given to Master Dury, to
enable him to testify authentically to other Churches, the resolution of the
Protestant States, that thereby all well-willers unto the work might be
encouraged to continue in setting it forward. Upon this ground he went again
toward England through the Low Countries, In the Low Countries
where he informed the Divines of his acquaintance, and the Deputies of the
Provincial Synods, of things past at Franckfort and elsewhere in these
consultations, obliging them thereby to take the matter to heart. And when he
arrived into England, England.
the Bishop of Canterbnry being informed of all matters, did by Sir Thomas Roes
procurement recommend him to the King, who was pleased in taking more
particular notice of his person and work, then in former time, to permit him
still to proceed. Holland.
To which effect he went over again into Holland, Canterbury, bearing witness
that Master Dury had acquainted him with the success of his proceedings, Mr.
Dury's being in Holland.
that he went again out of England to prosecute the same business, not only
with his knowledge, but also with his approbation, and assurance that he would
be ready in due time, to advance such holy desires of Peace. He had also
private Letters from Doctor Davenant Bishop of Salisbury, and Doctor Hall
Bishop of Excester, to some of the chief Divines of the Low Countries, to move
them to concur more effectually in these endeavors, then they had formerly
done. Moreover, he had Letters from the Ambassador of the Lords States of the
Low Countries, residing at London, unto the States both of Holland and Zealand.
Thus he set forth, and arrived at the Hague in July, the year 1635. There he
dealt first with the States of Holland, to induce them to recommend these
thoughts unto their Provincial Synod which was then begun. Afterward he went to
those of Zealand, In Zealand
and appeared in their Classical meetings held at Walcheren, Zirickzee, Tolen
and Goes, then he dealt with the University of Leyden, Leyden.
and the Synods as they came in order; namely, with that of North-Holland, and
of Utrecht, and with the French Synod in those parts, from which Declarations
were obtained, fit for the advancement of his purpose: When he had thus far
proceeded in Holland, and found that evil-affected minds toward Peace, raised
ungrounded surmises against him, to stop the good inclinations of impartial
men, he used means to clear men's judgments, by causing some things to be
printed for the better information of all. And having understood that the Lord
Chancellor Oxenstiern was to go from Germany into Sweden, where he hoped that
his Lordship would do more then in Germany he was able to do for the work of
Peace; at the persuasion of some friends, he took a journey thitherward, where
he arrived in June, Anno 1636. In Sweden.
Nor was he altogether disappointed of his expectation. For the Lord Chancellor
coming thither favored his work; and although his proceedings were flow, yet
much reality was found in them. For when a resolution was taken to permit Mr.
Dury to treat with the Divines of that Kingdom, Mr. Dury's being at Stockholm.
four places were named, Stockholm, Vbsall, Westerose, and Strengnese, to which
he might address himself particularly, and lay open his intention, having
therefore first dealt with those of Stockholm, he had the Lord Chancellors
Letters to make way for him at the other places, Upsall.
of which the University of Ubsall was the chief. There he had conference both
Collegially and severally with the Professors of Divinity, who gave full assent
unto his desires, and set down these Conditions, upon which they were ready to
agree and join with the Reformed side.

1. That a full agreement should be made in all the fundamental Articles of
faith.

2. That all errors overthrowing the foundation, or tending to overthrow the
same, should be condemned.

3. That in matters ceremonial and of indifferency, there should be a mutual
toleration.

4. That betwixt the parties united, sincerity and uprightness should be
maintained, lest ancient Errors might he upheld under doubtful speeches.

5. That when peace is made, none should be suffered to maintain, excuse, or
spread any more the Errors once condemned

6. That ambitious and needless Disputes and brablings should be inhibited on
all sides

7. Mr. Dury's being at Stockholm.
That former reproaches and injuries should be put to oblivion.

8. That the Church Government should be settled according to Apostolical Rules.

These demands the rest agreed unto, neither was any thing of moment added
thereunto by any. Therefore being returned back again into Stockholm, and
having informed the Lords Regents of that which was past, thoughts were
entertained about the first and the last of these Conditions, as the chief of
all the rest; namely, concerning Fundamental Articles of Faith, and the
establishment of Ecclesiastical Government. Touching the first, namely, how to
limitate the number of Fundamentals, and distinguish the same from
not-Fundamentals, Mr. Dury did impart a brief Discourse unto those of Ubsall,
to which they made no reply, as being loath to go too fast, before they should
have the consent of their Brethren, yet silently they assented thereunto.
Concerning the second, because they then were in deliberation to settle their
Ecclesiastical Government by Canons, which they were about to make. Therefore
both the Dean of the Faculty of Divinity at Ubsall, the Queens Tutor at
Stockholm, and the Lord Chancellor, conferred several times with Mr. Dury about
that matter, to know the Constitutions of the chief Reformed Churches; wherein
he labored to give them satisfaction; and imparted unto them also the printed
judgments of the English Prelates, Doctor Morton, Doctor Davenant, and Doctor
Hall, which besides some other public Treatises of the same nature, were
communicated unto them. But the Lord Chancellor being desirous to confer more
particularly, and at leisure, with Master Dury, about all matters belonging to
the further advancing of the work of pacification, took him along in his
company and Coach toward Ubsall, in a Circuit which he made thitherward from
Stockholm, through Strengnese, and Westerose. In this progress the Bishops of
Strengnese and Westerose were dealt withal the second time. Mr. Dury's being
at Stockholm.
They settled good resolutions, and laid grounds for constant future Treaties;
so far, that they had thoughts of sending some body into England; nevertheless,
before matters could be brought to full maturity, some of the German Lutherans
hearing large reports of Master Dury's proceeding in Sweden, and being moved
with jealousy that the Swedes would come to some public Treaties, and therein
to a Conclusion without them, did expostulate the matter, and by Letters
endeavored to dissuade them from all further entertaining of his motions, by
which means their spirits were troubled, and their resolutions so clogged, that
from that time forward, they went heavily to work; yet Mr. Dury hoping to
overcome all such letts, did not leave the work, but labored so much the more
to engage them to it, by showing ways free from all exception, whereby the
differences which they did stick at, might be composed. This he did first at
Ubsall, and afterward at Stockholm, in a meeting of the chief Clergy, which
was commanded to deal with him; wherein he gave them satisfaction to all their
demands, in a whole days conference instituted to that effect, so that they
seemed to acquiesse. And because they had laid this as a main ground, That if a
Fundamental agreement could be found in the Doctrine of the Lords Supper, they
would not much stand to debate other matters. Therefore not long after their
conference, he offered to the Archbishop and Professors of Ubsall, a learned
and patheticall Declaration, which from the University of Aberdein, and
Ministry of Edinburg, was sent unto him, to show the fundamental agreement of
Protestants in that point. At this Declaration some small exceptions were
taken, in respect of certain forms of speeches contained therein; which Master
Dury having fully explained, and thereby resolved their doubts, those of Ubsall
did rest satisfied; but some others there were, who having set themselves
professedly against the work, would by no means receive any content. For the
more humbly and discreetly it was offered unto them, the more they sought to
avoid it, and labored by all means to cry down and discredit the very purpose
of agreement, Mr. Dury's being at Stockholm.
lest the good liking which the Lords Regents did show thereunto, might take
some real effect, and work upon the spirits of the common Clergy a good
impression to give way unto it. This their perverseness being fully apparent,
moved Master Dury to deal in some kind more strictly with them, than otherwise
his inclination would have suffered him to do; yet at last, to avoid occasions
of strife, he resolved to depart from thence, and let the business lie a while
asleep; but lest some unconscionable men might falsely traduce all his
proceedings in his absence, as then already in his presence they had begun to
do, by mis-informing others of his words and actions, and mis-interpreting
suspiciously his aim, he caused to print (before he went away from thence) a
Summary and true Narrative of all his chief actions, and Proposals which he
offered to the Clergy of that Kingdom met in a Convocation. And afterward, to
the end they should have no just cause of false surmises, or pretext to traduce
his intentions, he made a solemn Vow to bind himself to lawful purposes, and
unblameable ways of proceeding, which he put to paper and presented to the Lord
Chancellor, to be imparted unto the chief of that Clergy. These preventions
being used, when he was resolved to be gone, the Lords Regents were pleased in
the Queens Name to give him a Declaration and dimissory Letter, whereby his
actions in Sweden were approved, bearing witness that Master Dury being come
into Sweden to dispose the minds of their Clergy unto the work of Peace
Ecclesiastical, according to the grounds laid by the States of the Empire at
Frankfort, Anno 1634. he had dealt by permission and command of her Majesty,
with the chief Divines of that Kingdom; and although some difficulties were
risen, as in weighty matters is usual, yet that he had not omitted any thing
which could serve for the taking away of the same. Thus he went from Stockholm,
Anno 1638. and came to Lubeck, there he had speech with Dr. Hunnius, At Lubeck.
one of the chief Divines of those quarters. Him he prepared to entertain the
motion of Peace, Mr. Durye's being at Lubick and Hamburg.
Lubeck he set forward toward Hamburg to meet Sir Thomas Roe, who there was
residing as Ambassador Extraordinary from his Majesty of Great Britain
toward the King of Denmark, and Princes of Germany. To him he gave attendance
all the while he staid in those parts, not leaving his former purpose, but
rather using the advantage of his Lordships favorable countenance.

In this new period of the Negotiation, he went slowly to work, first because
he looked toward the Swedes, how they would behave themselves after his
departure; Secondly, because he waited for some overture to begin, and make
some Proposals at the public Treaties of Peace in Germany, which then was
thought upon by reason of the Emperors Ambassador, who was come to those
parts, and the Mediators which did offer themselves toward that Negotiation.
But when those Treaties were not likely to proceed, At Bremen.
he went to Bremen, that he might acquaint the Divines of that place with his
former proceedings, and gain in time to come their assistance by way of
counsel. These were very cordial in the business, and entertaining him with all
kindness and liberality (which no Germans before them had done) such
encouragements and declarations were given, as he could desire, both from the
Clergy, and Magistrate of that City. Then he proceeded toward the King of
Denmark, At Gluckstad.
who was at Gluckstad; there with the good liking and countenance of my Lord
Ambassador, he acquainted the Lord Chancellor Raventclow with his desire to
deal with the Clergy of Denmark, if his Majesty would give him leave so to do.
His Majesty gave way to his demands, and was pleased to recommend certain
Writings (which his Chancellor received from Master Dury) unto the
consideration of his Divines of the University of Coppenhagen.

These gave their judgment and advice concerning his Negotiation, tending to
show their approbation of the purpose, their particular counsel, and proposals
in prosecuting of it, and their willingness to treat further about it with
Master Dury, Mr. Dury's being at Gluckstad.
if his Majesty would give permission thereunto.

The King caused their judgment to be delivered to Master Dury; who thereupon
did accept of the offer of their Treaty, and gave them a large Answer to all
their Propositions, containing diverse overtures toward a constant progress in
a Theological way of Treaty. Unto this Answer, by His Majesty's command, they
gave a further Declaration of their judgment; whereunto Master Dury having
replied, and showed his Majesty a brief and ready way to come to the purpose,
the King was pleased to write unto my Lord Ambassador, to let him know that he
thought it fit Master Dury should be more particularly authorized from England,
before the matter could proceed betwixt him and his Divines to any issue.
Whiles these matters were thus in agitation, Master Dury dealt also with the
Magistrates and Ministry of Hamburg and Lubeck, and with the Illustrious
Archbishop of Bremen, At Bremen.
who gave him a reference to some chief Divines, who entertained his motions
with very good liking, and gave him an answer to the same. at Stade.
In like manner he made Proposals to those of Stade, who took the same into
mature consideration, and promised to concur with others in answering. At last
he went to those of Brunswick and Luneburg, where, at Brunswyck.
with the singular favor of those Princes, and by the most pious and peaceable
inclinations of their Counselors and chief Divines, toward the work of
Reconcilement, a ground was laid for a very effectual progress. For they have
made the work their own, undertaking to dispose the rest of the Lutheran
Churches and Universities unto a real concurrence in it, that afterward they
may proceed with our Churches jointly, to a full conclusion.

Duke Augustus of Brunswick was the first to whom Master Dury made his address:
this learned and wise Prince was pleased, in favor of the Work, not only to
convocate his chief Divines, and appoint them, with some of his Counselors of
State, to confer Collegially a whole day with Master Dury, but also to settle a
resolution, which his Divines subscribed, Mr. Dury's being at Hildesheim.
obliging themselves thereby, to join in all the ways of agreement, whereof
they had conferred together: and moreover, to recommend the matter to his
Cousin Duke George, by a large and most effectual Letter.

With this address he came to Duke George, residing at Hildesheim, where he had
no less, but rather more favorable entertainment then he had gotten at
Brunswick. For by an Act of Council the chief Divines, who then were in place,
were appointed to visit and entertain him, till others that were sent for
should come: And when the chief of them were come, Master Dury was lodged and
entertained with them in one house at the Princes charge, for the space of
fourteen days, that they together might ripen matters, and bring their thoughts
to a head. Which being done, a Committee of some Counselors of State was
appointed to give them public audience in the Princes Name, to hear them
confer upon the matter of agreement, to consider their Counsels and joint
resolutions, and to make relation thereof unto the Prince, that by his
Authority and Countenance, such assistance might be given to the Work in due
time, as should be thought expedient: All which being done, first the Divines
gave to Master Dury a Theological Declaration, wherein they testified their
agreement to all his Proposals, and then their more particular resolutions
concerning the manner of proceeding which they would follow in the future
advancement of the Work on their part, were also imparted unto him. The
substance whereof was this:

That Doctor Calixtus chief Professor of the University of Helmestat, should by
order of the Prince put forth some Treaties, wherein the heads of matters in
dispute amongst Protestants should be handled historically out of Antiquity, to
show what the Church of all ages has believed thereof; and how,
notwithstanding some difference of opinion thereabout among the ancient
Fathers, Brotherly love was always maintained. These Treaties should be thus
improved: First, they should be sent unto the Lutheran Universities of
Wittenburg, Leipzigh, Iena, Marpurg, Mr. Dury's being in Hildesheim.
and Rostock, and also to those of Brandenburg, Hessen and Bremen, to move them
to declare their judgments therein for mutual agreement. Then, at some fit
occasion some body should go to Leipzigh and Wittenberg, and deal with the
Saxon Electoral Professors by word of mouth, to dispose them to a full
resolution in this business. To which effect also the Prince should move the
two Dukes of Saxon Weymer, Duke William, and Duke Ernestus, who have long
wished for this Reconciliation, to cause their University of Iena to cooperate
therein; And in process of time, when the business should be brought by this
way of proceeding to some considerable ripeness, then it should be moved, that
from Great Britain and elsewhere some body might be joined to Master Dury, and
also from Germany some body should go into England, and other parts, to speak
with the chief Divines of those Churches, that when there should be good hopes
of bringing the matter to pass, the Sovereign Princes and States of all sides
should be entreated to agree upon a meeting, to make some conclusion in the
matter: for the good success whereof, public prayers should be made with
common consent in all the Churches.

These resolutions being taken, when the Prince himself had spoken to Master
Dury, and given him assurance of his willingness to set forward this purpose,
he did dismiss him with a recommendatory Letter unto his brother, Duke
Frederick, residing at Zelle, Zelle.
who in like manner received Master Dury very kindly, and moved his Divines to
confer with him. In this conference, when they had received satisfaction to
some doubts which were proposed, they gave consent unto all which was concluded
at Brunswick and Hildesheim. Luneburg.
From Zelle he went to the free City of Luneburg, where he acquainted the
Ministry of the place with his proposalls made unto other Churches, that they
might also take the same into their consideration, and in due time with consent
of their Protector, Dk. Frederick, resolv what to do therein.

Thus the Circuit of Brunswick and Luneburg being finished, Mr. Dury's being at
Gluckstat.
he returned to Hamburgh in February, An. 1640. Thomas Roe, who was at
Gluckstad, with the King of Denmark, to give him account of all the passages of
his proceedings. There he also dealt further with the Lord Chauncellor, Detloff
Raventlow, and the King himself was pleased, upon my Lord Ambassador his
recommendation, to give him access to kiss his hand, and in presence of his
Son, the Archbishop of Bremen, to speak with him about the setting forward of
his purpose. In which discourse, his Majesty showed a good liking to his
proceedings, and gave way that if he thought fit, he should make new
proposalls, touching means of Reconcilement, unto his Divines, that they might
have further occasion to entertain these thoughts as well as others. Hereupon
Master Dury did impart unto the forenamed Lord Chancellor, a paper, containing
certain heads, fit to be Theolagically consulted upon by them, that their
resolutions touching the same, might in due time be framed, and also made
public, if they themselves thought it expedient. Thus the Treaties at Denmark
being again set on foot, he returned from Gluck stad with my Lord Ambassador
toward Hamburg, and gave by letters, information into England, concerning all
matters of moment, which passed in his work. Then also some writingspresented
formerly unto the Divines of Denmark, were made public, that many who desired
to know the passages of that negotiation, might have satisfaction therein. Not
long after, my Lord Ambassador was recalled from Germeny into England, about
which time the private disputes amongst those of Bremen were come to some
height: for those that were most inclinable to moderation, suffering wrong, had
sought: Master Dury's advice, and desired his help to compose their doubtful
questions. Therefore he sent to some of the Prelates of the Church of England,
and some of the Professors of Divinity, in both Universities, certain writings,
which the chief Divines of Bremen submitted unto their judgments, at Bremen.
containing the true state of their difference, Mr. Dury's being at
which reflected much upon the main controversy debated betwixt the reformed,
and the Lutheran Divines; therefore the decision thereof, was thought to be a
singular preparative for the common and more public Unity of all Protestants.
To these writings the Bishops of Salisbury, and of Exceter gave their answers,
and the rest to whom they were sent, promised to do the like; In the mean time
Master Dury ripened, somewhat matters toward the Lutherans, and endeavored to
smooth the knottinesse of the Clergy of Hamburg and Lubeck.

For finding some warping of their intentions, At Lubeck.
which he perceived would bend another way then was expedient; he dealt first
with Doctor Hunnius a leading man at Lubeck, and then with the Senior Preacher
of Hamburg, at Hamburg
that when these two should be set in a right way, the lesseknowing and more
clamarous Clergy might be more easily persuaded, and wrought to admit the
thoughts of moderation. As for Doctor Calixtus, although some men of strife,
and evil willers to him, did undertake to disturb him in these peaceable
thoughts, yet being strongly countenanced by Superiors, he began to perform
his promise, and gave Master Dury full assurance of his constancy, and of the
concurrence of many others toward the furtherance of the same Counsels. And
because the opposition made against Doctor Calixtus, by his Brethren, was like
unto that which the chief Professors of Bremen suffered by their Brethren,
Master Dury conceived that the similitude of their cases, might be a motive to
induce them to mutual correspondency, in the work of reconcilement. Therefore
having gotten the Original Writings which Bishop Davenant, and Bishop Hall
sent to those of Bremen, At Bremen.
he went thither, to deliver the same, and confer with them about the
matter, whereunto he found them exceeding well inclined. In the way going
thither, he dealt with one Statius Buscherus, Doctor Calixtus his chief
opposer, endeavoring to mollify and withdraw him from some preposterous
courses: and coming back again, he stayed a whole day at Bremenvorde, Mr.
Dury's being at Bremervorde.
the Residence of the Illustrious Archbishop of Bremen, with whom he had twice
occasion of large conference, tending to give him satisfaction (which he also
received) concerning some doubts, which he had conceived of the Work. From
thence passing through Stade, at Stade.
and having insinuated unto the chief Preacher of that place M. Haveman some
writings tending to Pacification, at Buxtebude.
he arrived at Buxtethude where he met with Master Scholvinus the Pastor of
the place, a learned and moderate Lutheran Divine, whom he confirmed in a
course of conference, and correspondency, begun with Doctor Bergius at Bremen,
toward the ripening of matters belonging to Pacification.

Then being come back to Hamburg he made himself ready to return for England:
At Hamburg.
And to this effect took his leave of the Magistrate, and Ministry of that
place; some of the Magistrate were very earnest with him to persevere in the
prosecuting of his work, and the Ministry gave him their answer in writ,
showing that they were willing to proceed; first, by way of private
correspondency in writing, and then by way of public meeting, when things
should be repined. Before he went from Hamburg he sent by Sea to the chief
Prelates, who in England had assisted him, a Treatise, which Doctor Calixtus of
Helmistat, had written in behalf of the work, that they might declare their
judgment unto him concerning the same. Then he passed again through Buxtehude,
and Stade, where he confirmed Master Haveman and Scholvinus, in their
resolutions to moderation, and dealt again with Statius Buscherus, to take off
the edge of his spirit against Doctor Calixtus. At Bremen he stayed fourteen
days, at Bremen.
to print an Information directed to all the Reformed Churches, concerning the
Counsels of peace, whereunto the Lutheran side did give way, that if the same
should find on the reformed side in like manner approbation, the business
might be in due time set forward by public authority. at Oldenburg. at Embden.
From Bremen he went to Oldenburg, where he dealt with the Superintendent of
that place, and by his means presented to the Earl of Oldenbueg that which was
fit to give him information of his work. Embden, Mr. Dury's being at Groningen.
where he stayed certain days, to insinuate the printed information unto the
Divines, both of the City, at Amsterdam.
and of the County. At Groningen he did the like: from whence coming to
Amsterdam, the Hague.
he conferred with the chief Divines of his acquaintance there, and sent to
all the Presbyteries (which they call Classes) of North-Holland, and
neighboring parts, so many copies of the printed information, with adjoined
letters, as were requisite to be imparted unto them. From the Hague he did
the like unto all the Presbyters of South-Holland and Zealand, and of the
neighboring places, as also to the Synods which were to be held in every
Province. Thus having given satisfaction to the chief of the Low Countries, and
used means to send information from Amsterdam into Helvetia, and from the Hague
into France, in England.
he came to Zealand, and took Shipping for Eengland: Where being safely
arrived, he made his application to the King and Parliament, and to all that
were in power and place to move them to countenance and assist his design, but
the division between the King and Parliament increasing daily; his motions
though not unseasonable, yet were not effectually entertained by any either in
England or Scotland; because several applications being made to the Churches,
and to the men of eminency in both Nations, all the year 1641. he found all to
be in vain, be cause every one was intent upon his particular occasions, the
Hague.
and all minding only their Domestic grievances; the common interest of
Protestants could not be laid to heart: therefore when he saw that nothing
could be effected or intended, so long as the differences were like to grow
greater; he accepted of a Call, which was given him to the Court of the
Princess Royal at the Hague, to attend the Service of that family in the
education of that Princess. He was in that imploiment in the years 1642,
1643. till he received a Summons from the Parliament, whereby he was called
unto the Assembly of Divines; and because tht Prince of Orange would not give
him consent to go thither, Mr. Durye's being in England
Roterdam gave him, to be the Minister of their Company: there he was in the
year 1644. and the first Summons whereby he was called unto the Assembly of
Divines, being still insisted upon; he went from Rotterdam in the year 1645.
and came to London, where in the service of the Churches, for the composure of
Domestic differences, he employed himself between all emergent parties, till
the year 1654. So the work of his public Negotiation for the Unity of
Protestants was suspended for the space of almost thirteen years; wherein he
entertained only a correspondency by letters with some of the Divines of his
acquaintance beyond the Seas, to keep the thoughts of so good a work a foot
amongst them, so far as the times could permit.

Then the Peace being happily concluded between England and the United
Provinces, on the fifth day of April, 1654. Master Dury having gotten his
Highness the Lord Protectors approbation and countenance, for the continuance
of his design of Pacification amongst Protestants, and having obtained the
assistance of the two Universities, and of the chief Ministers in and about
London, to concur with him in his endeavors, In the Low Countries In high
Germany. in Switzer Land at Zurich.
he went from London on the foresaid day of April; and through the
Low Countries, and a part of High Germany, he came to Zurich in Switzerland on
the eighteenth day of May, where having delivered his Highnesses letter
inscribed to the Protestant Cantons, recommending his design unto them; those
of Zurich at his desire appointed three professors of Divinity and three of the
chief Ministers to treat with him; till they should call a meeting of deputies
from all the other Reformed Cantons to hear his proposalls, that a general
resolution might be taken to carry on his work. This meeting was held at Araw,
in the Canton of Berne, on the thirteenth of June; where Master Dury having
proposed the scope of his Negotiation, and the main grounds upon which it was
to be agitated, Mr. Dury's being at Zurich.
and communicated some Documents to be considered of by all the Cantons;
Zurich;

That the Cantons rejoiced much to find his Highnesses favorable affection
expressed unto them; and acknowledged it a great honor, that he had
acquainted them before others, with his purpose to advance the Union of
Protestants in Europe.

That to Master Dury's proposal and scope, they gave their full assent as to a
work most commendable and necessary.

That they would not only commend it to all their Churches and Academies, but
would concur to further it with their advice and authority.

That to find the effect of this their imclination, they, invited him to visit
their chief Cities and Academies.

Entreating him withal to testify unto his Highness, their reciprocal love
and affection; and that his recommendatory letters have with them a great
weight.

By this time Master Dury had even made an end of his Theological Treatise
with the Divines of Zurich: at Zurich.
wherein, their agreement concerning the means and manner of proceeding, by
which the scope of his design might be obtained was set down. Zurich to
Berne. At Berne.
Where he arrived the fifth of August, and having saluted the chief
Magistrate, and treated with the Divines whom they appointed to hear his
proposalls, he came to a full conclusion with them; wherein they agreed to all
that had been resolved upon at Zurich; and when they had given him at a full
meeting of the Ministry and of the professors; their declaration in writing,
Mr. Dury's being at Basel.
Basel the first September.

At Basel he proceeded in the same way, for having saluted the chief
Magistrate, and gotten six Deputies appointed to treat with him: Some of the
Ministers and some of the Professors of that Universitie; he dealt with them
to the same effect as he had done with those of Zurich and Berne, only they
varied a little in their declaration concerning the way of proceeding; adding
some advices and limitations to the work which the others had not expressed,
although they had not been unmindfull of them; and after a public
entertainment which the Magistrate made for Master Dury and all the Ministers
and Professors, he went to Schaffhusen, where being com the 20 of October, by
the direction of the Sena^e the whole Ministry was convocated with the
professors of the School, Schaffhu. sen.
and some of the Senators being present, he had audience on the twenty fifth,
wherein relating his progress, he communicated unto them the matters
transacted at Zurich, Berne and Basell, desiring them to impart unto him, their
judgment concerning the same; which they did on the twelfth of November
following by a written Declaration, approving Master Durys design and
concurring with the rest to further it: These four chief Cantons being
severally prepared thus to concur; it was moved by those of Schaffhusen, that
the Canton of Zurich, should according to former Customs begin to think of a
common Declaration which might be given to Master Dury in the name of all;
Zurich.
this they resolved to do as soon as Master Dury should have made an end of
going through the rest of the Churches; therefore being returned to Zurich; by
their advice he went to S. Gall, thither also the Deputies of the Cantons of
Appenzall (being forewarned of the time of Master Dury's coming) were sent; S.
Gall.
that at that time he might meet with the Ministers of both places in a
Synodical way; Appenzel.
which was done in the presence of some of the Magistrates of S. Gall, on the
twenty eight of November. And having given them at large an information on of
all that was formerly done in his work, Mr. Dury's being near the border of the
Grisons.
and conferred afterward with some of the chief, concerning particular matters;
he went toward the borders of the Grisons (whiles they should prepare the
Declaration which they would resolve to give him) that he might in a place of
safety; confer with some, who from the Churches of the Grisons were to give him
a meeting without being observed. To that place he went in December, and there
having spent one whole day, and a part of another, in conference with those
that came thither to him; he returned to S. Gall; received their approbatorie
Declaration, and went back to Zurich to advise with them what course should be
taken to deal with their other confederates: Zurich.
these deliberations being brought to some conclusion, Master Dury went from
Zurich toward Berne, where on the twenty third he arrived; and with their
advice and by their address to the places of safety within their Dominion, he
set forward and dealt first with the Ministers of Biel, then with those of
Neustat, thirdly with those of Neuschatel, Berne
and in the way toward Lausanna with the chief preacher of every considerable
town, till on the twelfth of January, 1655. he came to Lausanna; where as in
other places, by the Magistrat's Direction he conferred with the Ministers and
Professors of that Church and Academie, Lausanua.
and having furnished them with sufficient information concerning his
proceedings, he left them preparing the Declaration which they promised to
give him at his return from Geneva; for thither he was bent; and was to return
back again the same way.

At Geneva he arrived on the twentieth, and stayed there ten days; he had a
Letter from his Highness the Lord Protector to the Magistrate of that place,
which being delivered, the whole Ministry of the City and Territory, with the
Professors of the Academy; came together and received the information, which
was at large delivered unto them, by Master Dury concerning his work. This
being done on the twenty third, they appointed Deputies who treated with him
day by day, afterward concerning the particulars which he offered unto their
consideration; Mr. Dury's being at
Harmony of Confessions to be put by them in another form, then formerly it
has been in: Master Dury thought it not fit to make any long stay there, lest
being much observed, his Negotiation at the Court of France (whence many spies
are upon Geneva) might become suspected, and so prejudicial unto their good
correspondency there, for this cause he made have to be gone, not staying for
their answer in writing, but referring them to send it after him toward Berne
(whither he was purposed to return) he came on the first of February to
Lausanna, Berne.
he set forward and came on the seventh to Berne. There he stayed to print
some thing which was to be sent to Geneva, that it might be by them dispersed
amongst the Churches of France, to cure them of some prejudices which were
taken up against his work by some in that Kingdom, and to expect their answers
which they promised to send unto him: Araw.
which things being being performed; he went to Araw, where he found the
Deputies of all the Protestant Cantons at a meeting, to whom he gave an
account of the success of his Negotiation, thanked them for their assistance,
and desired them to move their Churches to give him their common Declaration to
be made use of, in the name of all, to add a Declaration in their own name
thereunto, as a State, and to write to the German Princes of the reformed
Religion, to preinformthem of this Negotiation, and to prepare themto a
Concurrance in the work at Mr. Dury's arival amongst them. To these proposals
they gave their assent; and Mr. Zurich.
Dury went forward to Zurich, where on the twenty seventh of February he
arrived; and haviving given them an account of his proceedings in all the
quarters where he had been, since the time he had been absent from them; he
moved them (by the means of a Divine who came from Berne with him for that end)
to settle a nearer correspondency between themselves and those of Berne, in the
prosecution of this work.

At Zurich he stayed all March, and April, Mr. Dury's being at Basel.
and a part of May following, to write letters to all parts, to expect the
promised Declarations of the Church and State; to print some preliminary
informations to be sent before hand into Germany; to settle the course of a
Theological Correspondency; and to receive the answer of the Protestant
Cantons to his Highness Letter; which things being done he went to Basel and
came thither on the nineteenth of May.

At Basel, having informed the Divines of all that was past, and proposed unto
them the course of correspondency agreed upon by the other Cantons, and
received a letter from the Magistrate of the place to his Highness the Lord
Protector; in answer to that which he had formerly brought unto them from him:
and when he also had treated with the Prince Elector Palatins Agent Charles
Mieg residing at Basel, how to correspond at a distance in the Negotiation with
his Prince; because for some reasons of State, the Prince was not willing to
have Master Dury come to Heidelberg to him: he took his journey through the
Dukedom of Wirtemberg toward Hanaw; in the way he stayed one day at Stutgard,
which is the residence of the Prince; Stutgard.
there although the Duke was in great heaviness by reason of the sickness of
his Lady (who dyed soon after), yet having understood that Master Dury was in
the town; he caused some of his Counsel to salute him, to confer with him
concerning his business, that he might know the true intent thereof, and to
settle a way of correspondency in time to come about it, as one who desired to
cooperate toward the furthering of it.

On the fourteenth of June he came to Hanaw (one of the chief towns of the
Wetteraw), Hanaw.
there he stayed to deal with the Ministry of the place; and to print such
papers as were necessary to be sent abroad, to all the reformed Churches of
Germany, Franck fort; at Bremen.
this gave Master Dury an opportunity to meet with the Ambassadors of the
reformmed party; Mr. Dury's being at Wetteraw. and Nassaw.
and to make use of their addresses, in sending the papers of Information to
their Princes and Churches. And whiles he stayed at Hanaw he acquainted the
Prince Elector Palatine with all his proceedings, and by the means of Doctor
Hottinger, who was appointed his correspondent, he satisfied all his scruples.
Dury continued till the fifth of September; and because before that time he
had received some answers from most of the Churches of the Wetteraw, to which
he had written; and the Declaration of the Ministry of the City and County of
Hanaw; Ysenburg and Budingen and their Divines; at Offenback, at Wechtersback
and at Birstein. Then with the Earls of Solms, at Hoing, at Braunfells and
Griffenstein; and lastly with the Divines and Counselors of the Princes of
Nassaw at Herbone, Dillenberg, Sigen and Dietz; and with the Counselor of the
Earl of Witgenstein (who is the Director of the Circle of the Wetteraw) himself
being absent with the Elector of Brandenburg in Prussia: this circuit through
the territories of the Wetteraw and of Nassaw, was ended before the end of
September, then returning again to Hanaw to make some dispatches; he stayed
there till the eighteenth of October, from whence at that time he went into
Hessen, Marpurg on the nineteenth he stayed there in conferences with the
Professors of Divinity of that University, Doctor Crocius and Doctor Curtius,
eminent men of the reformed side, Cassel.
till the beginning of November, Cassell on the third of that month; where
having saluted the Prince, some Deputies of the chief of the Ministry were
appointed to hear his proposalls, these having received the information which
he imparted unto them, made a report thereof, unto the chief of the Princes
privy Council; who soon after conferred with Master Dury, to be cleared in
some doubts, they had, Mr. Dury's being at
concerning the proposalls made unto the Ministry: and they having received
satisfaction therein; at Master Dury's desire, they assisted him very
affectionately, Anhalt.
in furthering his designs by counsel, and by addressing and directing his
Negotiation in the neighboring Churches of Low Saxonte and Westphalia, and
also toward the Palatinate and some other quarters with which Master Dury did
keep constant correspondency; and in this course of acting with them, he
continued till the latter end of January, 1656. then he went from Cassel
toward Anhalt, and arrived at Dessaw, where the Senior Prince of that Family
resides, to whom the direction of all common affairs does belong: with his
Chancellor Master Dury having had acquaintance in former time, he had much
freedom of Communication, and a ready address unto the Prince, who favorably
heard his proposalls, and appointed his chief Divines and Counselors to confer
with him; who having made their report, and the matter being liked in Council;
Anhalt.
a twofold Declaration was drawn up, the one to be given Master Dury in the
name of all the Princes; the other in the name of all the Superintendants;
which were delivered unto him before he went out of the Principality of
Anhalt: and after he was gone from Dessaw; for having taken his leave from the
director, and saluted the Princes residing at Koeton, and at Berenburg, with
each of whom he stayed but one day, he went to the Prince whose residence is at
Pletzkow, whose singular courtesy and zeal toward the work obliged him to
stay five days with him, during which time the Declarations aforesaid were
delivered unto Master Dury, together with a letter or two of address unto some
of the Counselors of the Dukes of Weimor; for he resolved to return through
the Dukedom of Weimar toward Cassell, Weimar.
and by a clear information gievn to them of his design, prevent the false
reports which might be raised, Mr. Durye's being at Weimar.
and remove the prejudices which were conceived by some concerning his work.
Auon. 1656.
About the beginning of March he was at the City of Weymar, and stayed two
days for the Dukes arrival who was not in the town; being then come home, he
gave Master Dury private audience, and having received the papers which were
prepared to give him an insight in his businesses; Dury about the space of two
hours, he showed his likeing to the work, and appointed one of his Council to
confer with Master Dury about some particulars; and when he went away, the
Prince gave him a letter to his chief Counselor; who is the Governor of the
Dukedom of Isennach; willing him to learn more fully of Master Dury the
circumstances of his way, that in due time they might judge what to do in it;
from Weymar he went to Gotha, Gotha.
where Duke Ernestus lives, who is the younger Brother of him who lives at
Weymar. With this Prince Master Dury had a whole days conference, without any
intermission; for he sent for him about eight in the morning, and continued
till twelve; and then began again at two in the afternoon, and continued till
six without any interruption. The next day he sent again unto Master. Dury by
eight of the Clock, and appointed one of his Council (because other affairs
did hinder himself, as he told Master Dury) to confer with him, about the
designs of advancing Religion and Learning, which he did prosecute: and the
same day again in the afternoon from about two, till evening, this Prince
continued his discourses with Master Dury, the Councellor whom in the morning
he had employed being present; so that in effect two whole days were spent
totally in a serious proposal and disquirie, of the means and ways, by which
true Christian Unity and Gospel Moderation of affections should be advanced
amongst Protestants; and the result of all was, that the Prince would
contribute all that lay in his power to further the designs whereof they had
conferred together; and that Master Dury was desired in time to come to
entertain a correspondency about the same with the Prince his Chancellor, Mr.
Dury's being at Isennac^
or with the Gentleman then present, Dury for his coming to him, the Prince
dismissed him, and he went from thence to Isennach. Where he arrived on the
ninth of March, there having delivered Duke William his Letter to the Governor
of the place; Dury in discourses of his own business, and of the public
affairs of England, from six till almost twelve at night; the result of all was
a full agreement to Master Dury's undertaking, and a free engagement on his
part to concur therein, and to correspond by Letters with him to that effect.

These businesses being thus successfully transacted in the Dukedom of Weymar,
Master Dury went from Isennach to Rotenburg on the twelfth, Rotenburg
where Landgrave Herman the Uncle of Landgrave William of Cassel resides; to
him (for he had given Master Dury some address both into Anhalt and to Weymar)
he gave an account of his Negotiation in both places; and consulted with him of
a further progesse to be made in the work. Eschwegen
From Rotenburg ^ee went to Eschwegen, where he dealt with the Swedish
Ambassador Mounfieur Horn; who resided with the Kings Sister in that place; at
his Persuasion Master Dury wrote unto the King, to let him know the progress
of his work, both amongst the Reformed and also some of the Lutberan party.
Cassel
From thence he returned on the seventeenth of March to Cassel. Where having
given the Landgrave an account of his proceedings; and acquainted the
Provincial Synod, which then was met at Cassel therewith in like manner, he
stayed there till the eight of May to make a full end of his Negotiation in
those quarters, and to fit himself for his journey which he intended toward
the Churches of Westphalia, Rintelen in the County of Schaumburg on the
eleventh. This Academie is wholly Lutheran, Mr. Dury's being at Rintelen
Dury thought fit to make acquaintance with them to prepare them to cooperate
with him in the work of Peace toward the Churches and Universities of their
own side; with these Latheran Divines he spent nine days, to inform them of the
way of his Negotiation, and of the progress thereof, whereunto they having
promised their concurrence, he took the opportunity of viliting two Earls who
were in the neighborhood, viz. the Earl of Schaumburg, and the Earl of Lip;
with whom and with some of their Preachers and Counselors he conferred; to
let them know the nature and chief circumstances of his work, that they might
countenance the furthering of it in their places; whith they promisid to do.

Then being gone from Rintelen on the 20 of May, he came to Detmold in the
County of Lip, where having spent two days with the Superintendant of the
place, Detmeld
and the Earls Chancellor: to confirm them in the good inclinations which they
had toward his business; he set forward and came to Tecklenburg, a seat of
one of the Earls of Bentheim; there he stayed eight days, in which time the
Earl did convocate the chief of the Ministry of his Territories, Tecklenburg
who having been preinformed before Master Dury came to them of his work they
had prepared their approbation of it, which upon conference had with him they
completed and subscribed; and the Earl with his Chancellor having also
conferred with Master Dury, and seen the Declarations of other Princes and
States touching his work, he gave him his Declarations to further it in like
manner; whereupon on the fifth of June being gone from thence he came to
Bentheim, where the two brethren Earls of that house young men cousins to him
of Tecklenburg were then residing, who received Master Dury very courteously:
and he having in general terms proposed the intention of his coming to them,
they appointed the Chancellor and two of the chief Ministers of the place to
confer with him, to understand the particular matters which were to be offered
to the consideration of their Churches, Steinfurt, Mr. Dury's being at Emdon
these having received the papers which were to be Communicated to their
Churches, the resolution was taken to send them to their chief Ministers
abroad; and then to call them together that they might give their joint
Declaration concerning the bufinesse. When this resolution was made known to
Master Dury, he thought fit to redeem time, that whiles they should be
acquainting their Churches with the particulars of his work; he should go to
Emden, to acquaint them with the same matters, and return back again thither by
that time they should have ripened their thoughts. Therefore he took his
journey thitherward, and on the thirteenth conferred with the Ministry of that
place, and afterward with the chief of the Magistracy, and lastly with the
whole association of the Neighbor Ministers; which conveniently was met on the
second day of the week, they all having promised their assistance and
concurrence in the work; and taken a Resolution to send unto him their written
Declaration in due time, Emden and came to Groningen, where he conferred with
Doctor Maresius to renew old acquaintance, Groningen
and to discourse somewhat in a preparatorie way concerning his Negotiation;
which being done he returned to Bentheim on the twenty one day; there the
Ministers of the Counties of Benthem and Steinfurt, with the Divinity professor
of the School met on the twenty sixth and prepared their written Declaration,
Bentheim
which the day following they delivered unto Master Dury at their Assembly and
conferred with him of servall particulars wherein, Wesel
the Earls gave him afterward also jointly their Declaration signed and sealed;
whereupon the next day which was the first of July he set forward from thence
toward Wesel. There being arrived, Duysburg
he found the chief Ministers gone towares Duysburg, to a general Synod, in
which the Deputies of the Churches of four Dukedoms, viz. Gulick, Cleve, Berg
and Mark were met, for which cause he instantly went thither; Mr. Dury's being
at Duysburg
and had audience at their meeting in the morning without delay, where having
represented the sum of his business unto them, they Deputed six to receive the
particular information, which was done in the afternoon; and they having made
their report of that which then had been delivered unto them; they were ordered
to continne their conference the next day early by seven of the Clock with
Master Dury, that they might be able to relate the state of the business more
fully, that a Declaration should be penned inthe name of all their Churches, to
be givento Master Dury in approbation of his work, and that to this effect
four of their Members whom they named should draw it up; and being sent to the
Classes of all the Churches, and approved by them it should be sent to Master
Dury under the seal of the Synod; which was also done afterward: this
Resolution being enacted the Synod was dissolved; Wesel
and Master Dury did return to Wesel in the company of two of the Assembly who
went home that way. At Wesel he saulted the chief Magistrate to move the Senate
to concur with their Ministry; in promoting the Resolution taken at the
General Synod, and went toward Cleve. At Cleve he stayed certain days, not to
treat with any of the Divines, Cleve
but to make acquaintance with the Governor who is Prince Mauriee of Nassaw,
and with the Senators of that Dukedom. The Prince gave him public audience in
the Senate, where having briefly proposed his bufiness unto them; he delivered
a Memorandum of his demands; which were these. First, that as a State they
would be pleased to declare their sense of his business, as other States had
done. Secondly, that they would authorize the professors of Divinity in the
Acedemie of Duysburg to give their judgment of it. Thirdly, that Master Hundius
the chief preacher of the place should be commanded to claborate the task of
fundamental truths, which he had hitherto maintained against the Jesuits so
well, that they had not been able to except hitherto any thing against them;
and that task being wrought out, it should by their order be imparted to
Master Dury for the furthering of his work. Mr. Dury's being at Nimwegen


To these demands the answer was that they would first acquaint his Electorall
Highness with them, and then let him know their answer, which they doubted not
would be approbatorie; having then conferred in private with some of the
Council, and agreed with the Vice Chancellor concerning the way of a future
correspondency, he wentfrom thence, and on the tenth of July he came to
Nimwegen. This City is a frontier of the Low Countries toward Germany; in it
he saluted the Deputy of the Synod of Gelderland, who was well inclined to
advance the Counsels of Peace toward the Churches of that Province, therefore
Master Dury did consult with him concerning the way of furthering his work in
the united Provinces: Dury took into consideration, not resolving to follow it
except emergent circumstances should move him thereunto, Utrecht
and with this resolution he went to Utrecht, where he stayed no longer then
was requisite, to saulte the chief Preachers of his acquaintance, and the
Professors of the Univerfity, to let them know summarily the progress of his
work, and so came to Amsterdam; Amsterdam
where having advised with Master Rulice concerning the way how to propose his
work in those Provinces, by him he was induced to make his first application
to the Synod of South-Holland, then assembled. at Dort; thither therefore he
went, and acquainted the Synod with his aim, but because they were toward the
end of their ordinary work, Dort
and were loath to enter upon a new and extraordinary business, which might
occasion some debates amongst them, they gave him a dilatorie answer which made
him perceive their unwillingnesse to take the business into consideration;
therefore he went suddenly from thence and came to Amsterdam on the twentieth.
Hardewick
Where having undestood that the Synod of Gelderland was the next day to meet
at Harderwick, he went thither, and having made way by private addresses to
be heard in public, the Synod gave him audience on the 23. and having
proposed the sum of his business unto them, Mr. Dury's being at Amsterdam.
and desired that some Deputies might be named to understand the particulars
thereof to make a report unto the Synod; four were named to that effect, who
met twice with him, and having fully perceived the grounds and progress of his
work, they made their report, That they thanked him for imparting his business
unto them; that they highly approved the work, that they would join with their
correspondent Synods to surther it; that they would take the advice of their
several Classes about it, and if need were would also confer with their
supreme Magistrate concerning it; and that this their Declaration and
Resolution should be enacted: and the extract thereof given to Master Dury to
be able to testify so much on their behalf. For this resolution Master Dury
having thanked them, and gotten the extract in debita forma ratified, when he
had conversed in private with the chief of them he went back again to
Amsterdam; where having stayed two days, he went to the Hague to learn the way
how to apply himself unto the States, but finding no clear way of address he
went to Leyden, and conferred with one of the Divinity Professors Doctor
Hornbeeck, the other two being out of the way; he went back again to
Amsterdam, and from thence to Utrecht, to preinform the Classes of that
Province, of his business, that at their Synod which was to be held in the
beginning of September, they might com prepared to concur in his work. To this
effect he put papers in the hands of the Deputy of that Synod, to be sent
unto all the Classes; and dealt with the Profssors of Divinity of that Academy
in the same way, to engage them to cooperate toward the same effect. This
being done in the beginning of August; because soon after the Synod of
North-Holland was met as Alcmaer, Alcmaer
he went thither, before the Synod was opened, that he might prepare the
Leading men to entertain his motions; but he found after he had dealt with
the Preses of the Synod, that debates arising amongst themselves concerning the
way of dealing with Master Dury; the Commissioners missioners of the States who
in all Synods are present at their meetings to countenance the same, Mr. Dury's
being at Alomaer
did stop their proceeding, alleging that the ousinesse ought first to be
brought to the cognizance of the States before the Churches should meddle
therewith, thus being taken off, front making any further application to that
Synod; he w^nt through Amsterdam, toward Leyden, and from thence to the
Hague. At Leyden he imparted to the Divinity Professors and to the French
Ministers, Leyden
the papers which were requisite for their information, to oblige them to join
in the work with him; which he found them willing to do. At the Hague having
learned the way to make his application to the States General: he delivered
unto their Assembly with a Memorandum (containing the substance of his
business) seven bundles of papers each bundle inscribed to a Province for their
informationconcerning his purpose. Hague.
Upon the receipt of these papers the States took the matter instantly into
consideration, and the next day the extract of their Resolution was delivered
unto Master Dury to this effect; that having received papers from him
concerning the unity of Protestants, and considered his demands, they were
resolved to send the same unto each particular Province, that there the
business might be taken into consideration: Holland.
thus being referred unto the Several Provinces, he made it his work to deal
by visits and by letters, with the chief Leading men of Holland, Zealand, and
Utrecht in Church and State, that when any public meetings should be in any
of these Provinces, they might be furnished with matter to further his
design. Thus the time was employed till the latter end of August: then in the
beginning of September he went to Utrecht, to be at the Synod, which was to
be held there on the second day of that month; Utrecht
and had in the afternoon public audience in the Synod, where his business
being examined by Deputies, a Resolution was Declared to approve his work, and
to concur in it: whereupon (making all possible have to be at the French
Synod, which the next day was to begin at Middelburg in Zealand) he took his
journey in the night toward Dort, Mr. Durye's being at Middelburg
and came on the fourth of September to Middelburg in the forenoon, where in
one hours time he had the opportunity to salute the members of the French Synod
at their rising, and the Classes of the Isle of Walcheren happlly met at the
same time upon an extraordinary occasion. Classes, he proposed his design of
coming to them, and desired them to resolve upon the most expeditious way of
satisfactorie communication, which might be used toward themselves and toward
the other Classes of Zealand; because before the end of that Month he was to
be in Holland, to attend the Assembly of the States of that Province.

At this motion they resolved to meet again that day seven-night, to take his
business into consideration, in the mean time they did appoint the Ministry of
Middelburg to confer with Master Dury about the particulars whereof the
Churches were to be informed, that when the Classes should meet, they might be
able to make a report; and having determined the shortest times, within which
the other Classes could successively meet, to give Master Dury audience; they
ordered their Scribe to write letters to each of them, Dury's proposalls. These
things being thus ordered in the morning, Master Dury in the afternoon had
audience in the French Synod; where having briefly related his design, and the
progress thereof, and desired that some should be Deputed to confer with him
about particulars; they did appoint four of their chief members to meet with
him; who having conferred twice with him, and understood the whole State of the
business, and made a report thereof unto the Synod; they resolved to give him
a Declaration of their judgment written in Latin, whereby their approbation of
his work, their advice to carry it on, and their willingness to concur therein
should be made apparent. No sooner had the French made an end of conferring
with him, but the Dutch Ministers came together and invited him to their
consistory; so from the one he went to the other, and gave them the same
information which the former had received, when he had met twice with them.
Mr. Dury's being at Flishing
These things being transacted at Middelburg, Master Dury went to Flishing, to
make acquaintance with some men of note, who could contribute somewhat to the
furthering of his design, with whom he spent two days; and then came back to
Middelburg, Goes
Master Dury went the same day about night toward Goes; where the next morning
he met with the Classis which came together about his business; and they
having understood the state thereof, and received the papers which he had
prepared for their information, and gotten a promise of concurrence from them,
Middolburg
he returned to Middelburg the same day at night. Where the next day the
States of Zealand being come together, their Pensionary being much inclined to
further Master Dury's design, did move to give him audience in their Assembly,
where having opened summarily the nature and progress of his work unto them,
they appointed one of every College, with the Pensionarie or Secretary, to
confer with him about particulars.

On the day following, which was the 11, the Classis of Walcheren, as they had
appointed the week before, met in the morning; and when the Ministry of
Middelburg had made their report, Master Dury was called into the Assembly,
where Master Appollonius was chosen Preses, who in the name of the Classis
thanked him for acquainting them with the progress of his work, for which they
praised God; and seeing they had been desired by him to propose all the doubts
which might arise in their minds about this business, to hear what could be
said for the removing of them; therefore they had gathered together the heads
of doubtful matters, and were willing to propose them, to understand how they
should be resolved: Dury had showed a willingness to confer with them about
those matters, Mr. Dury's being at Middelburg
Master Appollonius by way of question, proposed the doubts out of a paper, to
which when Master Dury had given his answers, and continued in conference with
him above two hours and a half; he left off making further enquiries; and
Master Dury desired of them if they were satissied, that they would impart unto
him their judgment as others had done in writing; and if they intended to
concur in the work, that they would appoint some to correspond with him in
their name for future communication. Having made these motions, he went out,
that they might consider by themselves what to answer. And being called in
again, They did thank him for the pains taken in answering their doubts,
declaring themselves satisfied thereby, and that they would give him their
written Declaration to make known their assent to his worck. And that they had
named two of their Brethren to correspond with him for a concurrence. For this
resolution Master Dury having thanked them he took his leav of the Assembly;
and in the evening about six of the Clock, Master Dury being sent for to meet
with the Deputies of the States appointed to confer with him; he went to them
and stayed with them till eight, discoursing of the particular passages of his
Negotiation, and giving unto them the copies of certain writings which they
compared with the originalls. At parting they promised to make their report,
and Master Dury delivered a Memorandum unto them to be presented in his name to
the States, wherein he desired; First, that they would recommend the work unto
their Churches. Secondly, that they would declare their own sense of it, as
other States had done. Thirdly, that they would further the enterpris toward
the other Provinces in the Assembly of the General States. Two days were spent
after this at Middelburg, Bergen on the Zoom.
and then Master Dury went to Bergen on the Zoom: where he expected to meet
the Classis convocated, but some neglect being fallen out in the conveyance of
the letter which was sent from Middelburg to give them warning of the time of
Master Dury's arrival, Mr. Dury's being at Utrecht
Dury got the Ministry of Bergen on the Zoom to meet, and to them he delivered
the information which the Classis should have had if it had met, entreating
them at their next ordinary meeting, which was to be in October, to impart it
unto them, which they promised to do, and Master Dury having saluted the chief
Magistrates of the place, went the next day to Zirickzee, where he found the
Classis met at the time appointed; and having conferred with them, and
acquainted them with all proceedings, they promised their concurrence with the
other Churches to further the work.

Having made an end with the Churches of Zealand, he returned to Dort, and
from thence to Vtrecht; where having received the Act of the Synod of that
Province, and the Declaratiou of the Professors of Divinity, he begun to make
some acquaintance with some of the States of Utrecht to prepare a way for a
future application, and hearing that the meeting of the States of Holland was
drawing toward an end, he went to the Hague, Hague.
and there having represented to the States his business, and desired them to
depute some to consider of pauticulars as the States of Zealand had done; he
received on the first of October this answer.

That the States of Holland wished all good success to Master Dury's endeavors
in the work he had in hand.

That they found it not yet expedient for them to enter upon the particular
consideration of that work.

That when they should understand how far the Lutherans were willing to concur
in it, then they would not be wanting to further it.

By this answer Master Dury finding that their dilatorie resolutions did
proceed from a mistrust of the Lutherans inclination; for the want of
information how far the chief of them were engaged, he resolved to cause print
some Declarations of the Lutheran party to remove this obstacle: Mr. Dury's
being at Hague.
and to that effect gave to a Printer in the Hague, First, a Declaration of the
Saxon Divines, in a Conferrence held at Leipzich concerning their agreement
with us. Secondly, a Declaration of the Protestant States at their Assembly
held at Frankfort, wherein they allow of that conferrence, and Declare their
resolution to advance the agreement. Thirdly, a Letter written to the King of
Sweden by one of his chief Bishops, to persuade him to advance this design.

He spoke also to the Residents of the King of Sweden, and of Denmark, to move
them to cooperate in removing this obstacle, either by procuring some
Commission from their Masters to that effect, or by private conferrences with
some of the States, to let them see, that on the Lutheran side would be no
aversion from the work, when the way of transacting matters should be duly
prepared: this last both of them promised to do, and concerning the first they
promised to acquaint their respective Masters with Master Dury's motion. Utrecht
Thus having made an end with the States of Holland, he returned to Utrecht,
where he addressed himself unto the ordinary Deputies of the States of that
Province, because it was uncertain when the States themselves would have any
meeting. These knowing by the information of the States General, and by the
Declaration of their Divines of the Academy, and the Act of their Provincial
Synod the nature of the work; appointed without delay three Commissioners, to
confer with Master Dury concerning particular matters, which when they had done
and also made their report, an Act was drawn up in the name of these Deputies,
declaring fully their approbation of the work; thanking Master Dury for his
pains in it; and promising their ready concurrence to further it: Leyden.
and as an act of State was delivered unto him. From thence being gone to
Leyden, he got the Divinity professors to meet as a faculty, and resolve (upon
the information which they then fully received) to give him their judgment
approbatorie of his undertaking in writing. And whiles they were about doing
this, Mr. Dury's being at Hague
he took that time to visit the Leading men of the French Churches at Dort,
Rotterdam, Delft, and the Hague; from whence being returned to Leyden on the
24 of October, he received the judgment of the Prosessors of that Universitie;
commending his endeavors; approving fully the design; giving their advice in
it, and promising freely their concurrence to advance the effect thereof. When
he had dealt thus far with the States, Churches, and Universities of Holland,
Zealand, and Utrecht, he was encouraged by some of the States General, to
make a second application unto their College, that they should declare their
approbation of his work in a public way. But the answer on the 29, was to
refer him to the remaining Provinces, with a promise of Recommending his design
unto them. Whereupon he found himself obliged to go the Circuit of the other
four Provinces, to gain their assent to his undertaking; and to inform their
Churches and Academies of the circumstances of his Negotiation; as he had
informed those with whom he had formerly dealt; So then on the 2 of November
he went from Amsterdam toward Friesland, Friesland
where he dealt first with the Divinity Professors of Franeker; then with the
Deputies of the States of Friesland met at Lewarden; with the Deputies of the
Synod of that Province, to address the information requisite to be given to
all their Classes: and lastly, with Prince William the Governor of the
Province; by whom, as by all the rest, the design was approved, and a ready
willingness declared to help toward the advancement of it.

From Lewarden he went to Groningen, where proceeding in the same Method and
way toward the Deputies of the States, toward the Professors of the
University, Groningen
and toward the Deputy of the Synod for the information of the Classes, he
found the same acceptance of his work, and received the Declarations requisite
to evidence the same. From Groningen he went to Swoll in the Province of
Over-yssel; there although he found the Province so di^ided within it self,
Mr. Dury's being at Over-Yssel
that there was no meeting of Deputies to eprelent as elsewhere the
Souveraignty of that Province, yet it fell happily out that there was an
extraordinary meeting of the Deputies of the chief City at Swoll about the time
when he was there; Swoll
to these having made his application, Classis which then was called, and with
the Deputy of the Synod for the information of the other Classes of the
Province; Deventer
he went to Deventer, where he conferred with two of the chief Ministrers for
the space of an hour only; and then set forward toward Arnhem, where the
Court of the Dukedom of Gelderland resides. There the Senators of that Court
having been preinformed of Master Dury's design (by their Commissioners, Arnhem
who had been at the Synod of that Province in July) were ready to further his
work, and without delay gave him an act of approbation concerning the same.

Thus all the Provinces, Churches, and Academies of the united Provinces were
dealt withal, and the business being accepted and embraced by all, Master
Dury set himself to give information of this success to all his correspondents
in foreign Churches where he had been Negotiating before; and to this effect
he remained constantly at Amsterdam, for the convenience of sending letters to
all quarters; in which imploiment he continued from the middle of December
till the end of January, in the year 1657; in which time two things fell out,
much tending to the furtherance of his work; Amsterdam
the one was, that by the means of the Ministry of Amsterdam, the obstruction
which was put unto his Negotiation toward the Churches of South-Holland and
North-Holland in their two Synods, was removed by the opening of a door of
communication with them in time to come which these of Amsterdam did undertake
to procure by their Classis and correspondency with the other Churches of the
Province. The other was that the Prince of Sweden being come to Amsterdam; Mr.
Dury's being at Amsterdam
Dury had conference with him, and having informed him of the progress of his
work, and how far matters were prepared on the side of the reformed party, the
Prince declared his resolution that he would move the King his brother to set
some Lutheran Minister a work, who should prepare the Lutheran Churches by
going amongst them, as Master Dury did amongst the Reformed, that when Master
Dury should come afterward unto them; for the matter of reconcilement he might
find them willing and fitted to entertain his motions. to confirm the Prince in
this resolution Master Dury dealt afterward with his Secretary and gave him a
Memorandum, intimating the way by which it might be effected, with much credit
to the Church of Sweden, and without any offense to the other Lutheran Churches.

When all matters were dispatched at Amsterdam Master Dury went to take his
passage for England from Rotterdam, where whiles he did stay for a wind, a
Classis was held, wherein his business was proposed, but could not at that
time be taken into consideration, the Classis being convocated for another
end; therefore it was referred to another meeting appointed at a certain time
for that end; in the mean time the wind continuing crose, Master Dury went to
Zealand, hoping for a readierpassage from thence; Rotterdam
then was likely to fall at Rotterdam, chiefly because he thought he might
be able in the interim of his abode, to further his design by ripening the
resolution of the States of Zealand to appear therein; which in some measure
was effected; for before he came from thence; the States did write an order to
their several Classes to give in their advices concerning his bufinesse, In
Zealand
with the reasons which move them to approve of the design; to the end that
having understood the advice and motives of their Churches, they might have a
better ground to appear in the work as a State. This Master Dury did understand
from the Pensionarie, and from the Secretary of the States of that Province;
Mr. Durye's being at
and not long after, Flishing on the 14 of February, and landed at Marget on
the day following. From whence he came up directly for London, in the company
of a public Minister of State, from one of the Electors of the Empire, who
makes his application to his Highness the Lord Protector.

FINIS.

