THE CAPUCIN TREATED, OR, The lives of the Capucins, with the life of S.
FRANCIS their Patron.

Wherein is described, and examined the Original of the Capucins, their Vows,
Rules, and Discipline's.

Written Originally in French by the exquisite pen of that incomparably
learned, and Pious Divine, Mr. Peter du Moulin, And Englished By Philanax
Orthodoxus.

1 Timothy 4.8. Bodily exercise profits little, but Godliness is profitable unto
all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come. London, Printed for Henry Marsh, at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane.
1665.

To the truly virtuous (and therefore truly noble) Lady, the Lady Catherine
Colleton.
MADAM.
IF our labors ought to be dedicated to those persons to whom we are most
obliged, then I am sure, I am not mistaken in addressing this small translation
to your Ladyship. And consequently I had been guilty of injustice had I
addressed it elsewhere. Besides, had I let slip so fair an opportunity of
publishing to the world my thankfulness for the many and great favors you have
been pleased to confer on me, I had been guilty of ingratitude: which is so
odious a vice, that certainly, it is inexcusable in a Christian. For the very
Heathens by the light of nature have discovered so much of its ugliness, that
the ancient Persians were wont to say, If you call a man an ungrateful person,
you call him every thing that implies baseness, and unworthiness. But Madam, I
know well enough, that the highest pitch of gratitude I am capable of, bears no
proportion with the greatness of your favors: but I know withal, that where
nothing else is to be had, your Ladyship will accept it instead of good
payment; a mite or a talent being all one to you, whose goodness, regards not
the quantity, or quality of a present, but the intention of the person that
presents it. Wherefore this trifle dares promise it self a gracious reception
from your Ladyship, which favor if you shall be pleased to vouchsafe it, it
needs not care what entertainment it finds from others. I shall use no other
argument to invite your Ladyship to the perusal of it, than to tell you that
the variety of its pleasing divertisements, may prove a good bulwark against
the assaults of (your old enemy) melancholy: and if it does you that good
service, I shall think my pains in translating it very happily bestowed. I
cannot conclude without paying my grateful acknowledgments to the worthy
Gentleman your Husband, and to the hopeful young Gentlemen your Sons, for the
many undeserved civilities I have received from them: But they must give me
leave to acknowledge my Obligations to your Ladyship in particular, and
therefore to style my self more particularly

MADAM, Your thankful, and humble servant. P. O.

The Translator to the Reader.
EXperience tells us that example prevails more then precept. And if so, then
we may conclude that the mock-sanctity of the Capucins (who for strictness of
Life carry away the Bell from all the other Orders of the Romish Church) has
gained many a proselyte. But I dare promise (by the help of God) that no person
shall be seduced by these Impostors, who will but take the pains to peruse
this small treatise. For it plainly shows that their holiness chiefly consists
in absurd and extravagant actions, which render them more like Bedlams, and
Jackpuddings, then Saints. And as for St Francis their Patron, who is so much
cried up by the Romanists for his eminence in sanctity, that they place him in
Heaven amongst the Seraphins; and some do so blasphemouslie compare him with
Christ, that they say, it is questionable whether of the two was the typical
Jesus; and Tursellinus says of him,

Francis that was, shall now be Christ to thee;

And Christ that was, St. Francis now shall be.

I say, this grand Saint is here proved to be a grand Cheat, and in effect
nothing else but an ignorant, superstitious, ridiculous Enthusiast. But I shall
not forestall the curiosity of the Reader, only I shall say in commendation of
the book, that it will please his humor if he be but ingenious.

The Authors Preface.
Some new guests being come to this Town, who are rare examples of modesty, and
sincerity, common civility requires that we should present them with something,
which may prove useful and serviceable to them. Now I cannot think of a fitter
present for persons of a sublime profession, and extraordinary sanctity, then
to present them with a description of their Otiginal, and the continuation, and
progress of their virtues. For although Father Joseph in his book against my
Three Sermons calls me Fool, Cheat, and an Impostor, yet the Rule of Charity
requires us to render good for evil. Besides we must not judge of persons by
one single action: neither must we, under pretense that this Reverend Father
has his fits of passions, conceal his virtues; Especially, that Capucin-like
goodness of his, when in his Sermon at the gallows, to comfort a whore who was
to be executed, he calls her sister; and why might not he call whores his
sisters, seeing venerable Francis, the Patron of the Capucins, called the
Magpies, Grasshoppers, and Swallows his sisters? With the like Prudence he
exhorts this poor condemned person, whose name was Margaret, to recommend her
Soul to St. Margaret, which is a Sa^^t that never was in the world, and is
placed in heaven without having ever been upon earth. After which proofs of
his rare wit, he condemns us all to hell, to keep him company. Wherefore he
will not be offended, I suppose, if in acknowledgment of so charitable an
office, I address to him this small treatise, wherein he will see the Original
of his Order, and the illustrious actions of the Capucins, whose perfection the
Apostles could not attain unto. The Reader will here find very pleasant
extravagances and Follies more then enough to make a Saint of (the word Saint
having changed its signification in this blessed age:) For now a days if a man
would attain unto a Seraphique, and supereminent sanctity, he must first be
out of his wits.

The ensuing Narrative would afford sufficient subject for laughter, did it not
afford much more subject for sorrow an^ compassion. For a man cannot see,
without great grief, the Christian Religion quite disfigured, and poor people
fed with empty shows in stead of true and holy doctrines.

The God of mercy take pity on so many poor people so grossly abused; and
stir up his zeal, and wonted compassions to deliver so many Souls ensnared by a
counterfeit holiness: to whom the holy Scriptures are a book altogether
unknown, and sealed with more then seven seals.

My design in this treatise is not to offend these Fathers, but to instruct
them, and to show them how far distant they are from true holiness, also to
demonstrate to them that in aspiring to a degree of glory above Abraham, Moses,
and other such petty Saints, who never did works of supererogation, they take
the course to come behind the meanest: and that some crimes are more tolerable
then their sanctity. The Lord open their eyes that they may see it is a
dangerous thing to mock him, and that they have to do with a terrible Judge, who
cannot be deceived, who searches the heart, and from whom nothing is hid.

A Table of the Chapters.
OF the Monastic profession in general. Chap. 1. Of the begging Friars, and
their vows: and of the difference betwixt them and the Jesuits. Chap. 2. Of the
excellence, and prerogatives of each Order of the begging Friars. Chap. 3. Of
the words Minor, and Minime; and of the observation of the whole Rule. Chap. 4.
Of the austerity, and disciplines of the Capucins; and first of their habit.
Chap. 5. Diverse austerities and observations of the Capucins, as well those to
which they are obliged by their Rule, and by the Constitutions of their Order,
as those to which they oblige themselves by voluntary devotion. Chap. 6. Of the
whippings of the Capucins. Chap. 7. Of the penances of the Capucins. Chap. 8.
Some extravagant actions in which the Capucins place holiness. Chap. 9. Of the
names which the Capucins take at their entrance into this profession. Chap. 10
Of the form of making their vow. Chap. 11. Some observations upon this vow.
Chap. 12. The impiety of the Superiors answer. Chap. 13. That corporal
austerities, and whipping, and tormenting of the body are not marks of
holiness. Chap. 14. That the austerities, and humilities of the Capucins are
full of hypocrisy. Chap. 15. Of the pleasant process betwixt the Capucins, and
the Recollects about the tip of their hoods. Also of Masses in green, red, and
violet. Chap 16, By what means St. Francis obtained of Pope Innocent III. the
approbation of his Rule. Chap. 17. Of the humility, and incomparable patience
of St. Francis, and of his most notable actions. Chap. 18. The great reward
which St. Francis received for his humility. And of his marks. Chap. 19. That
under the Cloak of humility St. Francis hid an unparalled pride. Chap. 20 The
Laws, and ordinances contained in Saint Francis his Rule. Chap. 21. That the
holy Scripture is falsified, and wrested in St. Francis's Rule. Chap. 22. Of
poverty, and riches. Chap. 23. Of the vow of poverty, and of idle begging, and
of works and satisfactions of supererogation. Chap. 24. Of the fraternity of
the Cord. An extract of a book entitled The Treasure of the Indulgences of St.
Francis 's Cord, translated out of Italian into French. Also of the
Canonization of St. Francis, and Ignatius de Loyola. Chap. 25.
THE CAPUCIN TREATED, OR, The Lives of the CAPUCINS, with the Life of St.
FRANCIS their Patron, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Monastique profession in general.
THe Monks do generally profess works of Supererogation, that is, to do more
good works, and more perfect, then those which God commands in his Law; that
is, they profess to do works more excellent then to love, and serve God with
all their heart, and with all their strength; for it is that which God commands
in his Law. Therefore they serve God with more than all their strength; they
are more virtuous than God would have them to be. Moreover they would make us
believe, that by their profession of austerity, and severe Discipline, they do
more satisfactory works, and suffer more punishment than their sins deserve,
and that the overplus serves for others. For the Pope gathers this overplus
into the Church-treasury, and distributes it to people by his indulgences.

By these works of supererogation the Monks pretend to attain unto a
supereminent degree of celestial glory, far above those small Saints who
contented themselves to fulfill the Law of God, without doing any more. This
degree of glory is called by the Doctors Aureola. To which degree Abraham,
Jacob, Samuel, David, etc. have not attained; for they never did works of
supererogation.

CHAP. II. Of the begging Friars, and their vows; and of the difference twixt
them, and the Jesuits.
THere are four sorts of begging Friars, viz. the Minors (called in France
Cord^liers) the Preachers (who are also calle^ Jacobins, and Dominicans) the
Carmelites, and the Augustines. They bind themselves by vow to three things.
They vow poverty, so that they possess nothing in particular, although they
abound in common. Also they vow never to marry This they call the vow of
Chastity, as if there could be no chastity in a married estate. The third vow,
is the vow of obedience, whereby they do not only oblige themselves to keep the
Laws of God, but most exactly to observe the Rule of that Saint who is their
Patron, and the Constitutions of their Order, and to obey the commands of the
Guardian, or Superior of their Convent, and to obey the General of their Order,
and above all the Pope.

The Jesuits beg not, Ribaden ex vita Ignatis, l^^. 3.
and reject the austerities of the Minors, and will not be called Monks. They
are well shod, warmly clad, and lie on good beds. And they that are called
Fathers (who are the chief of their College) have their Table furnished with
the choicest meats. They labor with very great industry to gather wealth,
although Ignatius Loyola, their Founder, did beg. They vow never to marry. But
their chief vow, and which they observe most strictly, is the vow of blind
obedience, whereby they are obliged to obey their Superior in all that is
commanded, without enquiring whether the thing be good, or evil: for they will
always have it presupposed that the thing is good. This obedience has cost
many Kings and Princes their lives, particularly, that excellent Prince William
of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, Grandfathet to the Duke of Bovillon who was killed
at Delft by Balthazar Gerard of the Franck County, excited thereunto by the
Jesuits of Treves. His process and examination are to be seen at Delft in
Holland.

They say indeed, that we must do nothing contrary to the commands of God; but
they permit not those who are commanded by the Superior, to examine whether his
command be conformable to the commands of God. For (as Pope Julius the third,
in the Bull which Ribadenera inserts in the life of Ignatius, says) Christum
in Praeposito praesentem agnoscunt. They acknowledge Jesus Christ to be present
in the person of the Superior.

The Capucins are more moderate; for they oblige themselves to obey their
Superior in all things except sin. For example; if the Superior should command
a Capucin to plant Cole-worts with the leaves downward, and the root upward, or
to lick up the spittle of another Capucin, or to plant a straw, and to water it
until it grows, the Monk is bound to obey these commands, such actions being
most proper to try the obedience of the Minors.

CHAP. III. Of the excellence, and prerogatives of each Order of the begging
Friars.
EAch Order of the begging Monks has some privileges and Prerogatives to
render it recommendable. The Carmelites have this privilege above the other
Orders, that they remain in Purgatory but until the next Saturday after their
death.

St. Antonin, who has written the life of St. Dominick, the Patron of the
Preaching Friars, tells us, that St. Dominick, being once in a trance, saw the
heavens opened, and a multitude of Monks in celestial glory, but saw not one of
his own Order amongst them, whereupon this blessed Saint wept bitterly. But
Jesus Christ comforted him, by showing him a multitude of Jacobin Friars that
were hid under the Virgin Mary's kirtle.

Not one of any other Order ever had this honor. It is observable that this
Antonin, Archbishop of Florence, was Canonized by Pope Clement the 7th. An.
Dom. 1523. and that in the Bull of Canonization the said Pope approves of, and
authorizeth the doctrine of this Antonin, and gives great Indulgences to those
who shall visit his relics. The same is recited by Theodorick in the life of
St. Dominick, as Surius reports.

But the Minors surpass all the other Orders in the greatness of their
Indulgences, granted by the Popes to St. Francis's Order. Read a book
entitled, The treasure o^ the Indulgences of St. Francis 's Cord, Printed at
Rouen by Tho. Dare in the Jew's street, near the Palace, 1614.
and you shall find these words in p. 119. Item, every day until the nativity
of our Lady, there is eight hundred sixty five thousand, and one hundred sixty
two years, and one hundred days of indulgence, and a remission of the third
part of sins, granted to diverse Churches. The Jesuits laugh at this, and care
not to obtain of he Pope such Indulgences.

This may be seen in the book of the Indulgences of the fraternity of the Cord,
printed at Paris by John le Bouc at St. Hillarys Mount.
Pope Sixtus 5. Anno. 1586. on May 7, granted to those of the fraternity of St.
Francis's Cord, who shall say five Pater nosters, and as many Ave Mary's, on
Palm-Saturday, and on the feast of St. John the Evangelist, and that before
Porta Latina, the pardon of all their sins, and power to free one soul out
Purgatory. And these privileges are confirmed by the letters Patents of the
same Pope, dated at St. Marks. Aug. 9. 1587.

But the most memorable Indulgence is that which (as the Rosary of Bernardin
says) St. Francis obtained for the Church of Sancta Maria Angelorum, Francis
was born in this City, which is in the Duchy of Spoleta.
called Portiancula in the City of Assise (viz.) that all they who shall go
into that Church shall receive the remission of all their sins. However, Jesus
Christ would not grant this to St. Francis, but on condition that he should get
a confirmation of this Indulgence from the Pope. Antonin. in vita Dominici c.
1. sect. 1. Statum regularem sub Didaco Episcopo apprehendit ut alterum
baptismum Th. 2. 2 q. ult. art. 3. and in 4. sent. did. 4. q. 3. art 3. sect.
ad tertium. Bell. lib. de Monachis. c. 8. sect. denique Eman. Sa. Aphor. in
verb. Religio sex alae. eorum sunt s^x perfectiones qui bus ornatus suit beatus
Franciscus.


This also is one of the prerogatives of St. Francis's Order, and of St.
Dominick's Order, that the habit of St. Francis, or St. Dominick is as good as
a second Baptism, and that by virtue of this habit all our sins past are
cancelled. And this is the reason why many Princes and persons of quality on
their deathbeds have been clad in the habit of a Cordelier, or Capucin, that
their sins may be pardoned.

Of all the Patrons of the Monastique Orders no one is exalted to so high a
degree of celestial glory as St. Francis; (for he is placed in the highest
degree of Angelical glory.) The Church of Rome makes nine Orders of Angels
differing in glory. The highest Order is that of the Seraphins. The second is
the Order of the Cherubins, etc. But St. Francis is placed in the Order of the
Seraphins, above the Cherubins, as St. Antonin tells us in the life of St.
Francis, in the first Chapter, where he says, that those words of the 18.
Psalm, He rode upon the Cherubins, and did fly upon the wings of the winds,
are spoken not only of Jesus Christ, but may also be applied to St. Francis,
who is exalted above the Cherubins. And in the same Chapter, he says, that the
Six wings of the Seraphins are the Six perfections wherewith St. Francis was
adorned. In this high degree of Glory, he sees eight Classes of Angels, and all
the Saints, far beneath himself.

St. Bonaventure, a General of St. Francis's Order, and a Cardinal, says the
like, as I shall show you hereafter.

De Verborum signif. in b. Aliud mite Cor, et docile, terra bona suscepit, hoc
est fratrum Minorum religio.
Pope Nicolas 3. in the Decretal Exiit qui Seminat says, that when Jesus Christ
speaks of the fourth prrt of the seed which fell on good ground, by this good
fourth part is meant the Religion of the Minors.

In the same place, this Pope, commending the poverty and perfection of St.
Francis, observes he had no bagg, and that he finds not those actions of
infirmity which were in Jesus Christ, Christus egit etiam infima, sicut
interdum ut in sugae paetet, and in loculis.
who had two actions of infirmity (viz.) he had a bagg, and he fled. In these
two things Holy Francis surmounted Jesus Christ.

CHAp. IV. Of the words Minor and Minime; and of the observation of the whole
Rule.
THe Monks of St. Francis's Order are called Minors, that is to say, Less than
others, in token of Humility. But there is sprung up another Order of Monks,
whereof St. Francis of Paula, a Calabrian, is Patron, and Author. This Saint
lived in the time of Lewis 11. who dyed Anno Domini 1483. The Monks of this
Order not thinking it humility enough to be called Minors, call themselves
Minimes, that is to say Least of all. The Life of these Monks is altogether
Quadragesimal, that is a continual Lent; By virtue of this title they pretend a
right to begging, because Jesus Christ in the 10. of Matthew says, Whosoever
shall give to drink to one of the least of these, or to one of these Minimes, a
cup of cold water only, shall not lose his reward. However, this hinders them
not from receiving an alms of wine, although Jesus Christ speaks of cold water
only.

It is observable, that in the Mass of the said St. Francis of Paula, which is
celebrated on the second of April, the Priest reads aloud this verse of the
Gospel: Quo^ uni ex Minimis fecistis, mihi fecistis. Alleluja. What you have
done to one of these Minimes, you have done it to me. For the presuppose that
Jesus Christ will speak o^ them in the day of the general Judgment This Mass,
which is peculiar to the Orde^ of the Minimes, they have caused to b^ printed.

But to return to the Friars Minors, ther^ are diverse sorts of them (viz) the
Obse^vantines, the Recollects, the Capucins, etc There was a time when the
Cordeliers onel^ were in request; but afterward these Cordeliers giving
themselves liberty in dive^^ things, and dispencing with themselves from the
entire observation of St. Francis's Rule and of diverse constitutions of the
Order the Capucins sprung up, who now a day^ have the esteem and admiration of
the people, professing to observe the Rule entirel^ although they do it not.
For the Rule (...) St. Francis commands the Friars Minors (...) labor with
their hands, which command the Capucins observe not.

CHAP. V. Of the Austerity, and Discipline of the Capucins: and first of their
habits.
THe Capucins go barefoot, and barelegg'd, only they wear Sandals, or
Apostolical shoes, which are nothing else but soles of shoes so tied over the
feet that the feet appear. They wear only a Gown and a sharp pointed hood:
the other sorts of Friars Minors wear a round hood in form of a Child's
biggin.

They wear no shirt s, only they have drawers, which they let down when they
whip themselves. To wear two garments, or to have stockings, and shoes, or to
be girt with a leather girdle, and not with a cord, is counted a mortal sin.
And yet the Legends of St. Francis, written by St. Bonaventure, St. Antonine,
Bonaven. apud Surium page 34. Antonin, page 722
and Jacobus de Voragine, say that St. Francis did sometimes wear stockings and
shoes, and was girt with a leather girdle.

In this Cord the Capucins knit great knots for an Ornament. All this is done
in humility, and there is great merit in it.

They never put off their Garments except it be to take the vermin out of
them, or to patch them. Yea they will in humility put patches on a new garment.
Their garment consists of three pieces, in honor of the Trinity: To be clad in
the habit does a^ much good as Baptism: I have seen in the houses of Princes,
and Gentlemen of quality, little Children of six or seven years old clad in
Capucins habit. Mothers do this, to imprint on their Childrens hearts a love
and reverence to the Order of St. Francis. If a Capucin should die without his
Cord, he would be esteemed to have dyed without St. Francis's habit, and an
evil censure would be past upon him.

CHAP. VI. Diverse austerities, and observations of the Capucins, as well those
to which they are obliged by their Rule, and by the Constitutions of their
Order, as those to which they oblige themselves by voluntary devotion.
BY the constitutions of the Minor Friars, to ride on hors-back, except in case
of sickness, or urgent necessity, is a mortal sin; although St. Francis did
often ride upon an Ass.

It is also a mortal sin for a Monk to have in particular, and without the
Superior's knowledge, any thing worth above thirty pence: and if he should die
without revealing it to the Superior, he is deprived of Ecclesiastical burial.
You may see this in the Declarations of the Rule.

They are not permitted to be Godfathers, nor to present a child to baptism:
this they account scandalous, and St. Francis's Rule forbids it.

It is an ordinary custom among the Capucins, to send to women in travel,
little pieces of St. Francis's wood, or to cause them to swallow the powder of
it in some holy water, to facilitate their delivery. This St. Francis's wood is
the wood of a great Oak, which was once the staff which he used when he walked
abroad. This staff (out of reverence) he would not carry into the Church, but
pitching it into the ground at the Churchdoor it took root, and became a great
tree.

In the Choire of the Capucin's Churches there stands a vessel full of sand, or
lime, into which they spit. Diverse Capucins who have left the Order, and have
been eyewitnesses, do assure me that they have seen some Capucins lick up the
spittle which (through heedlesness) has fallen beside the vessel, and in
mortification to swallow it. This is accounted a great virtue. They have also
seen the Superior command some Monks to lick up the spittle of the rest, in
humility, and mortification.

It is a frequent custom among the Capucins, to prick themselves, and with
their blood to sign vows to the Virgin Mary, and to carry the papers whereon
these vows are written, about with them. This is taken for grand devotion.

They lie in their clothes upon boards, and a little straw, over which there is
a linnencloth spread, and nailed to the boards.

They make three Lent: two by necessity of precept, and the third by voluntary
devotion. This St. Francis's Rule teaches them. Also they fast twelve days
before Whitsontide, and on all the Vigils of the Virgin, of the Apostles, and
of the Saints of their Order.

They give to whom they please, certain Letters, which they call Letters of
Filiation, authorized by the Pope, whereby they give to those who have them, as
great a share of all their austerities, penances, fasts, whippings, etc. as if
they were members of their Order. So that a Merchant or a Gentleman, by virtue
of these Letters of Filiation has as really a part in their merits and
satisfactions, as if they were his own, for so they say God will have it, and
that he takes this for payment.

They never go out of the Convent, without asking leave of the Superior on
their knees.

The young Monks dare not speak to the elder, but on their knees; and when they
have spoken, they make a very low bow.

The Capucins give to people little tickets, wherein the name of Jesus is
written, to cure the Ague or Fever. Herein they differ from the Augustine
Monks, who give a little loaf without leaven on St. Nicholas Talentin's day,
who was a Saint of their Order. They suppose that these loaves have a great
virtue against diseases.

Their Constitutions forbid them to shave themselves with a Rasor, but they are
permitted to trim themselves with Scissars. And they dare not keep a Rasor in
their Convents, except it be to scarifie their shoulders after the use of
cupping-glasses.

By the same Constitutions they are forbidden the use of spices; and to beg
eggs, and cheese.

CHAP. VII. Of the Whippings of the Capucins.
BY the Constitutions of the Order, the Capucins whip themselves three time^ a
week, at two a Clock after midnight, (viz.) at two after Sunday night, after
Tuesday night, and after Thursday night. In the winter they whip themselves at
half an hour past five in the evening, for fear of too great a cold in the
night. They whip themselves on the back and buttocks.

Bonav. vitae Francisci page 38. Antonin. 3 part Chro. tit. 24. c. 2. sect. 1.
Quod vir Dei sentiens vest depo stia, chord a durissima se verberabat, dicens,
Eja frater a sine, etc.
This they do in imitation of St. Francis, of whom St. Bonaventure, and St.
Antonine write, that being one day tickled with carnal temptations, he lasht
himself very severely with his Cord, saying thus to himself: Eja frater asine,
decet te manner, and sic subire flagellum; that is, Go to, brother ass, thou
must stay, and be whipped thus. Ibi. Sed cum tentatio nequaquam discederet, for as
exiens cum hyems esset in magnam nivis congeriem se nudum immersit, etc.
Antonin. tit. 24. cap. 2, sect. 1.
But his temptations continued for all this, and therefore, to subdue them, he
stripped himself stark naked, and plunged himself over head and ears in the snow,
and made seven snow-balls, saying, The biggest is thy wife, and these two are
thy two daughters, etc. The same is recited by James de Voragine in his Legend
of St. Francis. And St. Antonine says, that he often plunged himself in a
place full of ice and snow, usque ad illiciti motus recessum, that is, until
the immodest motion of his secret parts ceased.

Besides this whiping, Antonin. c. 1. Sustinuic multa flagella a daemonibus,
etc.
and the torments which St. Francis inflicted on his own body, the devils whipped
him often, and very rudely: but the blessed Saint gave demonstrations that he
received all this with joy. Bonaventure says, that one day the devils beat him
so sorely that they left him half dead. Bona. apud Surium p. 40 and 41.
Daemones verberatum seminecem relinquunt.


But to returning to the whipping of the Capucins, before they begin this
pleasant exercise, each one prepares himself for it, and with his whip drives
his fellow to a convenient distance from him, for fear of striking him. Being
all ready, the Superior knocks with his hand on a bench, and presently all the
candles are blown out, and he that wears the cope that week begins to sing the
Psalm Miserere, and they all follow, whipping themsemselves while they sing.
Then they sing De Profundis, then the ancient Salve Regina, and then the
ancient Christus factus est obediens pr^ nobis. During all this singing (which
lasts about half an hour) the whipping continues in such sort that the blood
trickles down. And they make a terrible noise with their whips The singing
being ended, the Superior knock^ his seat with his foot, and so the whipping
cease.

This discipline is very terrible; for many times you shall see the place all
bloody and in great Convents where there are 60 or 80. Capucins, there is such
a noise o^ Monks singing with open mouth, and making their whips clack, that
you would thin^ the house were falling. This whipping is (...) just action, for
these fathers deserve it well*

In the holy week they use this disciplin^ every day, but they redouble it on
Good Friday, for on that day instead of one Miserer^ they sing three, and the
whipping continue all the while.

On the Vigiles of the feasts of our Lady and of the other solemn feasts, and
on ever^ friday of the month of March they, whi^ themselves in the dining room
before dinner. But this whipping lasts no longer tha^ while they are singing of
one Miserere, which is the 51. Psalm, which ends in vitulos Hence comes the
proverb to be whipped from Miserere unto vitulos. This whipping, which is milder,
and shorter than at other times, is exercised on the shoulders only, and not
on the buttocks.

This being ended, they eat bread and pottage on their knees in honor of the
Virgin Mary. Their night whippings are exercised on their buttocks; but the day
whippings on the shoulders only.

In the morning these poor Capucins go abroad to beg, with carved buttocks and
embroidered backs, carrying a Wallet on the shoulder. They beg from door to
door; one gives them bread, another a shoulder of Mutton, another a Leg of a
Capon, another puts some Wine into their bottle, which is very large, and of a
great capacity.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Penances of the Capucins.
THe penances of the Capucins, for punishing of a fault, are imposed in the
dining room, which place serves also for a Chapter House.

In this place before dinner the Monks on their knees wait for the superior, or
Guardian; who being come, the most ancient of those who are to receive penance,
puts off his garment from his shoulders, clasps his hands, and holds down his
head, as low as his knees, accusing himself of sins committed against the
Constitutions. They do not accuse themselves for want of a firm affiance in the
promises of the Gospel: but ordinarily those things which the penitent
confesses, are trifles; for, he confesses either that he has talked too
loud, or walked too fast, or gazed about too much, or has scratcht himself
while he was at prayers, or has broken an earthen pot, or the like. This
confession they call the fault. Then come the rest, and make such another
confession.

As these confessions are absurd, so are the penances imposed by the Superior
on the penitent as ridiculous. He that is accused in the Chapter House to have
broken silence, is condemned to take a short staff in his mouth, and to hold it
betwixt his teeth until the Superior say to him, It is enough. In Italian he
says Basta. Sometimes they have a long pole, which five or six of them hold
between their teeth, and so walk up and down with it while the others are at
dinner, who must take heed that they do not laugh.

If any one has whipped himself too gently, he is condemned to whip himself
publicly upon the shoulders with a fox-tail in the presence of those that are
at dinner.

If any one has talked too much, he is condemned to draw a Cross on the ground
wi^h his tongue.

Sometimes for a penance they make a Monk eat with a Cat in the same dish. And
others are made to suck a flint dipped in vinegar.

Others rise from their knees to drink, and as often as they drink they say to
their brethren who are at dinner, before they drink, Brethren, pray to God for
poor brother Linotte, or for brother Tribouleus, or for poor brother
Griboville, etc. For they are obliged to take ridiculous names in humility, to
render themselves contemptible. After this they drink by permission with very
great modesty.

If any one be accused of being too spruce and finical, a bucket of water is
brought him to view himself in, or they present him with the backside of a
kettle for a looking-glass.

They who have slept at prayers, are made to lie down in the presence of those
that are at table, and are made to snore, as if they were asleep.

If any breaks a cup, or bottle, or a fryingpan, he is made to carry it about
hanging at his neck for a penance.

CHAP. IX. Some extravagant actions, in which the Capucins place holiness.
Diverse Capucins who have left the Convent, have confessed to me, that although
they were accounted the most zealous amongst them, yet they had much ado to
forbear laughing at some extravagant actions, in which the Capucins place
holiness.

These things following are practiced amongst them, (viz.) To view themselves
in a Fryingpan. To make a cross with the tongue in the ashes. To comb the
beard with a rake. To chop off the beard on a block with a hatchet. To stand
upon one leg in the midst of the dining room. To kiss the feet of all those
who are at dinner. To make a Monk dance before them all. To make him fence. To
blindfold him with a dirty clout. To go about upon all four like a beast. To
carry about on the head a basket like a headpiece. To put upon the nose a pair
of spectacles made of felt. To ride about upon a stick like a child, etc. But
the absurdest penance of all is, when the Superior commands a Monk, who having
filled his belly, leaves some part of his dinner behind him, to eat it up all,
So that he must break his belly in humility, and mortification.

In the life of St. Felix de Cantalice, (an almes-begger at Rome, Canonized by
the Pope, about 16 or 17 years ago) this is put amongst his virtuous actions
that being at Rome, in the street he met Philip de Neri, founder of the Priests
of the Oratory, and made him drink off his bottle, and that Philip in requital
put his hat on Felix his head: Whereupon the Children in the street cried out
Fra Felice a un capello. Thus did these Saints by a great self denial mutually
communicate their holiness to each other.

In the Chronicles of St. Francis's Order, it is recorded, that Friar
Juniperus, (who is Canonized for a Saint) boiled a hen with her guts, feathers
and all. And that being in a certain Castle, he left his dung in the bed where
he lay. Another Friar Minor, named Jacobo, in humility leapt into a house of
office.

CHAP. X. Of the names, which the Capucincs tak^ when they enter into this
profession.
WHen the Capucins enter into the Order, after the year of Probation they take
another name then that which they had given them at their Baptism: For (as I
have already said) St. Francis's habit is accounted another Baptism. One is
called Hilary, another Joseph, another Basil, etc. Some of them take Sublime
and Caelestial names. One is called Father Angel, another Father Archangel,
another Father Spirit, another Father Cherubin, another Father Seraphin, etc.
which names are very unsuitable to the profession of humility. To be a Friar
Minor, that is, to be the least, and yet to be an Archangel, are things
altogether inconsistent. Besides the nature of their vow is to do works of
Supererogation: but the Angels do no such works, for they content themselves
with obeying the commands of God.

Those who say the Capucins are called Angels because they imitate the Angels,
in that they marry not, nor receive money, do great wrong to the Order of these
Monks; for by the same reason they may be said to imitate the Devils, because
they neither marry, nor possess wealth any more than the Angels.

It is a mockery to say, that they are called Angels, and Seraphins, because
they take the Angels and Seraphins for their Patrons, and Protectors: For by
the same reason a married woman, who has taken the Virgin Mary for her
Patroness, may be called the Virgin Mary; And he who takes God for his
protector, may be called God. But since the Capucins have St. Francis for their
Protector, who is (as they say) of the Order of the Seraphins, and exalted
above the eight Orders of Angels, what need have they to take the Angels for
their Patrons? Besides, they who choose Angels, or Saints for their Patrons,
choose one certain Angel, or Saint for their Patron; and not the Angels and
Saints in general.

CHAP. XI. The form of making their Vow.
WHen a Capucin will enter into the Order, after the year of probation, he is
admitted to make the vow, which is done in the presence of the Superior, and
his brethren, in these terms:

I A. B. do Vow, and promise to God the Father Almighty, and to the Blessed
Virgin Mary, to the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, to the Blessed St. Francis
my Patron, and to you my Father, to observe the Rule of the Friars Minors,
living in Poverty, Obedience, and Chastity.

He that receives this Vow answers,

And I, if thou observe it, do promise thee, in the name of God, life eternal.

CHAp. XII. Some observations upon this Vow.
Diverse things are remarkable in this vow, which being rightly understood, we
shall find that many abuses, yea impieties are therein covered with the cloak
of religion.

In the first place, this vow is made to God the Father, to the Virgin Mary, to
Saints, and to the Superior of the Convent, without making any mention at all
of Jesus Christ.

In the Second place, he who makes this ^ow to Saints departed, presupposes
that those Saints do see him, and that they know ^he intention of his heart.
This is contrary ^o the Holy Scripture, which says, that the dead have no more
a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun. Eccles. 9.6. And
that God only knows the hearts of the Children of men. 2 Chronicles. 6.30.

This vow is repugnant to all the examples contained in the Holy Scriptures,
wherein there is no vow made to creatures, but to God only; as God himself
commands in Psalm. 50.14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the
most High. Here sacrifices, and vows are linked together, as things equally due
unto God. But the Church of Rome holds that we must offer sacrifices to God
only. Ergo.

But that in the holy Scripture not one example is to be found of vows made to
Saints, Bellarmine freely confesses in his book De cultu Sanctorum, Chapter 9.
in these words; When the Holy Scriptures were written, the custom of making
vows to Saints was not begun. The same Jesuit in the same chapter says that a
vow is an action of religion due to God only, even as swearing, and
sacrificing are, as appears by the holy Scriptures. These are his own words.
Thomas Aquin^ the Prince of Schoolmen, Thomas 2.2. qu^st. 28. art. 5.
says the san^ A vow (says he) is to be made to God only, but a promise may
be made to a m^ And in the same place, A Vow is an act^ of Religion, or Divine
Worship. Whe^fore Cardinal Cajetan, in his notes up this place of Thomas, to
defend vows m^ to Saints, says, that the Saints are Gods, a^ that vows are
made to them, ut sunt Dij (...) participationem, as they are Gods by
parti^pation. The same says Bellarmine in (...) aforementioned chapter. A Vow
belo^ not to the Saints but only as they are Gods (...) participation. But we
are certain that t^ Saints who reign with Christ are such. E^ go etc.
According to what Pope Gregor^ 2. says in his Epistle to the Emperor Le^
(viz.) that all the Kingdoms of the We^ own St. Peter for a God upon Earth.

But these Doctors consider not, that if (...) vow be a worship of Latria, and
due (...) God only, and that if we make vows (...) Saints because they are
Gods by participation it follows that we give to Saints the worship of Latria
by participation.

Also they consider not, that by the sam^ reaosn it may be said, that the
Superior, o^ Guardian, who receives this vow, is God to^ by participation. For
when the Friar Minor ^ath said, I vow unto God, and to the Vir^in, and to the
Saints, he adds, and to you any Father, vowing to the Guardian in the ^^me
terms in which he vows to the Saints, and to God. This needs not seem strange;
^or in the Church of Rome, the Priests ^re called Gods and Creators of their
Creator, having a Divine power, yea, a power over Jesus Christ. Mr. Best, a
famous Preacher, in his book of the Priestly-Office, chap. 3. says, The
Priesthood and the Deity have I know not what of common, and are almost of an
equal grandeur, for they have the same power. Item. Seeing that the Priesthood
is equal to the Deity, and that all Priests are Gods, therefore it far exceeds
the Kingly Office, and Priests are much more than Kings. And a little after he
says, that God obeys the Priests as often as they pronounce the words of
consecration. A Sorbonist named Petrus Aurelius, has lately written a book
with the approbation, and by the authority of the College of Sorbon, which
refutes a treatise of the Jesuits entitled Spongia; and in the 75 page this
Aurelius says, Data est Sacerdotibus potestas Christum, hoc est Deum ipsum
producendi, that is, A power is given to Priests to produce Christ, that is to
say God himself. He adds, that the power o^ the Priests has in it a certain
emulation of the eternal operations, whereby the Divine persons are produced.

Qui creavit me (si fas est dicere) dedit mihi creare se; and qui creavit me
creatur medainte me.
Gabriel Biel, famous among the Schoolmen, in his first Lesson upon the Canon
o^ the Mass speaks thus; The Priest has great power over both the bodies of
Christ. That is over the Church, and over the consecrated host, which he calls
God. And in hi^ fourth Lesson, Whoever saw the like? H^ that created me (if I
may so speak) hat^ given me power to create him. And he that created me without
my help, is create^ by my means.

Simeon Dunelmensis lib. 2. Chro. Vigner in his Ecclesiast. History, p. 300.
This manner of speech is not new. For Anno 1097. Urban II. called a Council a^
Rome, against the Emperor Henry IIII. and all other secular Princes who should
claim a right to the investiture of Bishops and Abbots, and to the Collations
of Benefices, and Prebends, alleging that it is an abominable thing that those
hands which create God, should be obliged to so much ignominy as to do homage
to those hands which night and day are defiled with filthy and dishonest
touches. Wherefore, you must not wonder, if a Monk that is admitted into the
Order, makes a vow to the Superior, who is a Priest, and gives him that honor,
which belongs to the worship of Latria, seeing the Priests are called Gods, and
Creators of their Creator, and that they have a power over Jesus Christ.

To these testimonies of the Doctors of the Romish Church, who say, that a vow
belongs to the worship of Latria, and ought to be made to God only, we must
add the testimony of that Jesuit, Cardinal Tolet. in Book 4. Of the
institution of Priests, chap. 17. A vow is a promise made to God by a
deliberate purpose and will. By these things it appears, that a vow made to
Saints, or to a Superior of a Convent, is pure Idolatry; for thereby that
honor which is due to God only, is communicated to the creature.

Our adversaries cannot escape by saying, that in vowing to Saints they vow
mediatly to God; for the worship of Latria ought not to be given to the
creature either mediately or immediately. In all worship of Latria we must
address our selves to God directly. The Monk that makes this vow addresseth
himself to God directly by saying, I vow to almighty God, etc. Having thus
addressed himself to God directly, what need is there that he should afterward
address himself to him mediately, and by oblique ways? It is certain, that he
who says to his Superior, or Guardian, I Vow to you my Father, speaks not to
God, and by these words vows not to God. Consider the words of this vow, and
you shall find, that a Monk who is admitted into the Order, speaks to God, to
the Saints, and to his Superior in the same terms, and vows not in two
different manners.

But when Bellarmine confesses that the custom of making Vows to Saints was
not begun when the holy Scriptures were written, he should have mentioned the
time when it began, and not have cheated the Reader with false allegations, as
his usual manner is. For he alleges these words of Eusebius in his 13. book
of Evangelical preparation, chap. 7. Honoring the soldiers of true piety as
the friends of God, we come to their monuments and make vows to them; Which
passage is false, and altogether forged.

He also alleges Theodoret in his 8. book against the Greeks, which book is
falsely attributed to Theodoret. In one point Bellarmine, besides his error,
discovers his ignorance in the Greek tongue, in not knowing that the Greeks
have no proper word to express the word Vow: And the Latin Interpreter, to
whom Bellarmine trusts, has falsely translated Votorum rei dona persolvunt,
Which words are not in the Greek Text of the book attributed to Theodoret.

It is in honor of the Pope that the Monks vow to St. Peter, and St. Paul, and
not to St. John, and St. James: for they make the two former the Founders of
the Church of Rome.

The things to which this Monk obliges himself, are poverty, chastity, and
obedience. Of poverty I shall speak hereafter. As for chastity, the Jesuit
Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms upon the word votum says, that the vow of
Priesthood is not a vow of chastity, and that the Bishop can dispense with it;
Whereupon we demand, whether a Monk or a Priest that commits fornication, does
not violate the vow of Chastity, and whether by this Vow he does not oblige
himself not to commit fornication. If he does not oblige himself to it, he
shows that he will not be obliged by vow to obey the command of God, which
says, Thou shall not commit adultery: But by this vow he only obliges himself
to abstain from a thing which God permits, and not from that which he forbids.
But if this Monk by vowing Chastity vows not to commit fornication, it is
evident that by commiting fornication he violates his vow, and besides he
transgresses the command of God, which obliges us much more than any
voluntary vow. So that he commits two evils, (viz.) He breaks his vow, and
violates the law of God. Why then, when a Monk or Priest marries for fear of
violating the Law of God by committing fornication, is he accounted to have
committed a greater sin than when he commits fornication? Why then is not a
Priest that commits fornication, made irregular, and incapable of the
Priesthood; but if he marries is presently degraded, yea, and declared
punishable with death? To this they answer, that it is because he has broken
his vow, and yet he remains unpunished, and cease not to sing Mass for all
that. For the commands of God do not bind so strongly as voluntary vows do,
which are made without, yea contrary to the word of God, which says, If they
cannot contain, let them marry. And to avoid fornication, let every man have
his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband, 1 Cor. 7.

But that a Priest who commits fornication, yea has diverse Concubines, is not
thereby rendered irregular, and incapable of the Priesthood, not only
experience shows (examples of this being numberless) but we have also the
determination of Pope Innocent the III. Thereupon in the first book of the
Decretals, in the twelfth Title, in the Chapter Quia circa, His words are
these, Thou desire to be instructed by the Apostolic See, Whether Priests
that have diverse concubines, ought to be counted bigamous. To which we think
fit to answer, that seeing they have not incurred the irregularity of bigamy,
thou may dispense with their exercising of the Priestly Office, they being
stained only with simple fornication. But for marrying of one wife, according
to the Apostles rule, a Priest is degraded, yea punished with death.

But, which is much more, one that is a notorious Sodomite, is not made
irregular, but may sing Mass for all that: as Navarre, Navarr. in caput ad
inferendam. 23. quest. 2. De defensione proximi.
the most knowing of all the Canonists, and the Popes Penitentiary teaches; A
man (says he) does not incur irregularity but for the cases specified in the
law, of which number Sodomie is none. And this he proves by the authority of
Pope Innocent. And he adds, that in Italy, (which is more troubled with this
evil than it should be) they demand no dispensation for it.

In fine, how binding soever the vow of not marrying may be, yet the Pope can
dispense with it, and may permit a man to marry contrary to his vow. Emanuel Sa
in the same place says, that the Bishops may also dispense with this vow, and
permit a man to marry.

Methinks also to vow to St. Peter never to marry, is to pretend to be wiser
than he; for he was a married man. It is just as if one should say to him, I do
vow to thee not to follow thy example. I do promise to be wiser and holier than
thou.

It is evident, that he who burns with filthy lusts, and yet vows never to
marry, does like a sick person that says to God, Lord, I am sick, but I promise
thee that I will not make use of the remedies which thou offerest me, and have
ordained in thy word, for I will be wiser thaen thou.

CHAP. XIII. The Impiety of the Superiors Answer.
IF there be Superstition and Impiety in this Vow, whereby a Monk vows to the
Creature, and obliges himself to things which God commands not; yea, to things
which he forbids: there is no less in the Answer which the Superior or
Guardian makes him, saying;

And I, if thou keep this vow, do promise thee, in Gods name, life Eternal.

These words duly considered, will make a man ttemble for fear. For one that
is neither sent, nor authorized by the King, comes to a man, and says, I have
order from the King to promise you such a Preferment, if you do such a thing,
is a Cheat, and a perfidious person, and deserves to be punished, because he
speaks without order, and without being sent by the King. But the Superior,
who makes this promise to the new Monk in God's name, cannot show his
Commission or Warrant from God for the making of this promise. He abuses the
poor Monk, by making him believe that he is sent by God to make him this
promise in Gods name, (viz.) That if he lives in beggary, if he never marries,
and if he be obedient to the Guardian of his Convent, he shall have Eternal
life: For, these three things are things which God commands not in his Word,
and to which he has made no Promise; yea, these are observations whereby God
is more often offended then served: These are things which a Heathen or
Hypocrite may do. But to serve God according to his Word, and to believe in
Jesus Christ as he is proposed to us in the Gospel, are things to which God
has promised Eternal life, and cannot be done by any, but by those that are
the true Children of God: These are things, for which the Superior should say,
(not I promise thee, but) God promises thee Eternal life. For a man ought not
to promise that which he cannot give.

CHAP. XIV. That corporal Austerities, and Whippings, and tormenting of the
body, are not marks of Holiness.
HE is very much deceived, who takes the severitie and torments which a man
inflicts on his body, for proofs or signs of Holiness. The Apostle St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4. says, Bodily exercise profits little; but godliness is profitable
unto all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which
is to come. All that the Capucins do, is nothing, 1 K n. 18.28.
in comparison of what Baal's Priests did: for they did cut and mangle their
bodies with knives, and imbrued themselves in blood, for the service of their
Idol. There are Mohammedan Monks called Dervis, who live very austerely, and do
even roast their bodies upon the hot scalding sands, and with buckles and rings
of Iron make themselves incapable for generation. The Cynick Philosophers did
beg: Diogenes lay in the street in a tub, having no other housholdstuff then a
wooden dish; and yet he brake that too, when he considered thar Nature had
given him one in the hollow of his hand. Read Apulejus his eighth Book of the
Milesians, and you will there see the description of the Priests of the Syrian
Goddess, who did cut and slash their bodies. Arrepto flagro indidem se
multimodis mulctat ictibus. Avidis amimis corradentes omnia, and in sacculos
huic quaestui de industria praeparatos, farcientes.
He describes one of those Priests, that did whip himself with a whip full of
knots, being armed with obstinacy against the smart of the strokes, until the
blood streamed down his body. Moreover, he adds, (...).
That when these Priests had done whipping themselves, they went about a
begging, and one gave them a piece of Money, another Wine, another Cheese, etc.
which Alms they put into Wallets. In a word, the description which he gives of
these mad Priests, does very much resemble the lives of the Capucins. Lucian in
his Book, entitled The Ass, describes these Priests after the very same manner.

It is a grand abuse to make Piety consist in things wherein Christians may be
excelled by Heathens. There is a proud humility, which despises it self, that
it may be valued by others. The Apostles, and their Disciples, did not live so:
In a simple and ordinary habit, and manner of life, they lived soberly, and
labored in the work which God had committed to them. They were famous, not for
their extravagant and hideous apparel, not for whipping themselves, nor for
eating pottage on their knees; but for their zeal, and holiness of life.

CHAP. XV. That the Austerities, and Humilities of the Capucins are full of
Hypocrisy.
WE may easily know what to think of the Abstinences, Whippings, and humilities
of the Capucins, (viz.) that in the midst of their Austerities they discover
their pride. And of this I Will give you some examples.

Before the Capucins begin their Lents (for they have three Lents) they feast
and make merry for a whole week, during which time, there is no frolic or
Jovial act, which they omit. Some of them sing songs of good fellowship, others
sing Amorous, or love songs, others show Hocus pocus tricks, others stand upon
their heads, or act the Tumbler or Juggler, etc. In fine, every one does such
things as he had learned before he was a Monk.

In great towns there be few Capucins but have their superstitiously devout
women who furnish them with all sorts of dainties, as sweet meats, comfits,
gellies, etc. So that some Capucins have more choice of dainties in their Cells
then Ladies have in their closets.

When a Capucin comes from abroad, warm linen clothes are put on his body, his
feet are washed with sweet herbs, and when they are wiped with warm napkins,
every one comes and kisseth them.

Many of the old Monks, who are called Fathers of importance, are so careful
of their health, that they have a cook for themselves in particular (who is
always a Monk) a groom of the chamber, and an Apothecary, who follow them from
Convent to Convent. You shall see very few of these Fathers of importance, sick
but they are very impatient if they want but the least trifle, and then all the
town is ransackt from one end to the other, to find what they would have. The
Nuns furnish them with sweet meats, the Ladies with rare broths and gellies,
the Gentlemen of the Country with wild foul, the merchants and other townsmen
with Shambles-meat; and the wine which they ordinarily drink, is the best that
is to be had. Those Capucins, who, to save their Souls, have left the Order, do
protest that they have learned of us how to fast; and that when they were
Capucins, they fed more highly, and lived more pleasantly and plentifully.

In great Convents of Capucins such as are at Paris, and Roven, a most furious
ambition and envy discovers it self: For, to obtain the least preferment in
the Convent, and to supplant their competitors, they have their creatures who
cry them up every where, and rail on those that aspire to the same. Office;
whence great disorders do oftentimes arise; for Princes do more patiently bear
contempts and injuries then the Capucins. And at the Tables of Dukes,
Marquesses, and Earls, the Capucins suffer themselves to be placed at the upper
end.

Their pride appears in this, that they profess works of supererogation, that
is to say, better works then God commands: so that God may say to a Capucin, I
would not have thee so holy.

The same spirit of pride appears in their calling themselves Angels,
Archangels, Spirits, Seraphins and Cherubins. It appears also by the unworthy
submissions which the principal Capucins require of the inferior, who never
speak to the Superiors but on their knees; which Superiors command them very
base things, as to lick up the others spittle, etc.

It cannot be said, that they wear a barbarous and extravagant habit in
humility and mortification; For, he that will subdue his Flesh, may do it as
well under a common habit; he may under a usual habit wear a hair-shirt, and
may whip himself secretly as often as he pleases, and without any one's
knowledge: But this wild habit, differing from that of other men, serves only
to be looked upon, and admired; for people gaze upon and admire nothing but
what is extraordinary.

To this we may add, that he who makes profession of simplicity and humility in
his conversation, should not be vain in his discourses, nor too wantonly nice
and delicate in his words, for fear of belying his Profession by his Language.

I speak this because of Father Joseph, (...) Capucin; who in his new Book
shows, tha^ he has made a great provision of Elegancies. As when he calls St.
John, The Secretary o^ Love to the Son of God. And of Transubstantion he says,
that it is Love's Masterpiece. And speaking to us, he says, That when God
shall have brought us into his Winecellar, there to taste of the excess of his
love, we shall not find it so difficult to believe, That Jesus Christ did eat
himself, and that together with Christ's body the Devil entered into Judas. With
the like grace, supposing the words of St. Philip to the Eunuch too weak and
impertinent, as they are set down in the eighth Chapter of the Acts, he
introduces him speaking thus; Sir, will it please you that I presume to ask
you a question, with all due respect? To which he makes the Eunuch answer with
the like civility, I pray oblige me so much as to come into this Coach. Note
also, that the very first word of his Book is a mistake, beginning thus, The
Apostle St. Philip; For this Philip was not an Apostle. With the like vanity he
talks of preaching in a Ruff, and in a Band, and of yellow and green
Gentlewomen; and he brings in speaking I know not what Courtier, who praises
and extolleth him to his face, saying, That Father Joseph speaks very
gracefully, and that all the Catholics have been very much comforted by his
Sermons, and do admire the force and clearness of his Reasons.

CHAP. XVI. Of the pleasant Process betwixt the Capucins and Recollects, about
the Tip of their Hoods. Also of Masses in Red, Green, and Violet.
THe pride of the Minor Friars did never more clearly appear, then in the
quarrel which they had, and have to this day, with the Recollects, who are also
of St. Francis's Order. When we speak of a Process about nothing, we say, It is
a Process about the point of a needle; but the Process of these Minor Friars
has been about the point or Tip of their Hood.

We must know, that the Cordeliers, who brag as well as the Capucins, that they
wear St. Francis's Habit, differ from the Capucins in wearing a round Hood, and
laugh at the Capucins and Recollects for wearing a sharp-pointed Hood, calling
it in derision, Made like a Pyram^d, in which they put such things as they sell
by retail.
A Grocers paper. Betwixt these Capucins and Recollects there began, a few
years since, a great Process in the Court of Rome. The Capucins complained,
That the Recollects wore their Hood too long; and that thereby they would make
themselves equal to the Capucins in Holiness. That by reason of this long
point, being equal in length to that of the Capucins, many are deceived, taking
a Recollect for a Capucin, and so give him as much honor; although the
Recollects are not to be compared to the Capucins for holiness, and merit of
Conversation. And therefore they requested, that by the Decree of his Holiness,
the Recollects might be condemned to shorten the point of their Hood.

The Recollects, on the other side, maintained, and do so still maintain, that
they are not inferior to the Capucins in holiness, and perfection; and that it
is no dishonor to the Capucins if sometimes a Recollect be taken for a Capucin,
or a Capucin for a Recollect.

This process has caused great stirs, and has much troubled these two Orders,
and divided the Prelates of Rome into contrary factions. And it was pleasant to
hear the contests of these Minor Friars. The Capucin said to the Recollect,
What! thou would be equal to us in holiness: Thou art so ambitious, as that
thou would be taken for a Capucin. But the Recollect, being witty in biting
jests, said, Thou think that holiness consists in wearing a long Ut prius
dictum est.
Grocers paper. Thou think by thy pride to put the Holy Ghost into a long
through which they strain their infusions when they make syrrups; it is a long
sharp-pointed bag.
Apothecaries bagg. The holiness of you Capucins appears in this, vsz. That for
eight days before Lent, you show tricks of Legerdemain, and play the Tumblers,
etc. Thus did these Saints dispute, quarreling which of them by their pride
should carry away the prize of humility.

But the Cordeliers, who wear a round hood like a child's biggin, took great
pleasure in beholding this strife, and laughed at them both: For they say, that
the hood of the old pictures and statues of St. Francis, has not a long point;
And they say, that their round hood, made in form of a child's biggin, is
conformable to what our Savior says in the 18. Chap. of St. Matthew, Except
ye become as little Children, Cass. lib. 1. cap. 4.
ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Cassian says the same of the
Anchorites, living in the deserts of Egypt, that they wear a hood in imitation
of the simplicity and innocence of Children, according to that which is written
in the 131. Psalm, I am not haughty, but am even as a child weaned from his
mother.

Nevertheless, St. Hierome speaks against this hood, and laughs at it: for
observe what he says of it, in his Epistle to Eustochius, There are some
(says he) who wear a hair-shirt, Cucullis fabrefactis ut ad infantiam redea^^,
imitantur noctuas, and hubones.
and making themselves hoods, to resemble children, they are like Owls, and
buzzards. Afterward he adds, Shun those whom thou see have a Goat's beard, a
black cloak, and that go with their feet naked, being hardened with the cold:
All these things are marks of the devil. When they have intruded themselves
into great men's houses, they deceive silly women laden with sin, and
counterfeit a dejected gravity. This is a very fair lesson for the Capucins.

But to return to this great process: the Capucins did at last obtain sentence
in their favor; for they had on their side one of the Popes near kinsmen, who
was a Capucin. By this sentence of the Pope, the Recollects were condemned to
shorten the tip of their hood: but they openly protested, that they would not
obey this sentence, saying, That they would rather dissolve their Order, and
relinquish all, then acquiesce in this sentence. Wherefore yet to this day, in
despite of the Pope, they wear their hood of the same length as before.

Of this hood, as of the rest of the habit of the Minor Friars, it is
observable, that it is not lawful for a Monk to change it in the least, not so
much as in the colors of the Mass: For it is not lawful to sing Mass in a red
habit, on those days on which it is appointed to be sung in a green habit; nor
to be sung in a black habit, on those days on which it is appointed to be sung
in a violet habit: The rules in this case are very strict, page 328.
and are placed at the beginning of the Mass Book.

But Father Joseph wrongs us in his new book, by endeavoring to prove that the
like things are done amongst us, objecting against me, that I wear a Ruff, and
that as there are Masses in green, violet, etc. so it may be said, that amongst
us there are Sermons in a Ruff, and Sermons in a Band, Sermons in a Gown, and
Sermons in a Cloak: for this Minor Friar knows well enough, that we have no
rules to oblige us to wear a Ruff or a Band, as the Church of Rome has
inviolable laws concerning Masses in green, red, and violet. It is to be
supposed that when St. Peter and St. Paul were in a gay humor, they sang Mass
in a green habit. My design in mentioning the colors of Masses so strictly
enjoined, is to show, that false religions having corrupted the true doctrine,
do endeavor to color this wickedness with a multitude of ceremonies, and
external observations, in which great mysteries are pretended: So our
Adversaries having destroyed the body of true piety, pay the people with
variety of colors.

CHAP. XVII. How St. Francis obtained of Pope Innocent the Third, the
approbation of his Rule.
FRancis d' Assise, when he was but a private person, little known, and
followed by none; moreover, being esteemed out of his wits by his fellow
citizens, who threw dirt at him, and also by his father, named Peter Bernardo,
who did beat him, and kept him prisoner a long time, composed a Rule, and some
laws, to the Observation whereof he would oblige those who would believe him,
promising them life eternal.

But because this Rule could not be received without the Popes approbation, and
authority, he went to Pope Innocent the 3d. to beg the confirmation of his
Rule. Matthew Paris, an English Monk, Superstitious in the highest degree, and
an admirer of St. Francis, in his History of the life of Henry the III. says,
page 237.
that the said St. Francis presented himself to Pope Innocent the III. sitting
in Conclave, and gave him his Rule in writing, entreating him to authorize it
by his approbation: but Pope Innocent taking notice of St. Francis's bad
clothes, his dirty and contemptible countenance, his long beard, and the black
hair of his eyebrows hanging down over his eyes, despised him, and said to
him, Go brother, and wallow in the dirt with the Swine, for thou art more like
them than like a man. Which words as soon as Francis heard, he bowed himself
very low, and in obedience to the command of his Holiness, went and wallowed
with swine in a puddle, wherein he tumbled so long that he was covered with
dirt from head to foot; and in this pickle he came again, and presented himself
to the Pope, saying, My Lord, I have done what you commanded me, Whereat the
Pope being very much astonished, and admiring his great obedience, granted his
request, and approved of St. Francis's Rule which is observed at this day by
the Capucins, and the other Minor Friars, with a grand obedience. This
approbation was granted Anno Domini 1212. as St. Bonaventure and, St. Antonine
testify. And this approbation was again confirmed by Pope Honorius, successor
to Innocent.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the humility, and incomparable patience of St. Francis; and of
his most notable actions.
Diverse have written the life and actions of St. Francis. Vincent in his
Mirror of History writes it at large. Matthew Paris, an English Monk, in the
life of Henry the Third, describes the actions of St. Francis, and sets down
his Rule. These two Historians wrote about thirty years after St. Francis's
death. James de Voragine has written his Legend. We have also the Chronicles
of St. Francis, upon the same subject. But the Authors of greatest authority
are first St. Bonaventure, a General of St. Francis's Order, and a Cardinal,
who wrote about forty years after St. Francis's death. This Bonaventure, the
Church of Rome places amongst her Saints, and Principal Doctors. This is that
St. Bonaventure, who composed the Psalter of the Virgin Mary, This Psalter of
Bonaventure, was printed at Paris by Claude Chapelet, in St. James's street at
the sign of the Unicorn, anno. 1601.
containing one hundred and fifty Psalms, which are nothing else but the
hundred and fifty Psalms of David, out of which Bonaventure has taken the word
God, and has put the word Virgin in its stead; for example, he thus begins the
109. Psalm, (which according to the Hebrew, is the 110) The Lord said unto our
Lady, sit thou at my right hand, etc. And in Psalm. 90. instead of, He that
dwells in the secret place of the most High, he has put, He that dwells in
the help of the Mother of God. And in the 129. Psalm, Out of the depths have I
cried unto thee, O our Lady, hear my voice. And so throughout the Psalms. By
this means the true honor which all Christians owe to the holy, and blessed
Virgin, turns to her reproach, by transforming her into an Idol, and by putting
her in the place of God. This is that St. Bonaventure, to whom the Capucin
Joseph would have us give credit, and would have us believe that description of
S. Francis's life, which he gives us.

After this St. Bonaventure, we have St. Antonine, Archbishop of Florence,
Canonized by Pope Clement the Seventh, Anno Domini. 1523, with the approbation
of his Doctrine, and great Indulgences granted to those who shall shall visit
his Sepulcher. I speak this, because no body may think that such passages as I
shall quote out of these Authors, are things which the Church of Rome believes
not; or that I have invented them; or that they are forged by persons of small
authority. I allege such Saints as are prayed unto, and adored in the Church
of Rome.

Saint Francis his Father was named Peter Bernardo, A Citizen of Assise, in the
Duchy of Spolete in Italy.

Saint Francis's name, when he was young, was John Bernardo, but he changed his
name, and would be called Francis, because he spoke French when he was moved by
the Holy Ghost to utter the praises of God; as Bonaventure tells us, in the
life of St. Francis. This Life, written by St. Bonaventure, you may find in
Surius, in the month of October. p. 30.


When he was but young, and a Lay-person, he demonstrated a grand Humility,
even to the kissing of Lepers: and one day alighting from his horse to kiss a
Leper, it was revealed unto him, that this Leper was Jesus Christ.

His fellow-Citizens seeing him a greasy and dirty fellow, and that he did
wild and extravagant actions, judged him to be out of his wits; and running
after him, threw stones at him, and covered him all over with dirt. Which when
his Father saw, he fetched him home, and kept him shut up a long time, whipping
him cruelly, as mad folk are whipped for their cure. But his Mother taking pity
on him, did, in the absence of her Husband, set him at liberty.

When his Father returned home, he brought him before the Bishop, and made him
disclaim his right of Inheritance: To which Francis very willingly consented;
yea, pulling off his Breeches, and the rest of his clothes, he made himself
stark naked, being (as St. Bonaventure says) drunk with the Holy Ghost. Then
he said to his Father, Hitherto I have called thee my Father; but henceforward
I will say, Our Father which art in Heaven. Antonine reports the same in the
Life of St. Francis.

Being thus naked, he went into a Spittle where Lepers were kept, and tended
them, kissing their feet, and wiping and kissing their sores with an admirable
devotion, as St. Bonaventure tells us.

In those days St. Francis wore shoes, and walked with a staff, and girded
himself with a leather-girdle: But afterward, judging this equipage excessive,
and too delicate, he left his shoes and his staff, and in humility girded
himself with a Cord.

Being tempted with unchaste desires, he plunged himself over head and ears in a
ditch full of ice. And one day, the Devil having breathed on him, he felt the
fire of carnal lust kindled within him: Whereupon this blessed Saint stripped
himself stark naked, and whipped himself terribly with his Cord, saying, Eja
frater asine, decet te manner, and sic subire flagellum; that is, Go eo,
brother ass, thou must stay there, and be whipped thus. Antonine and James de
Voragine report the same.

The hard ground was his ordinary bed, and a stone his pillow. But one day, by
reason of a pain in his head, taking a feather-pillow, and reposing himself
thereupon, the Devil got into it, and extremely troubled his brain, and
disturbed his devotion: At which St. Francis being incensed, took hold of the
pillow, and threw away both it and the Devil.

Finding that his carnal concupiscence continued, he ran to his garden, and
gathering a great heap of snow, he plunged himself in it over head and ears,
stark naked, as St. Bonaventure says. But St. Antonine says, that he plunged
himself in it only so high as his privities. Then he made seven snow-balls,
saying of one, This is my Mother; and of another, This is my Daughter, etc.
whereupon the Devil went away very much ashamed.

He presented his Rule to Pope Innocent the Third; who for a while rejected it,
and some of the Cardinals opposed it, saying, That it proposed novelties, and
things impossible to be done: But at last, St. Francis wallowing in the mire
with Swine, obtained his request.

Sometimes he had a mind to hear himself reviled; Bonavent. p. 39. Legenda
Antonin. p. 725. Legenda.
and to this purpose he once said to a Monk, Rail on me. Which strict command
the Monk not daring to disobey, said to him, Thou art an idle, lazy Lubber, a
mercenary fellow, an ignorant sott, and a worthless rascal. Whereat St. Francis
greatly rejoicing, answered, God bless thee, my Son; for what thou have said is
vory true.

Bonavent. page 39. Antonin. page 726.
One day he had a mind to feed bette^ then ordinary; for which resolving to ma^^
satisfaction, as having committed a great s^ he caused himself to be dragged to
the Ga^lows, with a halter about his neck, and (...) body naked, only he had a
pair of Drawn on; and there standing on a great stone, (...) confessed that he
was a glutton, a fles^ eater, and most worthy of scorn and contempt. St.
Antonine says, that a Monk we^ before him, crying aloud, Friends, beho^^ this
glutton, this eater of Pullets flesh, which he has eaten secretly without our
knowledge

Bonavent. page 41. The Legend says the same.
The Devils whipped him so cruelly, the they left him half-dead. And one day
multitude of Devils running on the top (...) his house with a horrible noise,
he called (...) them with a sweet and pleasing voice, i^ treating them to come
down, and to be^ and torment him; saying to them, Com^ and avenge me of my
adevrsary, which is my flesh.

Legend. page 72.
Not being content with the torments the Devils inflicted on him, he whipped
himself cruelly, taking delight in this exercise. And once he hid himself in a
Cave a whole month, without any ones knowledge, as St. Antoni^^ testifies.

St. Antonine and the Legend put this amongst the proofs of St. Francis's
holiness; page 721. Antonin. Tit. 24 c. 1. s. 2.
That being once at dinner at an honest man's house, a Capon of seven years old
was brought to the table, and that he sent a leg of this Capon for an Alms to a
poor passenger, who was a One that believes amiss. Legenda Antonin. page 725.
Bonavent.
miscreant, and a perverse fellow. But the next day, when St. Francis was in
the Pulpit preaching, this miscreant, thinking to jeer St. Francis, said to the
people; I will show you what sort of meat Francis uses to feed on: and then
going to show the people the Capons leg, he found it turned into Fish;
whereupon this miscreant was much confounded.

When any one gave him roast-meat, he dragged it through the ashes, Antonin.
page 726.
or laid it a soaking in cold water, for fear of breaking his Vow of poverty
and abstinence. An invention which Jesus Christ and his Apostles, when they
were eating the Passover, did not think of.

St. Antonine says, Antonsn. in vita S. Francisci, page 723.
that St. Francis divided his Disciples into three Companies; whereof two spent
their time in contemplation, and the third in action. This third sort of Monks
were called Pinzocgori, and were permi^^ed to marry.

Legenda Jacobi de Voragine. Antonin. p. 724.
Some Greek Monks having prepared dinner for him, when he came to the house and
saw clean linen and glasses on t^^ table, he presently got to the door, a^ ran
out into the street, where meeting (...) beggar who had a very bad hat, he took
the hat, and putting it on his own head, sat down at the door of the house,
begging.

Legenda Jacobi de Voragine Antonin. in vita Francisci.
Being weary, he got up upon an ass but having with him one Leonard a Monk who
was on foot, this Leonard grumble^ at it; which St. Francis perceiving,
alighted from the ass, and said to Leonard; Brother get up upon the ass, for
thou art of better a family than I.

Legenda Antonin.
He honored Priests so much, that h^ said, If I should meet together on the way
a Priest, and a Saint that came down from heaven, I would first go and kiss the
Priest's hands, and would say to the Saint, stay thou there a while.

The Legend and Antonin. p. 726. and 727. Bonavent. p. 44 and 50
In humility he preached to the birds. And being once in a Castle called Albian,
while he was preaching to the people, a multitude of Swallows flockt about him;
which by their singing hindered the people from hearing him: W^^^^upon turnin^
to the Swallows, he said, ^ters, ye ha^ talked enough, now it is hig^ time for
me to speak. At which words the Swallows were silent until the Sermon was
ended. And pitying a Hare, Bonavent. page 44.
which suffered it self to be taken, he said to it, Brother Hare, why did
thou suffer thy self to be so deceived? A live Tench was presented to him,
Antonin. page 727. Bonavent. page 44. The Legend. Bonavent. page 44.
on which taking pity, he threw it again into the River. Hearing a Grasshopper
sing, he said to it, Sing, sister Grasshopper, and praise the Creator with
rejoicing.

Being in the Church of St. Mary, called Portiuncula, some body gave him a
sheep, to which he gave instructions; and the sheep in obedience to him,
presently sell a bleating, while the Monks were singing in the Choir: and this
creature did very humbly kneel down when the host was held up. Whereupon
Surius puts in the Margin, O that heretics would learn henceforward to adore
the Eucharist!

Traveling through the Marquisate of Ancona, Antonin. p. 727.
he met on his way a Country fellow carrying two Lambs to Market to sell them,
which did bleat most pitifully; Whereupon St. Francis, being touched with
brotherly compassion, said to the Country fellow, Why d^^st thou torment my
Brethren so? The Country man answered, I carry them to the Market to sell them
to some body that will eat them. Then the holy man said to him, God forbid;
rather take the cloak which I have on my shoulders. So he gave him his cloak,
and saved the lives of his brethren, which he carried away on his shoulders
with a brotherly Charity.

Antonin. page 727.
Remembering that it is written in the two and twentieth Psalm, I am a worm, and
no man, he would not suffer a worm to be trodden upon.

One of his Monks having spoken somewhat roughly to a poor man, he commanded
him to strip himself, and to go stark naked before this poor man, and to kiss
his feet.

Antonin. in vita Francisci cap. 2. s. 6. Bonavent. page 47.
He was very devoutly present at a Christmas midnight Mass, to which according
to the Custom of the Church of Rome in those days, and used still in some
places, an Ox, and an Ass were led, and hay was carried for them.

It is observable that Bonaventure says, That Francis had no learning, page 48.
nor knowledge of the holy Scriptures, acquired either by study or instruction
from others but that by the irradiation of the eternal splendor, he penetrated
even to the very bottom of the Holy Scripture. Hence it is, that in his Rule
he alleges Scripture so dexterously, and pertinently, as we shall see anon.

At last brother Francis dyed, having acted a Comedy both before God and man.

CHAP. XIX. The great rewards which St. Francis received for his humility: And
of his marks.
A Humility so profound, and of s^ great a merit, was not unrewarde^ St.
Antonine, page 728.
in the life of St. Francis, reports, That the people did run after him and did
tear his clothes in pieces, every on^ striving to carry away a piece,
believing tha^ these rags were of great virtue, and a prope^ means for
salvation; so that the people left him half naked.

Bonaventure says, That a certain holy man had a vision, wherein it seemed to
him, tha^ a golden cross came out of St. Francis'^ mouth, whose top touched
Heaven, an^ its two arms reached unto the ends of the Earth.

In the seventh chapter of the Revelati^^ St. John speaks thus; I saw another
Ang^ ascending from the East, having the sea^ of the living God. St.
Bonaventure, in the life of St. Francis, Bonavent. page 31.
says, That we must believe that without doubt this Angel is St Francis: these
are his words; I saw (sait^ John in the Revelation) another Angel asce^ding
from the East, having the seal of the living God. Whence we gather, by an
infallible faith, that this messenger of God, beloved of Christ, to be imitated
by us, and admired by the world, is that servant of God, Francis.

The same Bonaventure says, Page 40.
that a certain holy, and devout man, being once in St. Francis's company, fell
into a trance, and saw in Heaven diverse seats, amongst which he saw one more
Magnificently adorned then the rest, glittering with precious stones, and very
glorious: And as this holy man was wondering for whom this seat was prepared, a
voice came to him from Heaven, saying, This was the seat of one of the lapsed
Angels, and is kept for the most humble Francis. The Legend says the same: and
we have already seen, that this was the seat of one of the apostate Seraphins;
and that by this exaltation the most humble Francis is placed above the
Archangels, and above the Cherubins, and consequently above all the Saints,
except the Virgin Mary, who is called The Queen of Heaven.

All, that have written the life, and actions of St. Francis, say, That about
two years before his death, God intending to recompense the humility and merits
of St. Francis, sent a Seraphin to him; which, lying upon him cross-wise,
imprinted on his hands and feet the marks of the wounds of Jesus Christ.

After his death, there was a great stir, and contest about these marks: Some
laughed at it, and said, that if St. Francis had really received from God the
marks of the wounds of Jesus Christ, every one must needs have seen them,
during the space of those two years, seeing he went with his feet naked, and
wore no gloves: but that none ever saw them, save one Friar, named Elias,
Antonin. Tit. 24. cap. 2. S. 8. Solus hoc frater Elias casu utcunque prospicere
meruit.
who saw them but once, and that by chance too. They said also, that the
miracles of Jesus Christ, and his Apostles served to some good purpose, (viz.)
to cure diseases, to give ease and deliverance to the afflicted, to raise the
dead etc. but that the marks of these wounds d^ no cure at all, and are good
for nothing That it is not credible, that God would imprint these marks on a
mortal body, which was soon after to putrify, by which putrefaction these
marks had been defaced Moreover, that although these marks had been really
imprinted, yet it is a thing which the Devil, or men may easily counterfeit.
That the Apostles, who had more worth in them then St. Francis, never had these
marks.

But the Pope interposed, and in recompense of the services which Brother
Francis had done him, (for he was a great defender of the Popes Authority)
Canonized him, and put him in the Catalogue of the Saints. This Canonization
was Anno Domini 1228. Moreover, Pope Alexander the Fourth, Anno Domini 1254.
understanding that St. Francis was on Mount Alverno when he received the
impression of these wounds, took this occasion to augment his Revenue: For he
declared, that all the Ecclesiastical Lands and Goods in that Mountain did
belong to the Pope, and were directy and immediately subject to the Church of
Rome. Moreover, Antonin. cap. 2. s. 10.
he did personally cite, and adjourn those who had maliciously defaced the
marks of the Image of S. Francis which was at Gennes, in the Church of St. Mary
de Vignes.

About twenty six years since, Pope Nicolas the Fourth sent Bulls to all the
Churches under the Papal jurisdiction, certifying the truth of St. Francis's
marks (though diverse, who were hard of belief, Antonin. page 720.
laughed at it:) since which time, the memory of St. Francis's marks is sacred
in the Church of Rome, which (as Antonine says) observes the Feast of St.
Francis's marks; which honor is not done to the marks of Jesus Christ.

When I consider these things, I cannot enough wonder at the blindness of those
that give credit to things so full of absurdities and impostures: It seems as
if the adorers of St. Francis had invented them on purpose to dishonor and
mock him; for no man, who has any common sense left him, will do such things
as are attributed to St. Francis; who played the madman, that he might be
counted a Saint; and, as much as in him lay, kept himself from the usual and
ordinary actions of mankind, that he might be admired, (viz.) To draw roasted
flesh through the ashes; to wallow in the dirt with Swine; to tumble in the
snow; to give instruction to Animals, and to call them his brethren and
Sisters, are things which cannot be done by a man that is in his right senses.

And herein we must admire the just effects of Gods displeasure, who has
revenged the contempt of his Word contained in the holy Scriptures; for in
those days, and in the following Ages, the holy Scripture was a Book sealed,
and altogether unknown to the people: Nothing was then talked of, but Images,
lying Wonders, Croisades, Indulgences, adoration of Relics, and the power of
the Pope was then at the height, and absurd and feigned Legends were the
ordinary subject of Sermons. Wherefore God being provoked, struck the people
with the spirit of giddiness, and with a horrible blindness, which grew thicker
and thicker, until God took the Candle of his Word from under the Bushel, and
exposed to view the holy Scriptures.

CHAP. XX. That under the Cloak of Humility Saint Francis hid an unparalled
pride.
WHosoever shall rightly consider the actions of St. Francis, shall under the
Cloak of Humility discover an unparalled pride.

In the beginning of the Legend written by James de Voragine, it is reported,
That Francis being prisoner with diverse other persons, he only was merry, and
all the rest were sad. And being asked what was the cause of his mirth, he
answered; Ideo me exultare noveritis, quia adhuc sanctus per totum seculum
adorabar, that is, Know, that I rejoice because I shall be adored for a Saint
throughout the World. To desire to be adored is the highest degree of pride:
None of the Apostles desired this honor. Cornelius the Centurion, who was a
man fearing God, knew that there is but one God, which he continually invoked;
He knew well enough that St. Peter was not the Creator of the world: but being
seized with reverence, he would have given him some inferior adoration; for
which St. Peter rebuked him, saying. Stand up; I my self also am a man. Act.
10.26. St. John, seized with fear, would have adored the Angel that talked with
him, as you may see in the one and twentieth Chapter of the Revelation; But the
Angel rebuked him, saying, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants;
worship God. He knew well enough that this Angel was not God; for the same
Angel had told him so before, in chap. 19 of the same book. Is it not therefore
an impious folly, for a man to live the life of a beggar, that he may be adored
after his death?

The Rule of St. Francis, which speaks with an absolute authority, demonstrates
the pride of him that composed it. For who gave brother Francis, who was of the
meanest of the people, and without any charge either Ecclesiastical or Civil,
power to compose laws different from the laws of God, and to make ordinances
which oblige men upon pain of damnation? Who gave him power to command with
absolute authority? For see how he speaks in his Rule. Per obedientiam injungo
Ministris; I enjoin Ministers by their obedience. And he concludes his Rule
with these words, That it is not lawful for any man to infringe this Rule, or
by rash boldness to contradict it. That if any one shall presume to make such
an attempt, let him know, that he shall incur the displeasure of Almighty God,
and of the Blessed Apostles, Peter, and Paul.

I demand how we can be assured that God would have us, upon pain of incurring
his displeasure, entirely observe the Rule of Francis d'Assise, and that God
would be angry with a Minor Friar, who, instead of a Cord, should gird himself
with a leather-girdle, or should receive money, or would not wear patcht
clothes, or would wear a shirt, or should (whether he be a Capucin or a Lay
Cordelier) say less then seventy six Paters in one day? What can be said more
against murderers, adulterers, and blasphemers, than to say, that they incur
the indignation of Almighty God? Has not weak and sinful man enough to do to
obey the commands of God, without having heavy burdens imposed on him in
things unnecessary, and which God requires not, and then to be made believe,
that he who does in the least transgress these laws, invented by man, does
incur the indignation of God?

It is observable, that many of those who are rigid observers of those humane
laws, and oblige others to be so too, do very easily dispense with the Laws of
God; and ^e far from loving God with all their hearts, and their neighbors as
themselves.

But superstition prevails more than Re^^gion. And hence it is that in the
Con^ents of Monks there are envies, factions and ^ontinual emulations, besides
other vices.

But how did this Francis d' Assise know, that a Monk who observes not his
Rule, in^urs the indignation of S. Peter and S. Paul? Had he spoken with them?
Did they declare and promise that they would be avengers and enemies to all
those that should con^emn the Rule of the Minor Friars? We ^ave the Epistles of
those excellent Apo^tles, Peter, and Paul, which (without a ^omparison) are
better then St. Francis's Rule, and yet they do not declare themselves avengers
of the contempt of their ^octrines.

They do not say, that he who shall vio^ate their precepts, shall incur their
indigna^ion. Wherefore it appears that this vene^able Francis assumes an
authority over the Apostles, whom he would oblige to be an^ry for his sake, and
to undertake his quar^el. But it is not credible, that the Apostles, who enjoy
celestial glory, will con^ern themselves for the observation of the Rules of
Monks, especially seeing they themselves were no Monks, and that their lives
were as much unlike the lives of the Capucins, as heaven is distant from earth;
Also because there were no Convents of Monks in the Apostles days, nor in many
ages after.

Methinks it is enough to have God our enemy: If a man incurs the indignation
of God, the indignation of these two Apostles will not render him the more
miserable. In vain therefore does Francis, after he has denounced against the
Minor Friars, who shall disobey his Rule, the indignation of God, threaten them
with the indignation of St. Peter, and St. Paul, who are presupposed (though
without proof, and contrary to the word of God) to know the heart, and to see
all that i^ done here below.

Also we would fain know, why Francis d' Assise threatens the Monks with the
indignation of St. Peter, and St. Paul, only? And why not with the indignation
of St. John, and St. James? But perhaps he believed, that they have less credit
in heaven, or that they are less choleric.

It is very observable, that Francis d'Assise composed his Rule (wherein he
gives laws, and commands with authority,) when he was but a Lay man, and a
private person, and a long time before the Pope approved it: And although he
was of the meanest rank of people, and without any office or dignity, yet he
speaks magisterially.

To the Rule of St. Francis, is added his Testament, wherein he speaks with
full power, and authority, saying, Firmiter volo quod fratres laborent de
laboritio, and praecipio firmiter fratribus per obedientiam, etc. That is, I do
strictly charge, and do firmly, and absolutely command the Friars by their
obedience, etc. He presupposes, that obedience is due to him, and that his
commands ought to be firm, and inviolable. Kings speak not with more authority.

CHAP. XXI. Some Laws and Ordinances contained in St. Francis's Rule.
THe Rule of Francis d'Assise begins with these words:

The Rule and Life of the Minor Friars is as follows, viz. to observe the holy
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in these things, viz. in living Obediently,
Chastely, and without Property.

These words are very remarkable; for they do not oblige the Monks to
acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the eternal Son of God, and the Savior and
Redeemer of the world, nor to be charitable and liberal to the poor, nor to be
at peace with their neighbors, nor to do to others what they would have done
to themselves, nor diligently to read the holy Scripture, and to be instructed
in the Doctrine of Salvation, which are things expressly contained in the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and recommended by the Apostles: But this Rule obliges the
Minor, Friars to observe the Gospel in things which the Gospel of Jesus Christ
commands not; for you cannot find, that the Gospel of Jesus Christ forbids any
one to marry; on the contrary, Jesus Christ, by the mouth of his Apostle,
commands those who cannot contain, to marry, and St. Peter was married. Jesus
Christ forbids us not to possess any thing in particular, nor does he command
us to live in beggary by the sweat of other men's brows. He commands not to make
a Vow of Obedience to a Guardian, or Abbot, or Superior of a Monastery; for in
the days of Jesus Christ there were no such people, nor in many Ages after.
Can there be a more manifest mockery, then to oblige men by Vow to obey the
Gospel in such things whereof the Gospel makes not the least mention, and some
whereof are contrary to the Gospel?

But if these things are commanded in the Gospel, (as this Rule falsely
presupposes,) why then does the Pope dispense with this Vow, by permitting
Monks to marry? However, he seldom gives this permission, except to persons of
great Quality.

In the second Chapter of the same Rule, you shall find these words:

Let those who are received Monks, have a Cloak with a Hood, and (if they will)
another without a Hood. Also, let those wear shoes, who are constrained by
necessity so to do. Likewise, let all the Friars wear poor and base clothes,
which they may patch with pieces of sackcloth and such other stuff, and shall
have the blessing of God with it.

Must not that man be out of his wits, who thinks, that the patching of old
clothes can bring down the blessing of God upon any one? And seeing the
Capucins clothes are of woollen-cloth, St. Francis did very improperly ordain,
that they should be patched with sackcloth.

In the same Chapter of this Rule, mention is made of three Lents, viz. the
Lent before Easter, another from All Saints day till Christmas, and the other
from the day of the Epiphany till the Lent before Easter. So that there are
five Months of Lent: The two first are necessarily enjoined, but the third is
left to every ones liberty.

In this same Chapter, the Minor Friars are forbiden to ride on Horseback,
except in case of extreme necessity. Also they are commanded, when they enter
into any house, to eat whatsoever is set before them. By this Rule, they may
eat flesh in Lent.

They are likewise forbidden, in the same Chapter, to receive money, either
personally, or by Proxy: For Pope Nicolas has already told us, that to have a
Bag, and Money, as Jesus Christ and his Apostles had, is an action of
infirmity: but Saint Francis, who had neither Bag nor Money, attained unto
greater perfection.

In the fifth Chapter of the same Rule, Francis d'Assise commands his Monks to
labor with their hands, if they are able: But in his Testament he speak more
precisely; for he says, that he himself did labor with his hands; and he adds,

I do likewise expressly command all the other Monks to labor.

This Command is not observed now a days; for the Capucins and Cordeliers who
understand a Trade, had rather live in idle beggary by other men's labor: And
thus they daily break their Vow, and transgress their Rule.

But above all are remarkable the words of the Tenth Chapter of this Rule,
which are these;

Let not the Friars trouble themselves to teach those to read, who cannot read;
but above all things let them desire the Spirit of God.

St. Francis says this, because some Monks are very ignorant, and cannot read.
Some such there are now adays, but not so many as there were in St. Francis's
time; whose opinion it is, That no body needs trouble himself to teach them to
read, that so they may be instructed in the holy Scriptures; he had rather they
should remain ignorant: Only he would have them desire the Holy Ghost; not
considering, that God gives this Spirit to those who are instructed in his
Word: For, to desire the Holy Spirit, and yet to neglect the ordinary means
whereby the Holy Spirit works in the hearts of men, is to shut the door against
him, while we desire him; it is just as if a man should desire to have a Bell
rung, without having the Clapper of it moved.

These are the Commands of Francis d'Assise, who is exalted above the Cherubins
that stand before the Throne of God; to the observation of which Commands, he
promises Life Eternal; and by the transgression of them, a man incurs the
indignation of God, and of the Apostles Peter and Paul; but not of St. Philip,
and St. Luke. Moreover, here are better and more excellent things proposed,
then those which God commands in his Law, viz. Works of Supererogation, which
merit a super-eminent degree of Glory, far above the ordinary sort of Saints,
who contented themselves with doing what God commands.

To this Rule are added the Constitutions of the Order; (whereof I have already
spoken:) which the Capucins observe more exactly, and with greater obedience
then they do the Law of God, and Doctrine of the Gospel.

CHAP. XXII. That the Holy Scripture is falsified and wrested in the Rule of
St. Francis.
WE have heard before, that St. Bonaventure says, That St. Franci^ had not any
science acquired by study; but that he had received the knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures by divine inspiration. Whether this be true or not, will appear by
the passages of Scripture, which Francis d' Assise alleges in his Rule.

In the second Chapter, he strictly forbids the Minor Friars to forsake the
Order, but will have them continue in it as long as they live: And that they
ought so to do, he proves by a passage of St. Luke, in his Ninth Chapter, Verse
62. where Jesus Christ speaks thus, No man having put his hand to the plough,
and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God. The connection of this passage
with the preceding Verses, shows, that by him who puts his hand to the plough,
and looks back, is meant such a one whom Jesus Christ having sent to preach the
Gospel, and having undertaken that charge, does afterward leave it to serve
his worldly occasions. Our Lord speaks not of him who has vowed never to
marry, and to wear no shirt, and to live by begging, and to observe humane
Rules and Traditions, which ensnare men in unclean lusts, and which are given
to God for better works then those commanded in his Law, as if Man would make
him a debtor. In a word, to forsake the service of Jesus Christ, and to
transgress the Rule of Francis d' Assise, is, in his opinion, one and the same
thing.

In the Ninth Chapter of the same Rule, St. Francis commands the Monks to be
brief in their Sermons, Quia verbum abbreviatum fecit Dominus super terram;
that is, Because the Lord made his word short upon earth: Which is a passage
taken from the Tenth Chapter of Isaiah, Verse. 23. and from the Epistle of St.
Paul to the Romans, Chap. 9, Verse. 28. where is no mention at all made of
Sermons or words which men pronounce with their mouths; but of Gods judgments
and punishments, which he hasteneth, and will speedily bring upon men. The
divine inspiration given to St. Francis did not (it seems) teach him, that as
well in the Old as New Testament, (...).
Verbum is very often taken for Res or Negotium; as in Exodus. Chap. 2. Verse.
14. and Chap. 9. Verse. 5, and 6. and in 1 Samuel Chap. 1. Verse. 4. and Chap. 2.
Verse. 6. and in St. Luke, Chap. 1. Verse. 37. and Chap. 2. Verse. 15. and often
elsewhere.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Poverty, and riches.
FRancis d' Assise made profession to be a great lover of Poverty, and commonly
called it his Mistress. In his Rule he speaks thus to his Monks; It is this
sublimity of most lofty poverty (my dear brethren) which makes you heirs, and
Kings of the Kingdom of Heaven, and exalts you in virtues, who are poor in
substance: And thereupon he forbids them to possess any thing of all that is
under the Sun.

He himself put this Rule in practice. For having a competent estate, he left
it all: yea he left his breeches, and the rest of his clothes, and went about
stark naked.

As for Poverty in general, many take delight in praising it; yea, those very
persons who shun it; And to extol it, they say that Jesus Christ was poor:
But that serves rather to show that poverty is an evil; for Jesus Christ came
into the World to bear our infirmities, and to sustain our sorrows.

Bellarmine, in the 45. Chapter of his book of the Monks, says, that Jesus
Christ was a beggar. To the titles of the Son of God, the Redeemer, the Word,
the Wisdom of the Father, nothing was wanting to complete his praises, but to
call him beggar: But a man cannot properly be said to be a beggar for living by
the help and assistance of another.

We may judge of the nature of riches, and poverty by this, (viz.) that God is
infinitely rich, and that the Devil is the poorest of all creatures. Jesus
Christ says, that it is better to give then to receive; intimating thereby,
that it is better for a man to give what he has, then to ask what he has
not; For he that gives, imitates God, who gives always, but receives never.
Liberality is always better then indigence: It is more commendable to give
then to receive an alms. And certainly, he that blames riches as evil in their
own nature, blames God, who is the Author of them, and distributes them as it
pleases him. God oftentimes exhorts his people of Israel to piety by the
promises of temporal good things. And Solomon asking of him Wisdom only, he
gave him riches also, without parallel.

St James indeed says, that God has chosen the poor; but he adds, that are
rich in faith. For the happiness of these Poor consists not in their being
poor, but in their being rich in faith. Thus must we understand what Jesus
Christ says in the sixth Chapter of St. Luke, Blessed be ye poor. For that
which makes a poor man happy, is not his poverty, but the manner of supporting
his poverty. There be rich men that are very virtuous; and poor men that are
very wicked, whom poverty excites to theft, murder, perjury, etc. And
therefore Agur, in the Thirtieth Chapter of the Proverbs, desires of God, not
to send him poverty. The Soul of poor Lazarus is carried by Angels into the
bosom of rich Abraham. So that the poor and rich are put together, to teach us,
that rich as well as poor are received into the Kingdom of God, if they fear
and serve him according to his word.

It is true indeed, that riches do corrupt many, and serve only to puff them
up with pride, to inflame their lusts, and to divert their hearts from trusting
in God, to trust in their riches. And this is the reason why Jesus Christ says
that it is hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God: But this evil
proceeds not from riches, but from those that abuse them, into whose lap riches
falling are corrupted, as a Crown is defiled that falls into a puddle, and in
whose hands the goods of this world are like a sword in the hands of a madman.
We must not believe that Jesus Christ in the 16th. Chapter of St. Luke calls
riches unrighteous, because there is any unrighteousness in the possessing of
them, or because they are gotten by unrighteous means, but because they are
either provocations, or instruments of unrighteousness, to those that are
destitute of the fear of God.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the vow of poverty, and of idle begging: Also of works, and
satisfactions of supererogation.
THere are two sorts of poverty: one which God sends, and another to which men
do voluntarily devote themselves without Gods sending it unto them. The former
is an affliction, the other is a direct profession, which some choose, as
supposing it of great merit, and a work of supererogation. There be some poor,
whom God has reduced to a low estate, wherein they get a slender livelihood by
the labor of their hands: who, if they be contented with their conditions, and
by serving God with a pure Conscience, do aspire to better riches, viz. the
heavenly, they are happy, and beloved of God, and truly rich. There be others,
whom God bereaves of their estates for the profession of the Gospel, who,
although they have not purposely drawn poverty on themselves, yet, if they bear
this yoke patiently and joyfully, esteeming it an honor to bear the Cross of
Christ, their pover^y may be said to be voluntary, because they ^oluntarily
follow the call of God. Of ^^ese Jesus Christ speaks in the ninth ^hapter of
St. Matthew, Who have left ^ather, mother, wife, children, or lands ^or his
sake; God having reduced them ^o such a necessity, that they cannot keep their
estates without forsaking the pro^ession of the Gospel. In this case, ^e must
lay down our very lives, to ^ive our souls; and must be prodigal of ^ur estate
to be niggardly of our salva^ion.

But there is an affected poverty, which some embrace, by vow, and without any
necessity, or God's obliging of them thereunto; who may keep their estates with
a good conscience, but yet had rather leave them to live by other men's
estates, and had rather beg than work. This poverty is a yoke which God
imposes not on them, but they impose it on themselves. They bear not Christ's
cross, but their own. They leave the exercise of charity, upon pretense of
humility and patience. It may be said, that they are like the fowls of the air,
for they sow not, neither do they reap, and yet their father the Pope, feeds
them plentifully: for w^ see, that those who have vowed poverty are fat, and
plump; and though they ar^ poor in particular, yet are they rich i^ common.
They get more by begging thou the common people do by working* Many turn Monks
in spite, or to shak^ off the yoke of their parents, or in a Melancholy and
desperate humor, or to defraud their creditors, who press hard upon them, or
because they will not take pains to work, or have not wherewith to subsist at
home. They turn beggars, that they may not be poor. They are poor by vow, for
fear of being so by necessity. Wherefore Bellarmine speaks very gracefully, ^h.
de Mona^his cap. 46. secunda.
when he says, That to these begging Monks belongs that saying of Jesus
Christ, in the nineteenth Chapter of St. Matthew, Centuplum accipiet, etc. That
is, He shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit eternal life.

But when our adversaries call begging a a work of supererogation, they do
thereby acknowledge, that God commands it not. The Prophets, and Apostles never
vowed poverty, neither were they beggars. Those of them who were poor, were not
^o by vow, but by necessity, which God ^mposed on them. Joh. 21.3. Joh. 19.27.
Phil. 4.16
The Apostles had their Fishing Vessels after our Lords Re^urrection; And St.
John had his house. ^t. Paul received with thankfulness the re^ief which the
Philippians sent him: Being at Corinth, he got his living by making of Tents,
choosing rather to work ^han to beg; For he well knew, that beg^ing is a
shameful thing, and that it makes men both idle and impudent. He that leaves
his own estate, to eat another man's bread, has no reason to say to God, Give
us this day our daily bread; For God might answer him, I gave thee ^herewith to
buy bread, but thou have despised it; And now by thy begging, thou take from
them that are ^eally poor, those Alms which are due (...) them.

And so far is begging from being a work of supererogation, and better then
what God commands in his Law, that, ^n the contrary, God will have us prevent
it as much as we can, Omnino non erit indigiens and mendicus inter vos.
saying in Deuteronomy. chap 15. verse. 4. To the end that there ^ay be no poor among
you. The Hebrew word signifies a Beggar, (...)
and the Vulga^ translation so renders it. Not that it is (...) sin to beg,
when a man has no other wa^ of subsistence: But God commands, the rich so to
relieve the poor, that they man not be constrained to beg.

The Scripture often speaks of beggin^ as an evil, and a punishment, yea, a
curse In the seven and thirtieth Psalm, Davi^ says, I have been young, and now
am ol^ yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken nor his seed begging bread.
And in the 109. Psalm he makes this imprecation Let his Children be vagabonds,
and beg He speaks indeed of involuntary poverty but there is no likelihood,
that that which is a curse to some, can be a blessing t^ others; and that which
to one is a grievous affliction, can be to another a hol^ Profession.

As for examples, we have already see the description which Lucian and Apuleius
give of the Priests of the Syrian go^dess, who did whip themselves, and beg To
which we shall add the Massali^ Heretics, Epiphan. haeret. 80. cap. 3.
of whom Epiphanius says they went about begging, as not havin^ wherewith to
subsist, neither possessing an^ thing.

Examine Antiquity, and try if you can find so much as one example of Monks
that made begging a Profession. There was no such thing as a Profession of
beggary, for abovte welve hundred years after the nativity of our Lord. Camus,
Bishop of Bellay, who is yet living, has written a great book of the labors
of Monks; in the Preface whereof you shall find these words; The ulcer of
idleness is crept into Monasteries, under the name of holy und meritorious
beggary. His whole book is employed to prove that Monks should be obliged to
labor with their hands, especially those that do not preach, nor have any
other painful employment in the Church: So far is he from placing beggary
amongst those pieces of perfection, whereby God is made a debtor to man. And
this Prelate's book bears in its front, the Approbation of the Doctors of the
faculty of Theology of Paris. St. Augustine has written a book De opere
Monachorum, wherein he obliges them to labor. Epiphanius teaches the same, in
the Heresy of the Massalians; where, he says, that in all the Monasteries of
Egypt, the Monks did labor with their hands, even as Bees do labor to make
honey and wax. In those days the Monks were poor Hermits, living in deserts,
laboring with their hands to get their living, and carrying their workmanship
to the neighboring Towns to sell, bought bread with the money: They did not beg
the approbation of their Rule from the Bishop of Rome, for they were not
subject to him; In a word, they were not at all like the Monks now adays. The
same Epiphanius, in the same book, condemns those that live an idle life, and
making a profession of begging, get their bread at rich men's Tables.

But to complete their wickedness, the mendicant Friars make begging a work of
supererogation, that is, better than what God commands in his Law, and
consequently, better than to love God with all our hearts, and our neighbor as
our selves. God commands us to serve him with all our strength, so that the
Monks serve God with more then all their strength, which is impossible.
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, David, etc. never did works of supererogation.
The perfection of the Angels consists in obeying God, and not in doing more
than he commands. Jesus Christ himself came into the world only to do the will
of his Father, and not to do more then his will. Ask the most devout Capucin,
if he never commits sin; and he will tell you, that he is a poor sinner: How do
these things agree? They do not that which God commands, and yet will do more
then he commands! They fail in necessary things, and yet strive to do things
unnecessary, and which God requires not! They do not what they ought, and do
what they ought not! They are more holy than God would have them to be!

That man is crack-braind, who exercises liberality when he has not wherewith
to pay his debts: If this be so in referrence to men, how much more in
reference to God? It is an extreme pride, to endeavor to give God overplus,
and more then we owe him.

In a word, I would know whether the Monks, when they do works of
supererogation, do the will of God, or their own will. If they do the will of
God, they are obliged thereunto, and do what they ought: But if, by doing
better things then those which God commands, they do their own will, it follows
that their will is better than the will of God.

Out of this same shop of pride, come those superabundant satisfactions,
whereby the Monks would make us believe, that they suffer more punishment, and
do more penance, then their sins deserve, and that the Pope gathers this
overplus into his Treasury, and distributes it by his Indulgences in payment
for the sins of others. The Monks believe, that by whipping themselves, by
fasting and going barefoot, they expiate the sins of others: Wherefore
Bellarmine says, Bell. lib. 1. de Indul. r. 4. s. sex.
that the Saints are, in some sense, our Redeemers. The Legends of Saint
Dominick and Saint Antonine, say, that Saint Dominick, a grand emulator of the
holiness of Saint Francis, lasht himself three times a day with an iron chain,
viz. Once for his own sins, which were very small, once for the sins of the
living, and once for the sins of those souls which are in Purgatory, who (no
doubt) received much ease thereby. And it is this same Saint, that once had
mercy on the devil: for the devil having transformed himself into a Sparrow,
and Saint Dominick catching him, contented himself only with pulling off the
feathers from his head, whereas it was in his power to have wrung off his neck.

By these things God is blasphemed: For such things are attributed to God,
which if a man should do, he would be accounted either wicked, or mad. For,
what Judge would not be accounted unjust, or out of his wits, who should let a
malefactor go, because his neighbor has whipped himself for him? But things
which are ridiculous in civil society, are esteemed good in religion; as if a
man must lose common sense to augment piety.

All this abuse proceeds from this, viz. that men, utterly destitute of the
knowledge of the holy Scriptures, which are to them a book sealed, and
altogether unknown, seek other satisfactions, and other payments for sin, then
the death and passion of Jesus Christ. For seeing Jesus Christ has fully
satisfied Gods justice, to what purpose are others satisfactions presented to
him? Is not this to accuse God of injustice, to pretend that he takes two
payments for one debt, when the first is sufficient? Is it not to dishonor
that most perfect satisfaction, which Jesus Christ has accomplished for us, to
join it with the whippings and austerities of Monks; which is just as if a man
should mingle coals and diamonds together? For Pope Clement the VI. in his
Extravagant Unigenitus, says, that the merits of the Virgin Mary, and of the
other Saints, do help to complete the treasure of the benefits of Jesus Christ;
giving us to understand, that the benefits of Jesus Christ make but bare
measure; but that the addition of the Saints merits makes heaped measure, and
is an addition to the merrits of Jesus Christ. And for this reason, the Priest
in the Mass prays for salvation, not only through the Saints intercession, but
also through their merits.

The Lord God, take pity on so many poor people involved in so many abuses, and
discover the deceit of those who, being themselves notorious sinners, do yet by
a proud humility think to expiate the sins of others.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Fraternity of the Cord. Printed at Rouen by Tho. Dare, in
the Jews street, near the Palace, anno 1614.
An Extract of a Book, entitled The Treasure of the Indulgences of St. Francis
's Cord, translated out of Italian into French: And of the Canonization of St.
Francis, and Ignatius de Loyola.
THe Fraternity of St. Francis's Cord, is a Society of superstitiously devout
people, both Men and Women, and as well Clergymen as Laymen: Into which
Fraternity they who enter, are obliged to certain Observations, and for a Badge
of the Fraternity wear a Cord, in imitation of the Cord which St. Francis wore,
and do participate of all the Merits and Satisfactions of those of the said
Fraternity. They who have the least of merit, do, for all that, as really
partake of the merits of the others, as if they were their own: They lend their
merits to each other; and he that is asleep, or at dinner, participates of the
merits of him that whips himself, or of him that turns over the consecrated
Beads of his Chaplet seven times.

The Fraternity of Saint Francis's Cord has great Privileges, and the Popes
have granted it great Indulgences. These privileges have been set down in
writing by diverse, but especially by Antonio Brugneto, an Italian Observantin
Monk, whose very words in the 104. page are these;

The most glorious Father Francis, a little before his death, obtained of God
the Creator three Privileges, as the defunct Pope Gregory reports them from
St. Francis his own mouth, viz.

The first is, That as the number of Monks should increase, so should all
things necessary be provided for them by the Divine Providence.

The second, That whosoever shall wear the Habi^ of his Order, shall not die
unfortunately.

The third, That whosoever shall persecute the Religion of his Order, his days
shall be short, and his end miserable.

Moreover, the most glorious Father Francis, a little before his death,
revealed to a certain Monk (who is worthy of credit) that he had obtained three
other Privileges of our Creator, when he appeared to him in the likeness of a
Seraphin, and left the impression of the holy Marks on him.

The first is, That the profeffion of his Monks should continue until the end
of the world.

The second, That whosoever shall live well in his Order, shall live a long
time in it.

The third, That whosoever shall heartily love his Order, how great a sinner
soever he be, shall find mercy from God, if so be he turns from his evil ways.

The same Author in the 109. page has these words;

First, Pope Clement the Fourth has granted to those men, who on their
deathbeds shall desire to be clad in the Habit of St. Francis his Order; and
to those women who shall desire to be clad in the Habit of St. Clare, and to be
buried in it, the pardon of the third part of their sins.

This same Indulgence was granted them by Pope Nicolas the Third, and by Pope
Urban the Fifth.

Moreover, Pope Leo the Tenth, confirming the said Concessions, adds by way of
overplus, That they who should die in this Habit of St. Francis, or St. Clare,
and should be buried therein, should have a plenary Indulgence for all their
sins.

And in the 95. page;

Moreover, on Olive-Saturday, on the Feast of St. John the Evangelist, and on
the other Feast of St. John Port-Latine, ( Pope Sixtus the Fifth,) he has
granted to those of the Fraternity, who shall on such days rehearse the seven
Penitentiary Psalms, the redemption of one Soul out of Purgatory.

As for the Indulgence granted (as the Minor Friars say) by Jesus Christ, and
the Virgin Mary, and confirmed by the Pope at Nostre Dame des Anges, called
Portiuncula; the Rosary of Bernardin, and the aforesaid book of the Indulgences
of the Cord, and the Chronicle of St. Francis, say, that St. Francis would not
have the Pope's Bull for confirmation of the said Indulgence: For (says he) I
have the glorious Virgin, and Jesus Christ for Notaries, and the Angels for
Witnesses. This Indulgence is to be had on the second day of August, whereby
every one who has been confessed, and is contrite, and shall then go into the
Church of Nostre Dame des Anges, shall obtain a plenary absolution both of
sin, and punishment. If this same person should go into any other Church with
the like or greater contrition, he should not have the same Indulgence. It is
worth our notice, that St. Francis obtained this Indulgence of Pope Honorius,
by presenting him with three red Roses in the Winter.

But Pope Sixtus the Fifth, who was a Cordelier, has abundantly heaped up
Indulgences, plenary, more plenary, and most plenary, (as they Phrase it) on
the Order of the Minor Friars, and upon the Fraternity of St. Francis's Cord.

But of all these Indulgences, of three, or four hundred thousand years, the
Jesuits make little reckoning, and have never much troubled themselves about
procuring any of them from the Pope; esteeming their own Order, although barren
in pardons, and Indulgences, better then that of the Minor Friars.

However, in one respect the Cordeliers, and Capucins surpass the Jesuits,
(viz.) in that St. Francis was Canonized by the Pope immediately after his
death, without the least difficulty: But as for Ignatius Loyola, the founder
and Patron of the Jesuits, who dyed Anno Domini 1556, the Jesuits were above
seventy years soliciting in the Court of Rome, to obtain from the Pope that
he might be put into the number of the Saints; and at last, with great
difficulty, obtained his Canonization, seventy years after his death. So long
did the sanctity of Ignatius hang in suspense; which, no doubt, was the cause
of great trouble, and perplexity to him. However this future Saint, during all
this waiting, received some consolation; For, some years before his
Canonization he was Beatified, which is a forerunner of Canonization.

At last the Pope having received more clear and certain proofs of the holiness
of Ignatius, put him into the Catalogue of the Saints, and ordained that he
should be invoked in the Church of Rome; which had not been lawful during those
seventy years that past betwixt Ignatius his death and Canonization.

But as in the Chapels, and Colleges of the Jesuits you shall see few Images
of St. Francis; so in the Convents, a^^ Churches of the Capucins it is a very
rar^ thing to see the image of St. Ignatiu^ For the Capucins believe, that St.
Franc^^ has more credit in the Court of heaven and that he is exalted above
the Cherubins.

FINIS.

