THE SPANISH ROGUE.

As it was ACTED BY HIS Majesty's Servants.

Written by THO: DVFFETT.

Hor. Sermon. -- O bone! ne te
Frustrere: Insanis and tu, Stultique prope omnes.
LONDON, Printed for William Cademan at the Pope's Head in the Lower Walk in
the New Exchange in the Strand. M.DC.LXXIV.

TO MADAM ELLEN GVYN.
Madam,
IT is not, because you were pleased to be very kind to this Play, when it was
acted; for I know not whether you ever honored it with your Presence: Nor is
it to return you a troublesome acknowledgment for Favors; for I am sure you do
not know me: Nor the hope of obliging you to my future advantage; for the
utmost return I expect is your pardon; None of these has made me guilty of this
presumption. But since a Play in print, without an Epistle Dedicatory, is now
like a Modish Gallant without a Mistress, or a Papist without a tutelar Saint,
I resolved to obey Custom in making a Dedication, and my own free inclination
in the choice of your Excellent Self, at whose Feet I humbly lay this; wherein,
though my rash Boldness may be censured, I Am sure my Prudence will be
applauded: For if this Censorious Age will submit to the most perfect Beauty,
or the greatest Goodness in the World, under your Protection it will be safe.
-- Nature almost overcome by Art, has in your Self rallied all her scattered
Forces, and on your charming Brow, sits smiling at the slavish toyls which
yours and her envious Foes endure; striving in vain with the fading weak
supplies of Art, to rival your Beauties; which are ever the same, and always
incomparable. Notwithstanding this great Truth is celebrated by All that know
you; You still are Mistress of so much obliging Affability, so free from sullen
Pride, and affected Stateliness, the usual Attendants of extraordinary
Felicity; not contented to be safe in the barren praise of doing no ill, but so
readily and so frequently doing good, as if it were not your Nature, but your
Business; that, next to your Beauty, these Virtues are the greatest Miracle of
the Age. If I am the first that has taken the boldness to tell you this, in
Print, it is because I am more ambitious than all others, to be known by the
Title of,

Madam, Your Admirer, and humblest Servant, T. D.

The Persons Names.
Don Fenise -- Mr. Harris. Don Alonzo -- Mr. Lyddal. Don Manuel -- Mr. Watson.
Larasco -- Mr. Powell. Mingo -- Mr. Cash. Sanchez -- Mr. Griffin. Alcinda --
Mrs. Boutell. Rosella -- Mrs. Uphill. Teresa -- Mrs. Corye. Leonella -- Mrs.
Kneppe. Neighbors, etc.
PROLOGUE
Spoken by Mrs. BOUTELL.
OUR poor forsaken Stage does now appear,
Like some cast Mistress that has once been fair:
In every part a sad decay we find,
Yet fondly look, that you should still be kind;
At least we hope, what our Defects deny,
Your eager want will at this time supply:
For, as fierce Captain that from Camp returns,
Flies at each Vizard-mask he sees, -- and burns:
So, in this Dearth of Wit, methinks to Night
You should not stand to mind if all be right.
None sure will rail at faults we Women make,
When the kind failing's only for your sake.
And, tell me Gallants! which would you like best?
The tedious Fool that stays 'till she is dressed,
Or the kind Girl, who when the hour is come,
Slips on the Morning Gown, and steals from home?
After the good old English way we treat,
Though it be plain, we give you wholesome Meat.
Our Friends of the other House, do often take ye
With such Ragousts as nasty French Cooks make ye.
With garnished Dishes they delight your Eyes,
And give you naught but Vermin in disguise.
It Is not a Ladies Paint, can gain her Hearts,
Nor silly Lords fine Clothes, can mend his Parts:
Loaded with Liv'ries, the Gilt Coach may roll,
And yet the Spark within may be a Fool.
To your own Cost, most of you Gallants know,
That is not always best that makes a Show.
Were the Truth known, here is many a Spark I fear,
That has been lewdly Choused in fine Semar.
Thus Fools are caught, but the old crafty Sinner,
Takes the sound Wench; though in Straw-Hat and Pinner.
THE Spanish Rogue.
ACT I.
Scene 1.
Enter Don Fenise and Larasco in Fenise 's House. Fen. DEspairing Merchants,
when their Fleets appear,
After the dangers of a stormy year,
Have swelling hopes like mine; yet doubt their Fate,
'Till in their greedy arms they hug their freight.
Assist me Fortune! fix thy rouling wheel
Some few short minutes, and for ever reel.
Not yet! -- how dull and lazily it creeps? Looks on his Watch.
O Expectation! how each moment sleeps!

Lar. Sleep on, old time! for thou have need of Rest,
Who art for every Lovers service pressed.
Had my grave Courage been as rash as his,
We both had slep'd eternally ere this.
These Lovers; whom the Devil cannot frigh^,
When near enjoyment fires their appetite;
Designed to meet like Cats, in the dead of night:
But I told him, whom nothing else could stay,
'Twas her command he should not stir till day.
This time much better fits my peaceful mind,
Though Love will not, let them see, must I be blind?
She has, poor thing! expected him all night,
And, though he is freed from's peevish Mistress by it,
I know he will Rant; but my resolve is set --
These valiant Friends did never fail me yet. His Feet.

Fen. Even in consent, she is cruel too, the night
Much better would disguise a Lovers flight.
None but her self can such delays repair;
Impatience is as restless as despair. --

Exeunt Fenise and Larasco. Scene 2.
Enter Alcinda and Leonella in Don Manuel 's Hall. Alc. Is this a Lovers haste?
Did he not say,
Each minute in my absence seemed a day?
False man! unworthy of my meanest thought!
To slight a Love he has so dearly bought --
My flame increases by his cold delay;
Revenge shall lead me off, though love would stay. Exit Alcinda.

Leon. The language of those begging eyes I know,
Implores a reason that she may not go:
I Will rather make her hate him if I can,
For she is too good for such a faithless man. --

Going out, she sees Fenise and Laraseo coming; and returns with a dark
Lanthorn. Enter Fenise and Larasco. Fen. The King of Planets from his daz'ling
Crown,
With more than common Red gilds ore the Town:
Blushing to see Loves secrets trust the Light.

Leon. Stand! Who goes there? what sturdy mortal Wight,
When dismal shades the sleeping World orespread,
And yawning Graves let out their wandering dead,
Disturbs the silent night? and rashly pryes
Into pale Hecates drowsy sacrifice!
Speak daring Mortal! say, what makes thee creep
Through unknown paths, when time itself's asleep?
Declare thy dire intent --

Fen. Let Us make all sure,
And play these Frolicks when we are secure.

Leon. This voice I know; deceive me not pale Moon!
It Is he! -- hey ho! what made you come so soon?
This Love's a restless Bedfellow; take heed,
Tread soft and sure; this shows you love indeed,
TO adventure out this dreadful stormy Night,
You might have taken cold, or met a Spright --

Lar. A Spright! where! where!
Ah good Sir! dear Sir! stay no longer here --

Fen. Pry'thee release my patience, I Will approve
This sport another time -- But where is my Love?

Leon. Where is your Love indeed? to make her wait,
Were it not lost, you had not come so late.
Go boast your Treachery, and then declare
How long you wooed, how often you perjured are;
When you consult your Conquest, sum your Cost
Of precious time, and Oaths; See who has lost.
She will your scorn with interest return,
And, for your falseness, Heaven will make you mourn.

Fen. Thy Looks are well, but in thy Words I find
The certain signs of a distempered mind;
Is it to me you speak? and can you prove
My wandering Faith, or my decaying Love?
Disperse these wonders which your words create;
It was my Penance to attend so late;
And if I suffer, for your own design,
Your loud Complaints more justly will be mine.

Leon. Ah Sir! Excuses which so weak appear,
Betray too little Love, or too much Fear:
Do jealous Lovers, which abhor the light,
Call Phoebus to attest their secret flight?
She summoned you ere Night waxed gray, as soon
As the Antipodes enjoyed their Noon.

Fen. Thou heartless Fool! what mischief have thou done,
Instructing me to wait the rising Sun;
Kneel to good Fortune, for thy Life's the stake;
Raise not my Ruin on this Rogues mistake,
I Will lead her hence, or perish at her feet.

Leon. Sooner the Eve and Infant day may meet;
This injury revived her dying scorn,
And stayed me here to hasten your return.
Ill Tidings fly, too soon you will hear the rest --

Fen. The rest! Can my Misfortune be increast?
I know too little, since there is more behind.

Leon. If she can hate you, to your self be kind.


Fen. Villain be gone! thy swiftest fears out-flie --


Leon. Your Sword would blush to wear so base a Die.


Fen. In such extremes of Fate, I want a guide:
None can securely stem wild passions Tide.
Proceed! -- hold! -- (cursed fortune) dispatch the rest --

Leon. You Are banished from her presence, and her breast.


Fen. His baseness is too weak a guard -- He dies!
For such a Saint too poor a Sacrifice.

Fenise draws, and Larasco runs in crying. Lar. Dear! Dear! merciful! pardon my
mistake,
For Heavens, Oh Sir! for fair Alcinda's sake -- Within. Exit Larasco.
Murder! Murder! I Am dead! I Am dead!

Fen. Nothing to stop his Throat? no hearty Curse?


Leon. O for an Irish Wolf to make him hoarse.
Thieves! Thieves! Thieves! Rogues! Villains! Dogs! Thieves!

Manuel within. Leon. The Bloodhounds up, no cunning can relieves.


Fen. Curse on his yelping Jaws! what shall we do?


Leon. Here, here! quickly Sir, step in here --


Exeunt Mingo and Leonella. Enter Don Manuel in a ridiculous Morning dress.
Man. Thieves! Thieves! Wife! Daughter! Maid! no body hear?
All the doors open, undone! robbed! undone!
All the World asleep? am I heard by none?
Murder! murder! I Am dead, down right stone dead.
Ha! it is so, it is so, my wild girls are fled.
Pray Heaven it be no worse, I Will raise the Town.

Exit Manuel locking the door after him. Enter Don Fenise and Leonella. Leon.
Consult her safety, though you slight your own;
Her Honor suffers in your longer stay,
No dull consideration; but away --
Still more unhappy! he has locked the door.

Exit Leonella. Fen. Never to see, nor think of me no more!
Why can she not my Love transform to hate?
And rule my Passion, as she rules my Fate?
Why did those mighty Powers we adore,
Give Beauty so much strength, and give no more?
Have I for this, outwatch'd a Tyrants Spy?
A Hermits Zeal, or Statesmans Jealousy?
When Madmen sleep, and madder Chemists rest,
Loves greater madness still annoyes my Breast.
Repent! too cruel Fair thy Vow repent!
Let the Offender bear the punishment --
Unkind Alcinda! Must we ever part?
Can She so easily command her heart?
To my insulting Fate too much I bow:
If I must never more, I Will see her now --
I dare not go; Dull Fenise! can thou bear
These injuries from Love, and blame his fear?
He Is innocent, or thou must guilty prove;
As he to fear submits, thou yeild'st to Love.

Enter Leonella pulling Larasco in. Leon. Among the Women you can domineer --


Lar. Kill me Sir! Kill me! rid me of my fear.


Fen. This Fellow may his frightened sense regain,
The Object once removed, removes his pain;
Love, like an angry Ghost, allows no rest,
But still torments the guilty Lovers Breast.
Yet I Will shook off! Alcinda at a Window.
Ha! it is she! treacherous sense!
A Thousand Devils cannot force me hence.
Urge it no more, but to her lead the way.

Leon. Her strict Commands I dare not disobey.


Fen. The saddest prospect of my Fate I see,
She being lost, much worse it cannot be.
Thou shall relent -- here is gold --

Leon. Who can resist the charms your tongue affords?
This is a language sweeter far than words.

Lar. O Wondrous Virtue of imperious gold!
For thee is Honor bought, and Heaven sold.
Yet, had I all ere fruitful Peru bred,
I Would give it freely to be safe in Bed.
What new design? something she talks of me,
I fear some plot upon my Chastity.

Fen. Sirrah! Observe her Orders --


Lar. More Catterwouling yet! Hell stop her breath!


Fen. Another Murmur shall foretell thy death.


Lar. I wished a task, whose danger might declare
What I dare do, my Folly to repair.

Leon. Watch, and inform us when he comes, See right,
Let not your shadow put you in a fright.

Lar. I Will fight the proudest he that wears a head.


Leon. What dare thou stake against my Maidenhead?
I do not take thy rusty Sword away.
Thou a Fighter!

Lar. Donna! your beauty may,
That man is mad that will with Women fight,
Your loss by day you can revenge at night.

Fen. Dispatch his charge, my dearest blood I Would pay
To buy each minute which you throw away.
Villain! be watchful -- Exeunt Fenise and Leonella.

Lar. Sir! I will -- not stay --
If all my art and strength can get away.
This Lock is vengeance strong, No passage here:
No Window big enough for creeping Fear?
Never talk on it! I cannot endure to be killed,
He cares not so his wild desire's fulfilled.
I Will try the Garden wall -- is this door fast?
Then life adieu! the fatal Die is cast.
A Kingdom to secure my life! -- he is there! A Noise within.
Oh my dear pretty heart! thy end draws near.
O Death what shall I do? where shall I hide?
No cunning place to tie my self aside!
A little stay -- my knife! yet do not come: --
Pox on it! now I have left my knife at home:
Else I could cut my throat. Poor carcass! how
Must thou be Sliced and Carbonado'd now?
I might have stopped the Lock too, fool that I was!
Oh my belly! good Lock don't let him pass!
Dear Lock stand to it! sweet Lock don't let 'em come!
'Wounds! how I shall be Slashed? there is forty o'm --
Enter Don Manuel and Neighbors ridiculously armed; They see Larasco, and run
off again. So, so, now they consult about my End --

Enter again Don Manuel and Neighbors. Man. You that such daring courage did
pretend,
What made you run? I Will bravely go before,
Come Neighbors! enter all, and shut the door.
What all gone again? my case is hard, Larasco stands up like a Statue.
I dare not see, my house without a guard.
Ha! one of the Villains! or but a shape
Set up to fright me, while the Rogues escape;
It does not move, nor breath, it must be so --
Were it a Man, thus would I forward go --

Lar. Now must I go to Pot! -- how my bones ache! -- Aside.


Man. And Slash him thus, -- ha! did not something shake?
What shall a Scarecrow make me thus afraid?
Yet, by this light! it is very neatly made;
Substance! true mortal substance too! -- I Will swear,
Not one convenient member wanting here.
This shape may any maid alive deceive --

Lar. I am a very Image I believe,
But I have heard that Images cannot feel. Aside.

Man. I fear no flesh alive, by this bright steel!
O for a Caesar now, or for that brave
Undaunted Soul that did the world enslave;
Like Tennis-balls I Would whirl them about,
And thus make way to let their Courage out He strikes Larasco.

Lar. Oh! Curse on your valor! -- Aside.


Man. I Will try to place
His head upright, and paint some red in's face.
The nose too should be mended, and the eyes --

Lar. How to escape this dog I cannot devise --
Now he has turned his back, I Will cut his throat --

Larasco draws, Manuel sees him, and runs off; then Larasco falls groveling on
the ground. Man. Murder! murder! murder!


Lar. Oh dismal note!


Enter Leonella hastily. Leon. What noise was that? what is the disturbance here?


Lar. Mercy! good Sir, Mercy! Oh do but hear,
I Will confess all -- Noble Don Manuel!
Your cursed Wench, by some infernal Spell
Enticed Don Fenise hither, and has sold
The fair Alcinda to him for his gold.
He Is now within persuading her away;
I am a servant, Sir, -- forced to obey --
Dear Sir be merciful!

Leon. Rise, and be free --


Lar. Ha! is it you? confound such Sorcerie!
The Hall's enchanted, or this could not be.

Enter Fenise and Alcinda. Fen. Since that blessed hour I gave my heart to you,
My busy thoughts no other object knew.
My Eyes never strayed to any other face,
My heart never framed a wish beyond this place.
I plead no merit, Madam! for I know
My Service weak, and my desert too low.

Alcin. Fenise! Upbraid me not with your desert,
I know it is great, and well deserves my heart;
Were you unworthy, my obliging Vow
Has made me yours, nor will I break it now.
Yet Gratitude (for Love never reached my Breast,
Nor yet had power to disturb my rest)
Makes me your Prisoner now; and let^s me see,
You prize your fading pleasures more than me.
Your satisfaction you resolve to buy,
Though at the price of my dear liberty.

Fen. By what you want, judge not the love I have,
You cannot be a Prisoner to your Slave.
If Love cannot incite you to depart,
Trust gratitude awhile to guide your heart.

Alc. Give Reason yours, and an Example show,
Or ask no more what you refuse to do.
You cannot cease to Love; I cannot begin;
You cannot break the Snare, nor I get in;
Yet, to content your self, you will punish me --
Alas! this is not Love, but Cruelty.

Fen. How strangely Madam! at the self-same time,
You do excuse, and charge me with a Crime.
If Love cannot be compelled, as it is most true,
Fenise adores, but Fortune injures you.

Alc. Justly your Passion may suspected grow,
Since you demand those proofs you dare not show.
You gain my Faith by leaving me behind,
Lessen your Love, and practice to be kind.

Leon. Tempt not your Destiny, but let us be gone,
Her wandering Fancy must return anon:
Madam! if you will go, let us haste away,
To fly those Dangers which attend your stay.

Alc. Thou know my heart, let Fenise be our Guide --


Leon. Spread all your Sails, you have the Wind and Tide.


Alc. What Noise is that?


A Noise at the door. Leon. This comes of your delay --
O Heavens! Don Manuel has stopped your way.

Alc. What will Don Fenise do? persuade him in.


Lar. Now does my storm of misery begin.


Alc. Haste to the Garden, there is a private door.
Ah Fenise! now we part to meet no more.

Lar. Sweet Master! Dear Master!


Alc. Once more farewell! Exeunt Alcinda and Leonella.


Lar. Pray! pray for us! -- Now Toll the Passing bell --
Oh that I had but died, Ten years before
My Mothers only hopeful Son was bore:
I had been cared for, I had happy been,
This Catterwouling I had never seen.
Will you be murdered in your Muse? Dye here!

Fen. It must be so, this shows my Love so clear,
She can no more deny me --

Lar. What, more heroic Tricks? -- Oh how I shake!
Is this a time for Love, when Life's at stake?
Now will he dye to show this Cat his heart --

Fen. She knows I may compel her to depart;
And now, just at this time, to let her stay --

Enter Don Manuel and his Friends. Man. Here be the Rogues, Now Neighbors kill
and slay --


Lar. How fierce and big the Suck-bloods look? I Will spread
My Carcass on the ground, and say I Am dead. Larasco lies down.

Fen. Her Vows I Will give her back, and when she is free,
Justice will bind her to love none but me.
Since all my Vows so unsuccessful prove,
That even yet you seem to doubt my Love:
I hope this single Act will make it plain,
Here Fenise gives you back your self again --

Man. How Is this? Don Fenise! sure it cannot be --


Fen. Ha! where is Alcinda? what is this I see?
Larasco murdered by these Cowards Swords!
This Tempest must not be allayed with words.
Have at your hearts; lie there; are you so quick?

One falls as killed; Manuel and the rest fly, Fenise pursues them. Lar. Oh my
poor heart! I Am very stomach sick.
Are they all gone? this was a brave Design;
Cowardly Rogues! to strike a Man behind --
If I had not been dead, I Would fain have seen,
Who durst affront one of my haughty mien.
Sure he has wounded me, but I Am alive yet,
And pretty sound; but most confounded wet.
I Will take advice to know where it is I bleed;
Ha are you there? here is one lies dead indeed.
Quite mortal dead: Well Fellow! go thy way,
I Would Rifle thee, but that I dare not stay --
Had thou been wise, but all have not the gift,
Exit Larasco. It Is pity he should live, that has no shift.

Neighbor. Yes Coxcomb! I can shift as well as you --
I think I am the sweeter of the two.
Send me well home, I Will never come here agin,
I think him wisest that preserves his Skin. Exit.

Scene 3.
Enter Mingo alone. Mingo. Where am I now!
But it is no wonder if I Have lost my way,
My Master bad me near the Temple stay;
A place I seldom seek; The Donna's Road
To choose new Servants, and the newest Mode.
Where earthly Saints are prayed to, those above
Sometimes are called on, in Intrigues of Love.
Where pious Dons with zealous Wives conspire,
To raise the fortunes of their Husbands higher.
In The Temple I was Christened, but my fear
Tells me! 'twill fall if I again come there --
Hold, my Master! -- Enter Alonzo.

Alon. What did thou find the place?


Min. Yes Sir, and saw your Friend, but thus it was;
After my hasty steps had found the door,
All that I met, Nights silent liv'ry wore.
A Servant led me, where I saw Despair,
Just like Don Fenise, sitting in a Chair.
Not that Don Fenise, who did use to be
The life of Mirth, and all good Company.
Not he, whose Soul was free as boundless Air,
Whose very name could chase away Despair.

Alon. Rack me not with these delays!


Min. Sir I saw,
A form would make a frozen Tartar thaw,
And melt his rocky Heart th'rough weeping Eyes:
His heavy Head upon his Shoulder lies,
His crossed Arms supported by his Breast,
He had no motion, yet he had no rest.
His busy Eyes fixed to the earth -- in brief,
He was the lively shape of killing grief.
At last as if the Dream had had an end,
He cried, Alonzo! Where Is my dearest Friend?
Then did I your approach and message tell,
That did his eager grief a while repel,
But Sorrow soon did repossess his Face;
As Currents stopped, more swiftly end their Race.

Alon. It is not sure within the power of Fate,
To cause those Wonders which thou do relate.
His heart never entertained the -- boldest fear,
And how could base Despair find entrance there.
What ever cause such strange effects create,
I will avert, or help to bear his Fate.
True Friendship, like rich Diamonds, we mark,
Whose rays are most resplendant in the dark.
Mingo! make haste* and sum up thy account,
Thy meri^s may to higher Service mount;
Yet I have always used thee well --

Min. Most true --


Alon. And have I not been often abused by you?
Your wild Debaucheries in every place,
Made me a mark of Scorn, and rude Disgrace.
I need not number up your Faults again,
Yet I resolved to bring thee back to Spain:
Here I dismiss you Sir; but ere you go, Kicks him, and gives him Money.
I Will pay thee less, and more than I do owe.

Min. Ah Sir! I am a Rogue, but pray forgive --


Alon. Forget your saucy Tricks, and Civil live,
Perhaps you may be mine, if you amend -- Exit Alonzo.

Min. This Gold is dear -- Well! go thy ways old Friend!
Revenge sink deep, torment my injured -- breast,
'Till on his Ruin I have built my rest.
How, turn honest! turn Beggar, give me Gold:
I Will think on Honesty when I grow old.
For feeble helpless Age it may be good,
It Is but a dull disease in youthful blood.
Among the modish French it is plain disgrace,
Some of our Signiors too come on apace;
When they take up, the Tradesman must not wait,
But hears the News, and has the courteous Hat,
Talks handsome Sense, is heard like a Divine;
Pray Mistre! stay and take a Glass of Wine --
But when he Dunns, and Cringes like a Slave,
Dam'ee! what would this paltry Fellow have?
Now I Am for any thing, all ways I Will tread,
To find the path that does to Mischief lead*
Kicked! and turned off! I am a Rogue I know,
But to my Master I was never so.
Cashiered! and quite thrown by! well Don take heed,
Ere all be done, thy heart or mine shall bleed. Exit.

ACT II.
Scene 1.
Enter Don Manuel and Teresa in the street. Man. A Mere mischievous Plot,
without all doubt;
Would any come to force a Woman out?
He could not do it but by her consent,
No! no! I Will never believe her innocent.

Ter. Are you sure 'twas Don Fenise? Think again --


Man. Poh! think; I know him from a Thousand men.


Ter. You may mistake.


Man. Mistake! -- pray is it day if the Sun shine?
That Question's less impertinent than thine.

Enter Mingo. Mingo. I Have racked my Brains, and yet no way can find
To act a close Revenge, Mischief be kind!
And help me at a pinch -- Aside.
Oh this dull Head, this barren Scull of mine!
Will nothing come? no Project? no Design?
Ha! what are these? --

Man. Yes you are; foolish and impertinent --


Ter. Ungrateful Rascal! I was not impertinent,
When I helped thee to my Masters wealth,
And to two pretty little Girls, without one stroke of thy
Own labor; Heaven knows, and I have found
To my sorrow, it will be long enough before thou Will see one little, little Child, of thy own getting.

Man. No, nor thou were not impertinent, when thou
Did most inhumanely murder honest Sanchez.

Ter. Out thou Villain! was it not for thy sake?
Thy hands too were as deep in as mine,
Heaven knows I meant no harm.
Ungrateful! do upbraid me with my good will?
I Will be revenged though I dye for it --
Thy Cheats are Villainies I will confess,
Thy punishment, will make my pain seem less.

Man. Poh! you take Jesting so unkindly -- You know
Honey that I love you, And if my life only
Were to be lost, it should go rather than I
Would see thee troubled thus: But --
It grieves my heart to think of losing thee.

Ter. Ay, ay, these are your old wheedling Tricks --


Man. One cannot praise you for your Contrivance,
Or your Courage, but you are so angry --
Pry'thee my Dearest! forgive me -- I love
The very ground you tread on, And had rather see
Thee than my own heart-blood -- Come you shall be kind

Ter. My poor dear Rogue! I will forgive thee!
I will be kind, don't trouble thy self. She weeps, and kisses him.
What shall we do about Don Fenise Dear!

Man. That business must not be disputed here;
Let Us hasten home, least some observing Eye
Should ruin us, Nay pry'thee no Reply --
I Will serve thee Honey with my dearest blood.

Ter. My dear, dear Don! I Will dye to do thee good.


Exit Teresa. Man. I mean no less; in every foolish strife,
She threatens me to take away my life;
When she is dispatched aside, I shall be free
And then, my coy Alcinda! I Am for thee --
With more then common madness -- he is possessed,
That lays up secrets in a female Breast. Exit Manuel.

Mingo. Thanks! Satan thanks! --
These bloody Murders, Cheats, and Villainies,
And something more that undiscovered lies,
Are Riddles very dark, and intricate;
Teach me the rest, and I Will adore thee Fate!
What I Have already heard, commands a share
For secrecy, as great as their parts are:
But I am injured, since he is wicked grown,
For I resolved to be a Rogue alone.
Some way their business shall my own advance,
I Will follow them, and leave the rest to chance.
At least their Crimes will teach me to invent,
A Rogue in mischief is in's Element. Exit Mingo.

Scene 2.
Don Manuel 's House. Enter Rosella, Alcinda, and Leonella. Alc. What Visage
wears my Fate? what have they done?
The noise was very loud, Is Fenise gone?
Safely got off or no? Why don't you speak?
Should he be killed, my sullen heart would break.

Leon. He Is safely gone, but all I fear is known --


Alc. Sure I heard their Swords; had he no wounds?


Leon. None --


Alc. Henceforth we never meet.


Rosel. Did acts of Love,
In The Sphere of Justice as of Power move,
Asharp repentance would succeed your Fact;
And you would suffer what you late did Act.
Some worthless object, on your self would throw
That cruel scorn, you did to Fenise show.

Alc. Justice is blind, and grown so modish too,
Like other Females, bribes must make her do:
Sword, Self-interest and Passion swayes,
But Love and beauty every thing obeyes.

Rosel. She runs the common fate of all our Sex,
Whom natures too imperious Law, subjects
To her great Master-peice, victorious man:
And you Alcinda! know, you are beauty can
Command so large a power ore any heart,
As will oppose Astraea's weaker part.

Alc. Beauty, the Toy you talk of, I disown:
To my dull sense it still had been unknown,
If to your self I had a stranger been;
Where all those charming Vanities are seen,
Those rare Chymaera's, flattering Poets place
In the description of a beauteous face;
Those that want faith, the fair Rosella view;
All Lovers write is verified in you.

Rosel. Each wandering glance you make, a heart your prize,
By the Magnetic Virtue of your Eyes;
The amorous Gallants here their service pay,
You are their Saint, and at your feet they pray.

Leon. The longest day would seem a midnights dream,
While they continue on this pleasing theme.
Is not one Minute to Don Fenise due?

Rosel. Once more I must that hopeless suit renew.


Alc. Desist Rosella! from a Suit so vain --
The Earth may move, before we meet again.

Ros. So brave a choice your Reason may approve.


Alc. Reason was never the messenger of Love.


Ros. Think, think Alcinda! you may Love too late --


Alc. My humor's fixed above the power of Fate.


Leon. Madam!
My zeal to serve you, shows my troubled mind,
To see you fly the Blessings Heaven designed;
O! could you think the joys, that do attend
A married life, this humor soon would end.
Think what entrancing pleasure it is, to hold
Your Lover in your arms, and sweetly fold
With close embraces, and more lovely Twines,
Than clasping Ivy, or the winding Vines.
This idle peevish thing called Modesty,
Is Woman's most invet'rate Enemy:
Lay it aside, none but our selves are here,
Blushes are vain when none but Women hear.
Sleep with a Man! what joy the thought often brings,
This is no World to refuse good things.
There needs no words, Your Eyes speak your intent,
A Woman's silence shows her full consent.

Alc. Perpetual silence seize thee! I admire
What leprous Demon does thy Soul in^pire.

Ros. Base! -- I know not what to call her, sure
Nature wants Definitions so impure. Exeunt Alcinda and Rosella.

Leon. Truth seldom is accepted when it is plain;
But hanged! I Will soon retrieve their love again.

Enter Don Manuel and Teresa, and Mingo after, observing them. Ter. If you
consent, we yet may lose our Fears,
And with their Bodies, cloister up our Cares,
Send them to the Nunnery, and let us pretend
Zeal to Religion is our only end.
Let them drop Beads --

Man. From thence what can arise?


Ter. In their Concealment all our safety lies.


Man. Can that contribute ought to hide our Crimes?


Ter. Yes, very much these Superstitious times;
'Twill gain their highest praise, who can depaint
Mischief so fair, it may deceive a Saint.
In this quick-sighted Age that we live in,
Religion is the safest Veil for Sin.
While they do breathe an unconfined Air,
Our Ruins imminent, Objects so fair
Endure the search of many prying Eyes;
You know what Dangers may from thence arise.

Man. I like thy counsel well -- but --


Ter. But! -- but what?
Vengeance pursues us, yet his blood seems hot
An^ reeking for Revenge, methinks I hear
The wind cry Murder in my guilty Ear --

Man. Dear Duck! enough, thou art wise; it shall be so --
Rosella to the Nunnery shall go,
That will secure us, though Alcinda stay,
On her side there is no danger in delay.

Ter. Steal to your ruin; do! -- let both be gone;
Why should one go, or the other stay alone?

Man. Nay no great matter, but it is chargeable;
Truth is, I love Alcinda yet too well. Aside.

Ter. What should this mean? the charge will be but small --
Better lose part, than give account for all.

Man. Let Us in and think upon it --


Exeunt Manuel and Teresa. Leon. What can this be?
Vengeance and Blood, this is too hard for me --
Some monstrous mischief, though it is clos^ as Night,
Time will reveal it, That brings all to light.

Exit Leonella. Mingo, Strange! above wonder strange! and falls so right
As if the gods themselves loved deeds of Night.
To bring me there, just at that minute too;
I Will talk no more, but study what to do.
In vain you strive to prop your falling State,
Your Lives are mine, this Tongue commands your Fate.
Sure that was Leonilla stayed behind --
My quondam Mistress; I Will soon make her kind.
What sights are here?

Enter Alcinda and Leonella, Rosella following them. Alc. Receive no answer,
nor no message hear.


Ros. Examine ore your heart, she shall not go:
You too much malice with your power show.

Alc. Are you unkind? then who can be believed?
I had commanded had my Father lived.

Exit Alcinda weeping. Ros. Go, serve her will, it is strange, a gallant man
Should love so truly, and so long in vain;
Dearly I love him, yet I know not why,
I Am never so happy as when he is nigh.
Yet, for a husband if I make my choice,
His Interest will never win my voice.
And yet I love him still -- ha! to what end?
Were it not virtuous I should hate my friend;
Love is as yet a stranger in my breast.
I will not like a Tyrant treat a guest:
Yet, to secure my heart from a surprise,
I Will set a guard of Virtue in my Eyes,
And while my Love to Virtue does submit,
I will believe it fair, and welcome it.
And love him still --

Enter Alcinda. Alc. Will you my Rival grow?


Ros. Never did a Sister love a Brother so.


Alc. You shall not love him, nor shall he love you,
His Vows have made him mine, sure Vows are true.

Ros. You slight his Vows, his Courtship disapprove;
This Jealousy shows the excess of Love -- Aside.
Because You hate him must I do so too?

Alc. Fool not your self, I love him more than you:
You love! this News shall to your Father's ear --

Ros. Pray Heaven your flame does not too late appear;
On you Alcinda! he has fixed his Love
Too constantly to suffer a Remove.
Disperse your jealous frowns, I have my end,
When He your Husband is, and you my friend.
May you enjoy him still, and happy be,
Above the fears of Infelicity.

Alc. Take him you, if you please, for I know none
So fond to dye for him -- Exit Alcinda.

Ros. So coyly gone?
What sickly Fancies do this Maid possess?
She seems to hate, yet loves to an excess.
Ah Fenise! from my heart I pity thee -- Exit Rosella.

Mingo. Both are exactly fair in every part;
A virtuous flame seems to assault my heart,
And prompts me to be good; bids me declare
All I have heard; But they are both too fair --
Ha! if things fall right, One may be my own;
So Innocent! -- I dare not stay alone --
My better Genius tempts me to be just,
'Twill gain their Favors, and oblige their Trust:
Death! I am ruined by a longer stay --
The Maid I Will follow now, she went this way. Exit Mingo.

Scene 3.
Fenise 's House. Enter Don Fenise alone. Fen. When giddy Fortune ceases to be
coy,
The storms we past, increase our present joy.
But when her various Front grows black again,
That very joy adds to succeeding pain.
This day I have conversed with each extreme,
Despair is fixed, hope vanished like a dream.
Ah Alcinda! why should I think on her,
On that ungrateful, cruel murderer?
It Is she.
That values not my constancy, nor Me --
Dispises all my Vows; yet could she prove
More cruel than her self, still I must love.

Enter Larasco fearfully, and shuts the door after him. Fen. What means this
saucy haste? what makes you run?


Lar. O Sir! Sir! you are ruined! lost! undone!
Fly Sir! fly, the, -- O-O-Of -- Off -- Officer --

Fen. What Officer? pry'thee ask leave of fear
To tell the Cause --

Lar. Oh Sir! they are at the door --
That I had been but fairly killed before!
Now we shall be Hanged; both, both Hanged, I know it,
Methinks I feel the Slip about my Throat --
Good honest Dun! don't strain the Rope so hard --
O let a little time to pray be spared! --

Fen. Villain! what ails the fellow? --


Lar. Dear Christian friends!
If you will avoid such base, such shameful ends,
Beware of Wenching, and Ill company;
Wenching! it is Wenching brings me here to dye.
Curse on such folly -- pry'thee let me pray;
One little minute! -- Oh! he drives away --

Fen. Nay if you are going take my blessing too --
This fear has made him mad; what would thou do
Speak! where have thou been! --

Lar. Mercy good my Lord!
I never had Courage to behold a Sword.

Fen. Recall your sense, and tell me what you mean.


Lar. Ah Sir! I never shall have my Sense again.
The dreadful roaring Officers, without
Are sent to seize you, Look you all about.

Fen. To seize me! for what? --


Lar. They Will tell you if you stay --
Have you forgot the Man you killed to day?

Fen. Is the man dead? --


Lar. I! I! Sir! dead's a stone --
A happy, happy man, his Cares are done.

Exeunt Fenise and Larasco. Enter Alonzo. Alon. What am I like, the Servants
fly me so?
I am resolved to find him ever I go --
Don Fenise! Don Fenise! Exit Alonzo.

Enter Fenise and Larasco. Lar. Hark how they Roar! --
Pray Sir be gone before they force the door.

Fen. Rascal! go you, tell the Officious slaves,
Those that do enter here, do seek their graves.
I never feared thee death! thy fiercest brow
Could never disturb me; but thou art lovely now.
With greedy arms, such as glad Bridegrooms wear,
When full enjoyments drown their wooing fear,
I Will meet my Destiny, and hug my fate: Fenise. draws.
To end our Cares death always comes too late.
Now will her scorn, now will my Love have end --
A noise within, Alonzo forces the door, and enters with his Sword drawn. Here
here is Fenise!

Alon. Is It thus you meet your Friend?


Fen. With my Alonzo, thus I will contend.
Fate I despise, and Love I will forget;
In spite of both I may be happy yet.
Welcome dear Friend! --

Alon. But can my Fenise be
Still constant to that friendship vowed to me?
Has not some nobler Object stole that part,
Alonzo once possessed in Fenise heart?

Fen. No more of this; Alonzo wrongs me much,
To think my Vows, or friendship can be such.
But I may justly think your kindness lost,
That would not let me meet you on the Coast.

Alon. I suffered stricter penance than was due,
For that which injured me much more than you.
When tedious absence had endeared your sight,
And raised Impatience to the utmost height:
Yet then, then did I for admittance wait;
And now, you chide me 'cause I come so late.
When spite of Locks and Doors I made my way,
You interposed your Sword to make me stay.
I thought it some Enchanted House; for here
One Servant flies, another hides him there:
Scarce could I reach one with my doubting eyes,
But like some false deluding shade he flies;
At last I turned, and saw the armed Rout
Begin to march --

Lar. 'Twas time to look about.


Fen. This way I made, how I got off you saw;
Unveil these Mysteries, what made you draw?

Alon. Come Sir! I will inform you all within;
Discourse so sad, will soon enough begin.
Oh my Alonzo! That my whole Estate
Could call this Morning back; but it is too late.

Exeunt Fenise, Alonzo and Larasco. Enter Mingo and Leonella in the Street.
Min. My Dear! this very Morning did my feet
Salute this ground; where all my wishes meet,
Finding my lovely Leonella here:
More beautiful than when I last did see her --

Leon. Your old dissembling Tricks --


Min. By the light I see,
My love is dead to all the World, but thee.
Had spiteful Death extinguished thy dear light,
I had pursued thee to eternal Night.

Leon. O fie on you men! for you are all false --


Min. Look here, though men are false, Angels are true.
Gives her Money. These, and some hundreds more are kept for you;
Pry'thee be mollify'd, Love made me trace
Ten thousand miles, to see thy pretty face.

Leon. Since here we parted not, this cannot be true.


Min. That you lived, by mere instinct I knew;
Divided worms their parts will reunite,
Although the loving creatures have no sight.
But Nature did in me much stronger prove,
Assisted by my reason, and my Love.
Within thy breast I left my better part,
And now my body comes to find my heart.
Speak my dear Oracle! pronounce my Fate!

Leon. Well, I Will consider on it --


Min. Where shall I wait
To hear my Sentence? I Will attend thee home --

Leon. O by no means; You must not thither come:
Our House to Men will no admittance give.

Min. See thee I must, or else I cannot live --


Leon. A Small disturbance we this morning made,
Has made my Master jealous of his shade.
Man, and Male-kind so mortally he hates,
His Malice does extend to Dogs and Cats:
My Ladies Lapdog, and the Cat were found
Contriving of a Rape, and both were drowned.
A Massacre's designed against the Mice --

Min. No way to cheat this Tyrant? -- no device!


Leon. No; -- Yes there is, if you can counterfeit
An Eunuch handsomely, 'twill do the feat.
For some such property he will entertain,
To guard his door; lest men should come again --

Min. An Eunuch! all your Sex will loath my sight,
More than She-Papists do a Lenten night.
And treat me, as the angry Welchmen prey
On Puppets, that affront Saint David's day:
Yet, I Will about it strait, that thou may see,
I dare do any thing to purchase thee.
Lend me one kiss, nay fie! hold up thy head:
I Will pay thee Interest when we meet a Bed. Exit Mingo.

Leon. Fie! fie! I hate you now -- I must be coy,
Though he is sharp set, too easy Love will cloy:
Men are so Femaliz'd, so idle grown,
They court the Coy, and slight what may be won.

Exit Leonella. The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Scene 1.
Enter Larasco alone in Fenis 's House. Lar. MAlicious Rogues lie close, lurk
any where;
Men may be killed, yet see no danger near.
Would all like wiser Schoolmen fight with words,
I could be Valiant; but I hate these Swords --
I can eat like a Lion; and for Drink,
Bacchus himself should never make me shrink.
These are rare parts, the Virtues in request,
What pity it is I cannot reach the rest?
O had I but the heart, to thunder out
A Roaring Oath, look big, and stare about:
Cry Damm'ee! with a Grace; then stamp, and frown,
I were the most accomplished Blade in Town.
(A silent Noise methinks invades my Ear)
Enter Leonella. Old Tormenter! I Will be revenged on her --
Dreadful Toledo! forth, thou trusty Blade,
That over the Head and Ears in blood can wade.
Come out! here is food to fill thy hungry Maw --
I Will kill thee Villain! if thou will not draw.
Draw thou Son of a Whore!

Leon. Good Signior hold!


Lar. Signior thy Sister, thou paltry sneaking Scold --
O I could swinge you now, I tell you that --
Wh^t now you Sir? ha! what would you be at?
Coward! I could eat thee --

Leon. Brave Sir! you fight
Prodigiously, and kill as often as smite.

Lar. Mortal! Thou say the Truth, come buss me now --


Leon. Stay Sir! You hold your Sword I know not how,
I could instruct you in a better way.

Lar. Do It; I command thee -- He gives her his Sword.


Leon. Then I must obey --
Rascal! I Will teach you how to fight, I will, She beats him.
Draw on your Friends? Sirrah I charge you kneel.

Lar. Ah Madam Captain! my first Fault forgive --


Leon. Never draw Toledo more as long's you live:
Next, I command thee that thou never fight,
But with our Sex --

Lar. That too shall be at Night.


Leon. Lest you are kicked to Men give no affront;


Lar. Ah! you are merciful! indeed I will not.


Leon. Thy word shall serve -- Gives him his Sword.


Lar. Your Wars I Would fain be at --
I know already how to manage that.
Vollies of sighs must first approach the Town,
To clear the brow of the defendant frown;
Kisses for Cannons, but my shot should fall
Thicker than cannon bullets against your Wall.
The sturdy batt'ring Ram should charge her home,
While her faint No's-supply the absent drum.
The breach once made, ever I attacque the fort,
I would dismantl't, and peruse my sport:
And, if no modeish fireworks do remain,
I Will pitch my standard, and fall on again --

Leon. But stay rash Sir! suppose that you are beat,
A right stout man takes care for a retreat --

Lar. For a retreat? O prithee name it not --
I will overcome; -- Or perish on the spot.

Leon. Poh! where is your Master? cease this idle Talk.


Lar. He Is musing in his melancholy walk:
Let Us to the Pantry first, for some relief;
There Is heavenly Wine, and mighty glorious Beef.

Leon. Thy heart lies in thy guts, Sirrah march on --


Lar. Love is a Dish I cannot live upon;
Like my Camelion Master feed on looks,
If ever I do, my guts will curse the Cooks.

Exeunt Larasco and Leonella. Scene 2.
Enter Don Fenise and Don Alonzo in a Garden. Fen. Have thou never seen a
stately well rig'd Ship,
Charge through the foaming billows of the deep?
Whose battered Fabric, stormy Neptune draws
Into the ruins of his frothy Jaws;
Then shoots him up aloft, swift as a spear,
Sent to affront the Olimpick Thunderer:
Jove loudly speaks his scorn of Neptunes brave,
And lights the ship back to his watery grave.
From every point rough winds each other call,
Hasting to share the glory of his fall:
The Vessel still bears up, though thus oppressed,
The Wind grown weary, gives the water rest;
The skies serene, and all the storm blown ore,
The longing Vessel makes the wished for shore;
When, on a lurking Rock, so near the coast,
She splits; and just in the harbor all is lost.
So Fortune played with me, I triumphed ore
The storms of her disdain, had sight of shore;
That happy port of which my Love did steer,
If Earth has yet a paradise, it is there --
But now Alonzo! --
Mark the decree of my too cruel fate,
Just on the arrival of this glorious state,
Even in the prospect of my utmost joys,
It shipwracks all my bliss, my hope destroys.
Which now lies sunck in the Ocean of despair;
Sunck! for ever sunck! --

Alon. Time may repair
Thy heavy loss, and raise thy drooping fate.

Fen. Never! --


Alon. This passion's too effeminate;
A helpless Woman can, like thee, depaint
Impatient sorrow in a weak complaint;
Rayl on Sinister stars, and execrate
The dire effects of her misguided fate.
Such passive Souls teach fate to tyrannize.

Fen. What is it your active spirit would advise?


Alon. Despise thy mistress, and thy Rival kill;
This way to dote will be excuseable.
Do but the difference of passions prove,
You Will find revenge is sweeter far then Love.
Thy more successful Rival must be slain --

Fen. I have no Rival, but her just disdain.


Alon. If it be just, you ought not to complain.


Fen. Were it not so my case were not so sad,
Then hope might live; and pity might be had.

Alon. If not to thee, where will she give her heart?
The sun never saw a man of more desert.

Fen. Should thrifty nature spend her precious store.
To Enrich one Hero, 'till her self grow poor;
She has not worth enough to buy the prise
Of one rich smile, from her resistless Eyes.

Alon. A gallant Woman! were these fancies true:
But as she is fair, so she is Cruel too.

Fen. There I Am lost --


Alon. Yes, to any thing of man,
Or reason thou art lost; recall again
That royal Exile; where wild passions sway,
The Empire of the Soul will soon decay.
So Ships without a knowing Guide are tossed,
By every Gust in danger to be lost.
Distraction in thy fancy needs must reign,
Since it is formed by a distracted Brain.
Reason would tell thee, Nature did design
The female sex slaves to the Masculine;
'Till we are pleased to take them into grace,
And bring the rib back to its proper place.

Fen. But love, the King of passions, wont allow,
His subjects should to reasons Scepter bow.

Alon. Unreasonable love is Lust; a beast
May with a brutish passion be possessed.

Fen. You say you never loved, then how can you
Define a passion which you never knew?

Alon. I love good horses, sport on sprightly Wine;
This reason does allow, there is none for thine.
If thou love Beauty, view the forward spring:
Seek it in Books if Virtue be the thing.
Can thou with ladders scale the starry grove,
And mount the aerie battlements of Jove?
That, and much more thou sooner may fulfill,
Then court a froward Woman from her Will.
She makes thy sighs and miseries her sport,
Thou, like a fawning Span'el love her for it.
How vain, how foolish? how ridiculous?
Poor and contemptible this passion shows?
All for a Woman too; a false delight,
First framed by Natures drowzy oversight:
Begot by giddy drunkards, whose sick brains
And reeling thoughts, their riper Age explaines.
A painted nothing, gaudy butterfly;
Black at the heart, though pleasing to the Eye.
This is thy Goddess, Mistress of thy Fate,
Henceforth we will pursue them with a hate
As great as was thy Love, and thou and I
Will from their charms, as from diseases fly.
Summon thy exiled reason to her throne.

Fen. Your witty malice you in vain have shown;
Your counsel is a senseless dream to me,
Love knows no reason, no Philosophy.

Alon. Your ruin faces you, yet you run on
Like loseing Gamsters, even when hope is gone.
True friends no close distinction make, one fate
In joy and grief they both participate.
But I am troublesome, unwelcome grown,
You will be happy when you are alone -- Going out.

Fen. Stay! stay Alonzo. pr'ythee pardon me;
To pettish age, or young simplicity
We more allow -- Loves dotage I confess,
But have not power yet to make it less.

Enter Leonella with a Letter. Leon. O my goodness! what a sweet man is here?
A lovely tempting shape! -- She gives the Letter to Fenise.

Fen. Is it from her?
Thou bringst a blessing in each Character.

Alon. What Is the decree? does she propose a peace?
Thy looks are sad, pry'thee explain the case.

Fen. Read there --


Alonzo reads the Letter. Alon. The first part of my promise being past,
You must assist me to perform the last.
When I did yield to go, you did agree,
This day orepast I should be ever free*
That done, which Gratitude obliged me to,
I Will to my self be just, as well's to you.
You must forget me, never see me more:
It Is fit you keep, what you so freely swore.

Alcinda.


Alon. Before we number many flying hours,
This blustering March shall melt in April showers.
Hear me -- Fenise and Alonzo whisper.

Leon. Oh that I were a Lady for his sake!
A man made up in wax --

Alon. How Sir not take?
Then I dote too; come, worse it cannot be;
Laugh heartily, and leave the rest to me.

Fen. O I cannot --


Alon. What will you still be mad?
You cannot win her by your looking sad.

Fen. Well, I submit, but if your project fail --


Alon. Assure thy self that nothing can prevail.


Fen. Never see me more! -- ha ha he!
How imperiously these Ladies write?
Must forget me! -- ha ha he!

Alon. Bravely done, by this light.
Yet leaves thy choice as free as heretofore,
It Is fit you keep what you so freely swore.

Fen. Go tell the Toy you came from, I Am above
The power of her malice or her love.

Leon. Alack alack good Gentleman! these fits
Of Love, have put him quite beside his wits.
He is become insensible of's pain.

Fen. O No! my sense is just returned again --
Thy Lady Circe's charming spells are broke,
And now I Am freed from her enchanting Yoke.
As one, that is by an Ignis fatuus led
To some aspiring Rock, whose craggy head,
Hangs drooping ore the deep unmeasured Main,
Flies with amazed horror back again;
So I, misled by those false lights her Eyes,
Was like to fall loves foolish Sacrifice;
But now my Soul see's clear, I Will dote no more,
But fly those dangers I pursued before.

Leon. If I return this message Sir! I Will add
That when you spoke it, you were raving mad.

Fen. Woman! I Am calm and serious, say from me
That light and darkness sooner may agree,
Than we two meet -- Oh what do I intend!
I shall undo my self to please my friend.

Alon. No flinching now, I Will warrant thee she is thine.
Read her Note again.

Fen. This is very fine! Reads.
Pray let no more enticeing Notes be brought,
It Is loss of time to read her idle thought.
Yet, this I will preserve, as slaves made free
Keep that which justifies their liberty.
Oh Alonzo! --

Alon. No more, it is bravely done.
March off -- I Will finish what is so well begun Exit Feuise.
Go tell your foolish Lady how you sped,
Her snare is broken, and the Bird is fled -- Exit Leonella.

Enter Don Fenise. Fen. One scorching glance, If from her eyes it came,
Would set a frozen Scythian in a flame.

Alon. How Is this? relapsed again! can you be free,
Yet hug those Chains that cause your misery?
You Are like a poor Idolater, betrayed
To serve that Idol which your self have made.
Think all are beauitful, and 'twill appear,
You love your own fond fancy more then her.
You may as soon forget her if you please --

Fen. Fancy can be no cure for Loves disease:
We cannot of our selves, or love, or hate,
Love shoots his golden Arrows sure as fate,
Why do I talk! -- I may as soon declare
To one born blind, what light and colors are.

Alon. If you are so fixed, you will not be removed,
Leave naught untried to make your self beloved.
And, as you hope your wishes think on this,
Don't cringe and Idolize her for a kiss,
But ravished from her lips, for to entreat
Makes her aversion seemingly more great;
A careless confidence makes Women yield.
Thus you will win honor, though you lose the field.

Fen. Her constant virtue, seats her heart above
The mad attempts you use in looser love.
Nor must we try those idle ways, to gain
A Sovereigns smiles, that do ore others reign.

Alon. A Sovereign! why you disowned her power,
In sending back her dear Ambassador
With so much scorn, as showed less love then hate.
Princes with slaves will never capitulate.
Think you to win her now? be not so vain --
You vowed a passion, and forswor't again;
If, all your love and Courtship would not do,
Now you are a Rebel it is in vain to woo.

Fen. Treacherous man! was this thy policy?
Think thou to grow, where thou have supplanted me.
So bravely to betray me -- ye just powers!
It Is not my own revenge I act but yours,
Direct my trembling Arm, teach it an art
To search the secret passages of's heart --
Did troops of Devils guard thy perjured breast,
(As sure they do) for were thou not possess't
With hellish hopes, thou could not be so base)
Thus would I ruin their abiding place.
Defend thy self --

Alon. Dear Fenise! hear me, if my blood may give
Ease to thy passion, I Will not wish to live:
Strike boldly here, and kill thy truest friend.

Fen. Think thou, this poor evasion shall defend
Thy life? 'Thas raised my rage to such a height,
That now I Will kill thee though thou will not fight.
Traitor to friendships and to honors law!
Coward! Alonzo's a Coward! now draw --

Alon. Your strange distemper does my pity raise,
But not my anger --

Fen. Ha! what is it he says?
His pity! Heavens his pity! that word
Wounds me more sensibly then can thy sword.
Draw! or I Will murder thee, by Heaven I will!
Though Angels guard thy life --

Alon. He Is madder still --
Hold Sir! I will fight --

Fen. Then thou art Generous, and I Will destroy
Thy tainted life with so much gallantry,
'Twill be less happiness to live then dye,

Alon. First hear my Reason, though your own you slight
Nay hear me speak, or else I will not fight.

Fen. Say on --


Alon. The Crime you charge me with is Love,
But it is the strangest Love that man can own,
To dote upon a Beauty yet unknown:
An object, which never entertained my Eyes,
Nor fancy yet, -- O senseless jealousies!
Time is not, two hours older grown since fame
First reached my Ears with your Alcindas name.
Have you such powerful Rhet'rick, to enforce
So strange a passion with your mad discourse?
She never had a thought, nor wish from me,
But what I paid as one concerned for thee.
Believe thy friend, recall thy wandering sense,
Own thy mistake, and see my Innocence.

Fen. Ye drouzy stars! how long will ye permit,
That I such gross absurdities commit?
Thou cruel Woman, and more cruel Fate,
Am I the mark of Loves, and Fortunes hate?
Forgive me Sir! and if you are yet my friend,
Help me to give my Love and care an end.
Pierce this rebellious heart, one little thrust
Will pay deaths tribute; then my peaceful dust
Wrapped in the cold embraces of the grave,
Where it can nothing wish, will all things have.
Turn not away -- will you be cruel too?
Why should I beg what I my self can do

Offers to fall on his Sword. Alon. Strange madness! -- Heavens! what do you
intend --


Alonzo hinders him. Fen. To spite my fortune, are not you my friend?


Alon. I Will seal it with my dearest blood.


Fen. Then why
Will you oppose my latest remedy?

Alon. How can death be the end of misery,
When it is the greatest pain of all to dye?

Fen. O death is short, and after there is no pain;


Alon. But when we dye we hope to live again,
You rob the gods of their prerogative,
If you should dye when they would have you live.
By acts so desperate, and so injust,
You will renew your sorrows in the dust.
Be yet your self, bravely resolve to slight
The worst effects of Loves, and Fortunes spite.
He rules his stars, though never so unkind,
That bears misfortunes with an equal mind.

Fen. Ye powers above! pity my sad Estate:
And guide me th'rough this Labyrinth of Fate.

Exeunt Don Fenise and Alonzo. Scene 3.
Enter Larasco, with three Neighbors. Lar. No quarrels Gentlemen! that is my
decree,
For I Am a Tyrant if you anger me:
A Lion incarnate -- for the least word,
I must have satisfaction with the sword.
This Bilboe, simple as it hangs, has sped
Whole dozens in a morning at Madrid.
Hark ye! this bold French boy that made such work
In Flanders, and the huge Venetian Turk.
Both pay a pension to this dreadful Sword --
You know more then the King does; not a Word --

1. Neigh. O wonderful how strongly is he made?


2. Neigh. Well we are blessed to meet this noble blade.


Lar. The King imployes so many flattering Spies,
I could not rest but for this base disguise.
You are all true --

All. 3. I! I! I! --


Lar. Nay were you base,
Not one of you should live to leave this place.
Would you be Soldiers? men of great command?
Show but a line from this victorious hand
Though I Am so feirce; sometimes I Am pleasant too,
And fool with mortals, as I dance with you.

The Dance Lar. Hold! hold! this boxing may my courage raise,
Which only blood and gapeing wounds alaies.
When the dog Turk was at Lepanto beat,
Who was it think ye gave him that defeat?
The wings were lost, the plain with dead was filled,
The Cannon taken and the body reeld,
But never was there so much horror seen,
As when my single troop of horse fell in.
Th'rough Guns, Swords, fire and blood I led the way,
Ralli'd the flying troops and won the day.
The Turks like fearful sheep we overcame,
You could not hear the Cannons for my name,
Larasco! Larasco! Victoria!

All. Larasco! Victoria! Larasco!


Enter Fenise and Alonzo. Fen. Sirrah! what saucy noise is this I hear?


Neighbors run off. Lar. Only a little harmeless music Sir --


Fen. Haste, haste, Larasco! and prepare my horse;
To your advice I now will have recourse.
Woman farewell! Glory and Fame I Will court;
Alonzo! see her not, the time's too short:
My passion may revive by longer stay.

Alon. Bravely resolved --
When you are ready, I Will soon lead the way Exit Fenise.
This murdering beauty I must needs survey
What Is your business here?

Enter Sanchez. San. Hearing that you wanted a man I came,
To tender my service to you

Alon. Where have thou lived?


San. I served a wealthy man in India last:
Signior Don Pedro --

Alon. De Valiza was it?


San. The same; I served him 'till his latest breath.


Alon. Why, he was shiprack'd; how did thou 'scape death?


San. No Sir he did at Sea pay Natures debt --
So good a master, I shall never forget.

Alon. Can tell what Port the Vessel made, and where
Those little Ladies are, which he had there.

San. The ship arrived in Spain, I know no more;
I was next day found dead upon the shore:
My sense so long was lost, I never did know
How I came there, or who had used me so.

Alon. I Will take thee for that Masters sake, go in
Exit Sanchez. This news will much upon Don Fenise win,
Don Pedra de Valiza was my Father;
One of the Ladies was sister to Don Fenise,
The other was my sister.
Nine years they have been missing, and 'till now
We never heard where they were lost, or how --
Grant they may yet survive, ye powr's divine!
Then Fenise is obliged by vows to mine,
And I Am as strictly tied to marry his:
Which will confirm his thoughts of quitting this.
I will not see her, but we will strait to horse:
And yet I must, compelled by hidden force --
What should this mean Devil! to let thee see,
None of thy female sprights have power over me.
I will go see her; Woman do thy worst!
Who courts, or fears thee, equally is cursed.

The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Scene 1.
Enter Don Fenise and Don Alonzo. Fen. How! our sisters, and on the coast of
Spain!
Each hour's an age 'till you return again.
If fair Laurina lives, once more I vow,
On none but her I will my heart bestow.

Alon. May all the curses of the Trojan Queen,
Upon my head be doubled ore again,
If any beauty living has a part
But my Calista, in Alonzo's heart.

Fen. We Will search where careful mortals never trod.
Where birds or sullen beasts make no abode --

Alon. No melancholy grove, -- no hollow tree --


Fen. No Creek in the briney region of the Sea --
Though deep as hell, secret as lustful night,

Alon. Or traitors thoughts --


Fen. Shall 'scape our peirceing sight.


Alon. I Will find Calista --


Fen. And Laurina I --


Alon. We Will in a bed or grave together lie.


Exeunt Fenise and Alonzo. Scene 2.
Enter Don Manuel and Alcinda, in Don Manuel's House. Man. Your Genius fair
Alcinda! takes a flight,
Above the common reach of Women's sight.
You are discreet, and can instruct me best,
How to resolve a doubt which breaks my rest.

Alc. Good Sir spare my blushes: What is my crime?


Man. Lay by-such thoughts, for I would lose no time --
Pray hear me!
Suppose a harmless child were left alone,
Wandering and lost upon some pathless down.
Forsaken by her Parents, and exposed
To fortunes mercy; this is but supposed --

Alc. No parents could possess such flinty minds.


Man. A gentleman this little wanderer finds,
Dejected, weary, hopeless, starved, and weak,
Where none could see her weep, or hear her speak.

Alc. O Heavens! would he not relieve the child?


Man. Necessity already made her wild:
He kindly takes her up, and brings her home.

Alc. A noble pious man, Ages to come
Will bless his Charity --

Man. Pray hear the rest!
She with his daughter shares his equal breast:
Their clothes alike, alike their breeding is,
Only his thoughts distinguished that from this.
Suppose my self the man, and you were she,
Imagine it; how would you answer me?

Alc. As Heaven Sir! and justice do command,
My heart would not permit you to demand,
But I should freely offer what you gave;
To buy your liberty, become a slave.

Man. Then know, that you are she: that child whom I
Found so cast off to want, and misery:
'Twas I preserved you; what has since befell,
How I have loved you, your own self can tell.

Alc. You tell me wonders Sir! why did you name
Your self my guardian?

Man, Thy spotless fame
Had else been blasted, with the busy air
Of envious tongues, which nothing can repair.
Besides, Rosella justly might repine,
To see her welfare pris'd no more then thine.

Alc. Good Sir! inform me who my Parents were,
Whose hopeless state forced them to leave me there
With bended knees, low as the humble earth,
I Would pay that duty which I owe my birth.

Man. Some Oracle must answer your request,
But if that tenderness I have expressed,
Deserve your grateful thoughts, if ought be due,
Restore me back that life I then gave you.

Alc. Explain your secret language Sir! from me
You may command my life, and liberty!
With careful duty I Will your care repay,
My narrow fate permits no other way.

Man. In short, Love has so far posses't my mind,
I cannot live unless you will be kind.

Alc. Heavens! what do I hear? excess of care
Desturbs your sense, you are not well I fear.

Man. Nourish no more this idle misbelief,
Let your reply be positive, and brief;
I love you, to enjoy you, come be wise,
My closet's private from the Worlds eyes;
None dares disturb our joys, and what is unknown,
Untold by babbling fame, is still undone.

Alc. O Sir! can you find out a privacy,
Shut from the sight of Heavens peircing eye?
That will behold us, and though justice stays,
'Twill grow the more severe by those delays.
Divine revenge will seize you, in a time
When you are pursuing this unhappy crime;
Nor can it be unknown, the dazzling sun
Will write upon my forehead what is done.
Thus low I beg your pity -- O forbear!
Your guilt will like a gnawing Vultur, tear
Your fright'ned Conscience; and the action past,
The beastly pleasure dies: the guilt will last.

Man. Fairly accept my love and my estate,
Or I Will enjoy you at a cheaper rate.
I Will force your stubborn wilfulness, and then
Return you to your vagrant life ag'en.

Alc. Turn me a beging Sir! and I Will proclaim
You for a Saint, I Will canonzie your name.
You cannot force me though I am your slave,
Death will preserve me and my honor save.
Just Heaven! hear my vow, if you proceed,
May I be cursed, if I survive the dead.

Man. I Will take no more, so cruel and so young!
Force shall supply the weakness of my tongue.

Alcinda runs out at one door, and Mingo enters hastily at another, disguised.
Alc. Help! help! help!


Man. Cross luck! speak what art thou?


Min. It is the same; dear mischief help me now!


Man. Whether would go? what do seek? what do fear?


Min. Most noble Sir! afford your courteous ear,
The chance of War, guided by fates decree,
Made me a slave to Turkish tyranie.
I served a 'prentiship in chayns, became
An Eunuch to assist their beastly flames:
Kind Heaven at last appeased, did freedom grant,
But in my flight I was surprised by want.
Some envious females having known my case,
And all my losses, had me strait in Chase.
I took this Sanctuary, and from you
Entreat protection from this rageing crew.
By all you value most, by all that is dear;
And by your Innocence preserve me here.
On your sweet mercies Altar I lay hold,
No disrespect but danger makes me bold.

Man. But art thou a very Eunuch indeed?


Min. As I tell true, so may you help my need.


Man. I Will entertain thee, if thou will be mine,
Thy business shall be easy.

Min. I resign,
My life to you, and if I Have done ill in ought,
My diligence shall expiate my fault.
I have him fast; He Is full of thoughts, plot on
Projecting Scot! thou fool! thou cheating Don! Aside.
Blessed saints reward you, you have saved my life.

Man. This Eunuchs help will soon conclude the strife,
I Will in and teach him how to play his part,
Her body's mine, although I lose her heart.
Follow me in -- Exeunt Manuel and Mingo.

Scene 3.
Enter Rosella, Alcinda, Leonella. Rosel. A ravisher! O strange and horrid
Crime!


Alc. It Is a sad truth, if at that very time,
Heaven had not sent that unexpected aid;
His Lust most fiercely raged, when most I prayed.
Oh that Don Fenise would again be kind!

Leon. Madam! never hope that he will change his mind;
You easily may guess at his intent,
By this fine song his worthy friend has sent.

Rosel. Sing it Leonella --


Leonella sings this Song. Down with this Love that has made such a pother,
This Jack with a Lanthorn that leads us a round,
'Till with dull Marri'ge we Cheat one another,
For joys that do vanish, as soon as they are found.
Repent ye proud Nymphs! for your Tricks shall not pass,
We'll change no more Gold, and good Stones for your Glass.
While so severely you rail at the pleasure,
And kill the poor Lover that is at your command;
Like Doctors, you turn your heads from the Treasure,
But Oh how you grasp what is put in your hand.
Repent, etc.
When the short minute we sighed for is over,
The Nymph is more kind, and more brisk than before;
But how dejected and dull is her Lover,
To find all his Passion can purchase no more?
Repent ye proud Nymphs! for your Tricks shall not pass,
We'll change no more Gold, and good Stones for your Glass.
Rosel. Let not her rash despair invade thy heart,
Continue kind, and let me play my part.

Leon. Madam! here is a messenger from Don Fenise.


Rosel. My life on it he repents; withdraw a while,
When you return my news shall make ye smile. Exit Alcinda.
I Will punish him; go fetch my Vizard mask,
And tell him I Am Alcinda if he ask.
Now bring him in;
Enter Alonzo. Reason protect my heart!
A sweeter shape was never feigned by art.

Alin. Must I discourse with masks? with sableshrouds?
I dare peruse your beauty free from clouds.
Could you outshine the morning, could your rays
Obscure the glorious sun in clearest days;
Could your insinuating flames, inspire
A Stoics flinty heart with loves soft fire:
To me your boasted Excellence is dim,
Those foolish toys have power on none but him,
Fenise, that loved you once, mark me Lady!
That loved you once, and such a Beauty made ye;
But he is converted, and he vows, no more
Your well mixed paint and patches to adore.

Ros. Pray hear me Sir! --


Alon. Madam! I am not come
To feign sad stories of your servants death;
Your charming name filled up his latest breath,
He died for love of you, -- and when your tears
Witness repentance, Ease you of your fears.
No! I resolved some minutes to bestow,
To slight those charms that had bewitched him so. Exit Alonzo.

Ros. As you are truly Noble hear me speak;
Should he be cruel, sure my heart must break.
Is he gone? quickly call him back, run, fly --

Leon. 'Slife what ailes you Madam?


Ros. Make no reply --
Persuade him back, or never see my face;
Ha! what have I done? in so short a space
To lose my heart?
This for Alcinda I did undertake,
Now she may do it for Rosellas sake.
A gallant man!

Enter Alonzo. Alon. What does your message mean?


Rosel. Reallity, let Fenise love ag'en, She takes off her mask.
Alcinda shall be his; I give my hand,
A sign the contract shall most firmly stand.
Use all the interest that you can make
To stay him, for the sad Alcindas sake.

Alon. Ha! what do I see?
Angel! or Saint! or whatsoever you be!
That take frail Woman's shape, low on the ground,
I beg that pardon you from Heaven found.

Leon. The gentleman's smitt'n, he is caught in faith!
How he surveyes each beauty that she has?
It Is German clockwork sure, how its eyes roll?
Look ye the mouth on it moves; alas pretty Soul!
A very rare motion --
I long to see some tricks, his peirceing eye
Declares him Skilful in Astrology;
Can you cast nativities Sir?

Alon. Begone!
Let me and my nativity alone --
O happy friend!

Rosel. Near night he will find her at the Cypress grove;
He will not fail if he pretend to love.
Good thoughts attend you --

Alon. Though you design
Your self for him, your picture may be mine --
Think me not rude, by your fair self I vow,
I never begged favor from your Sex 'till now.
The Indies shall not buy it from my eyes --

Ros. Though what you ask my modesty denies,
Nay though I Have made a vow never to part
From this, but to the man that has my heart --
Yet you have prevailed; take it, and all content.

Alon. As I would take aguift from Heaven sent.


Ros. Oh my heart! farewell Sir! -- pray don't forget,
Fie, fie, Rosella! this once -- he is there yet --

Exeunt Alonzo and Rosella at several doors. Enter presently Alonzo and Mingo.
Alon. Mingo! why this disguise? what make thou here?


Min. I strive to live -- y, are angry still I fear.
Pray pardon me; you always found me just.
In your affairs, though led aside by lust.

Alon. Pry'thee no more, lest Protestations raise
Suspicion of thy faith, without a cause.

Min. Now Sir! I am from all my faults reclaimed,
And blush with anger when I hear them named.
Pray let me serve you here Sir! my great care
Shall testify, what my intentions are.

Alon. I Will think upon it; there is earnest of my love. gives him money.


Min. May you receive this bounty from above, Exit Alonzo.
In ten thousand Curses; and when Heavens store
Exausted is, I Will coin as many more.
This was a happy disguise --
I Have gained so much upon Don Manuel's wife,
She has discovered to me all his life.
He Is mine, to gain Alcinda by my Aid;
And my pretended Love has gained the maid.
From her I Will lrarn what brought Alonzo on,
And then I Will do your work, my angry Don!
Here she comes --
Enter Leonella. Enter Don Manuel observing them. O my dear Rogue! what dangers
have I trod?
How many weary steps? how often rode
Ore hill and dale? through fire and frost.
Through frights and foes? what Wives? what fortunes lost?

Leon. Time has not changed thee, thou art Mingo still.


Mingo. Thy slave my Sultaness! both heart and will:
O let me ever hold thee thus --

Man. Here Is sport! --
An Eunuch? a Stalion! I Will spoil your Court.
Do You hear Sirrah! Villain! Rogue! what are you?

Exit Leonella. Min. Thy evil Angel, Gorzell! nay it is true:
Gorzell I say! have thou forgot thy name?
Thy Cheats, thy Murders too, I can proclaim,

Man. Mercy, sweet Devil mercy! pity me!


Min. Rise mortal, and give ear to my decree;
One beauty shall be mine, the other thine,
And equally we'll share the pilfer'd coin;
Dispatch thy answer quick; consent, and live --

Man. You Are merciful, take all that I can give.


Min. Then I Am thy friend, and Mingo. Discovers himself.


Man. Caught again?
'Sdeath how did thou discover, me or when?

Min. O never question that, let it suffice,
I know you now, and all your Subtleties.
Hold to your bargain, we'll go hand in hand,
And raise such plots Fate shall not countermand.
That wench will tell me news if you retire --

Man. Thou Art my good Angel, take thy own desire.


Min. You must not see it, though I seem too kind
To your Teresa --

Man. No! no! use thy mind -- Exit Manuel.


Min. Yes, and thy soft pate, long prosperity
Has lulled the rascal in security.
Here comes his fellow trader --

Enter Teresa. Ter. Dear Eunuch! this has been a tedious day.


Min. How eagerly this Creature longs for prey?
Time's lazy grown, it is yet an hour to night.

Ter. That hour's eternity -- let us lose our sight,
And make it ever night --

Min. O hold! you prophecy your death I fear.


Ter. Death! prithee let us go in -- and meet it there.


Min. Know then in short,
I Am hired to murder you; here is earnest for it:
Shows the money Alonzo gave him. Your husband loves Alcinda --

Ter. O base slave!
Villain! I Will to him strait; I Will tear the knave --

Min. Stay! you will undo us both; but if you will,
You may preserve us both, and Manuel kill.
Dispatch him roundly, if you love me then
I Will marry you --

Ter. I Will do it! thou best of men! Exit Teresa.


Leonella peeps in and Enters. Min. Nay she is gone;
My best saint! my wise Medea! what spell
Will thou invent, old Manuel's rage to quell?

Leon. A powerful charm which he can never withstand.


Min. Teresa doats, doats on me, by this hand!
She Is so jealous of thee too, we shall never
Enjoy in quiet while we tarry here.

Leon. Come, come, there is Villainy on foot; my ear
Gave me intellgence, though none appear.
They look like saints; for all their pious show,
There may be Murders, Whores, and Rogues, or so.

Min. I understand, therefore it is our best way,
To make a handsome pack, and march away.

Leon. Our Ladies do prepare to meet their Loves,
I must along too --

Min. Mark well how it proves;
And let me know, it may produce a light,
To guide us on in our intended flight.

Leon. I Will observe, adieu! --


Min. Joy of my life, farewell! thus far I thrive;
I must be sudden, lest so many Eyes
As I employ, may find my Subtilties.
I Am stored with Wives, and with a helping friend,
I Will make true use o'm; to my propper end.
On fair Rosella lies my aim, though here
Is my circumference, my centre's there.

Exit. Mingo. Scene 4.
Enter Alonzo, with a picture in his hand. Alon. The blasting lightning darte
from the Sky,
Kills not so sure as this transpiercing Eye.
Coward Alonzo! shall thy Courage sinck,
At white and red? a Woman make thee shrinck.
That thing which I despised; do I not know,
Beauties like flowr's do fade as fast as grow?
Why should I love, and think of this? nay more,
That when we have enjoyed, the passions over,
And we are ashamed of that we did adore.
Unruly force of wild desire! -- this frame
Is beautiful as she, this face the same,
This I can break, deform it when I please;
Intruding Age, or any weak disease,
Will make her powerful charms as soon decline;
Minds often are wicked, though the shapes divine.
Folly farewell! this Idle senceless toy,
And all my passion too, thus I destroy --

Alonzo throws away the Picture, Fenise Enters and takes it up. -- Fen. What
sudden change is this?


Alon. O happy Fenise! fair Alcinda's thine,
Fly to the Cypress grove, there she will resign
Her self into thy arms -- be ever blessed,
I Will seek a grave, while thou enjoy'st thy rest.

Fen. Hate me for ever --
If I seek Joy while you have Discontent.

Alon. I love your Mistress Sir! and to prevent
Any unworthy Act, so base a flame
May tempt me to, I Will fly to hide my shame.

Fen. More unto Friendship, than to Love I ow,
If you unhappy are, I must be so.
You made her mine, when all my hope was gone,
It Is just you should enjoy what you have won.

Alon. Let it suffice in Love I yield to you,
Strive not to conquer me in friendship too:
Conceal that tempting Shadow from my sight;
Those that would cure weak Eyes, should fly the Light.

Fen. Is this the Form you love?


Alon. No Painters Art,
Could ever infuse more life in every part.

Fen. Fortune is kind, her Blessings to divide,
Both may be happy yet, Both satisfied.
It Is not Alcinda Sir! but may she be
As kind, as fair Alcinda was to me.

Alon. Who is it then? There was no other by.


Fen. Let Us to the place, and there the difference try.
But stay they are here --

Enter Alcinda, Rosella, Leonella. Alon. Two Suns at once in Beauties glorious
Sphere,
Denote some change in Loves high State draws near.

Fen. Pray Heaven his Tyranny may now decay.


Alon. In me it shall, I Will die or win the day.


Fen. Encouraged by your Goodness, I am come
To meet a Blessing, or receive my Doom.
More to my Love, then my Offense, is due;
My Change was feigned, but my Love is true.
It is the practice of the Powers above,
To pardon Errors, and accept of Love:
Your Beautie's heavenly, make your Language so:
Will you that pardon which you ask bestow?
Though you so well your easy change disguise,
I see the marks of Anger in your Eyes.
Remember Fenise! you did use to woo,
Despise not Love because it is offered you.
Will you refuse me then? Where shall I hide?
I blush to ask, but dye to be denied.

Fen. Refuse you Madam! Will a swelling heart
Refuse a Kingdom? Will a Hermit part
With want, and misery? by his remove,
To share the blessed happiness above?
My Soul is so transported with her Bliss,
I fear, it will believe no Heaven but this.

Rosel. But Fire that is slowly raised, as late decays.


Alon. Let common Beauties reign by common ways:
Too much your Beauty, and my Love you wrong,
Lightning is sudden, yet no Flame more strong.

Ros. Powder that swiftly fires, as soon does wast.


Alon. Yet does the Fire, as long's the Subject last.
So shall my Love, and never know decay,
But in the Grave, where no Affections stay.
That tedious way of Courtship you approve,
Shows much of Patience, and but little Love.
Extremes of Passion, such as Love inspires,
As ill are suffered, as devouring fires:
Mine, grown too powerful for my narrow Breast,
Presumes already to disturb your Rest.

Fen. Madam! one charge from you, would make her yield.


Alc. Love has the Day, but Shame would keep the Field.
Your heart is hers, pray trust me with your hand,
Come Sister! lend me yours, though Hymen's Band
May be more Ceremonious, may this
Endure as long, and be as firm as his.
Now I pronounce you one --

Rosel. Remember Sister! you compel my Love.


Alc. The Earth shall vanish, e're my Faith remove.


Rosel. With equal joy I meet your noble flame,
I will be ever yours -- Pray hide my shame.

Alon. That lovely blush, looks like the Evening Air,
Whose Scarlet-dye proclaims the next day fair:
And so may this Prophetickly appear,
For here begins my bliss, and ends my fear.
With purer Zeal a Heathen never paid
Vows to his Idol, for supposed Aid,
Then I present my Heart, a Gift too low
To speak the Service I will ever owe.

Fen. Ladies! Since we are Conquerors thus far,
The great Affairs of Love, as those of War,
Call for Advice to make the Conquest good.

Alon. That from our Leaders must be understood.
Command us Ladies! We will execute.

Ros. This place is most unfit for such dispute.


Alc. No Treaty will be heard, to think of that
Will be in vain, the Foe is obstinate.

Alon. Now let us lead you off a glorious Prize,
Why should we trust our fatal Destinies?

Rosel. Brave Enemies! you shall command our Lives,
But hasty resolution seldom thrives.

Alon. My lovely Mistress! where all Beauties dwell,
True honor of your worthy -- Sex, farewell!

Exeunt several ways. Scene 5.
Enter Don Manuel and Mingo. Ming. Most certain it is they are resolved to fly,
And only wait an Opportunity;
Pretend to make a Journey, and take Horse;
It Is Policy must do it, in vain is Force.
Now Leonella is dispatched with that,
Shall raise between their Servants mortal hate.
They both shall die before to Morrows Sun;
Nay more, by their own Swords it shall be done.

Man. Excellent Mingo! --


Ming. With Leonella, I Am to meet this night,
In The Summer House, for an intended flight.
That must be your Retreat, on her lay hold,
For she will be furnished with a Mine of Gold.
Make haste away! -- be sure you fail her not.

Man. Wit prosper thee, brave Rogue! Exit Manuel.


Ming. O fear it not.
Poor Fool! I Will make thee sensible e're long,
That thou have sold thy Welfare for a Song.
An idle senseless Tale, can thy dull Brain
Believe, that for thy ease I Will take this pain?

Enter Teresa. Ming. Here comes my Midnights Ghost --


Teres. My best delight!
Fate cannot deny us happiness; this night
Old Manuel rides abroad.

Ming. But is it true?


Teres. Just now we parted, as I came to you.


Ming. How Goodness is abused! a mere pretense;
How Rogues may work upon your Innocence?
Alas good Soul! This Night he means to spend
In The Summer House, there is his long Journeys end:
There he, and modest Leonella meet.

Teres. Leonella too, bless me!


Ming. Nay, go see it;
And if you love me, now you may be mine;
He once removed, I will be ever thine:
Here Is that will do the work, revenge your wrong:
Gives her a Pistol and a Dagger. Resolve it suddenly, the time's not long.

Teres. Think not, my little Silence did proceed
From foolish pity, no! they both shall bleed.

Ming. The Woman you may pardon if you will.


Teres. To rob me of thy love, no! both I Will kill.


Ming. My dear Infanta!


Teres. I Will do it! and meet thee in the Lodge, farewell!


Exit Teresa. Ming. Curses pursue thee, how she flies to Hell?
This one Night past, to Morrow all is my own,
And this kind Wretch shall die for what I Have done:
In Blood I Will wade ere Phoebus leave his Bed,
And make my Crimes out-blush the Mornings red.
Great Nemesis! refuse me not thy Aid
Thy Sacrifice is lost, if I Am betrayed. Exit Mingo.

Scene 6.
Enter Don Fenise alone in his own House. Fen. How sweet are all my Sorrows
now! how dear
My Sufferings are, now Happiness draws near!
Though in my Love I met with so much trouble,
My Pleasure will be, as my Care was, double.
Alonzo may have doubts, and jealous fears,
My long experience all suspicion clears.
Rosella's Heart, like parched Straw, took fire,
And did as swiftly blaze into desire:
Such flames are soonest quenched, and have least heat;
My Happiness as constant is as great;
Like noble Metal, which does long repel
Assaulting Flames, that round about it dwell,
But once made hot, does long retain the fire,
So did my dear Alcinda meet desire;
Her Love came slowly, but will sure remain;
She will be constant, though I change again.
Most happy Fenise! Enter Leonella, and passing by him, carelessly drops a
Letter.
Ha! sure it was she;
What makes she here? Why should she fly from me?
This may inform me, (^^^y hearts delight
The brave Alonzo) pray Heaven all is right!
Friendship allows me liberty to fee.
He reads the Letter. Fail not to meet me, as we did agree;
The hour precisely Twelve, the place you know,
Blind Fenise still, no sign of Friendship show.
He may observe you with a Lovers Eye,
The time seems lazy now our joys are nigh.
My dear Alonzo! haste, you have my heart;
When once we meet again, we'll never part.
Thine ever Alcinda.

Alcinda! Alcinda! Alcinda!
It cannot be, sure my distempered Joy
Distracts my thoughts, and does my sense destroy:
Or her fair shape which in my fancy lies,
Sends bright reflections to abuse my Eyes.
Ha! it is, by Heaven it is so! And if it be, Leonella peeps into to observe him.
O that I wanted Faith, or could not see.
Thine-ever- Alcinda! my Tongue speaks this,
To cheat my Heart; or else I hear amiss.
Alcinda false! it cannot, shall not be;
Yet who can doubt, what they so plainly see?
O shameless Woman! to destroy so soon
A happiness I have so hardly won.
The wild Hibernian Waves, and Winter Air,
Are constanter than these frail Women are:
Like thin Cameleons still they change their hue,
And take fresh flames from every sight that is new.

Leon. The Fish is caught, I must allow him line.


Fen. Hell upon Earth! I Will spoil their damned design.


Leon. Now I Will upon him while he looks this way --


Fen. What, can you run so well? I Will make you stay.


Leon. Mercy dear Sir! Oh Heavens! I Am undone;
I see my Sentence in your hand, -- I Am gone --
Ah noble Sir! you know I must obey,
Punish not me, if they have gone astray.
Gentle Sir pity me! --

Fen. Hear me, thou dismal Messenger of Fate!
Here, take your Charm, giv't to Alonzo strait:
If thou betray'st me, with one look, or word,
Thy Sex shall not protect thee from my Sword:
Wipe your diss^mbling eyes, and get you gone,
Lo^k undisturbed as if it were unknown.
Come Fiend! along, see here he comes, take heed:
I Will watch you -- Alonzo enters.

Leon. Fear me not. I Will do the deed.


Fen. This may be yet a damned malicious plot,
'Till he confirm it, I believe it not Fenise hides himself.

Alon. Ha! welcome Loves pretty Envoy!
Must this Night make us happy? Must we go?

Leon. There Is my business, if that inform you so.


She gives him another Letter. Alon. I will not fail, let this engage thee mine.
My Service to my Mistress --

Exeunt Alonzo and Leonella severally. Fen. So, to thine,
That is, Alcinda; Ah false perjured Friend!
Thy heart shall bleed for this ever this Night end.
I Will watch thee to thy Saint, before her Eyes,
Thou shall be punished for thy Perjuries.

Exit Fenise. The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Scene 1.
Don Manuel 's Hall. Enter Mingo and Leonella. Mingo. ABove my highest hope! it
needs must hit,
I love thy Beauty, and adore thy Wit:
But we must try to send their Men aside,
They Will sooner fall, if we their force divide:
Though both are Cowards, yet for thy Loves sake,
Any strange Project they will undertake.
Can think of no Design? no little Plot?
Hell take 'em Hounds! they are not worth a Thought.
But it must be --

Leon. O that is already done.
They are, by this time, in so great a fright,
They Will have no sense to trouble us to night.

Ming. Thou'st Policy enough to rule a State:
Let Us to our business, for the Night grows late.
Fail not to be in the Summer House, adieu!
I must not any more be seen with you,
For fear of old Teresa's jealous Head.

Leon. But, when my Ladies ask me how I sped,
What shall I answer them? you know they meant
To fly this Night, and therefore was I sent.

Ming. Say they will attend them, and it is ten to one
They Will put up all their Jewels to be gone.
Where to secure them, and how, you know.

Leon, It Is done, my Dear! But whither shall we go?


Ming. The time's too short to tell, nor need you ask,
Leave that to me, 't has been my chiefest Task
To set you on your way; your Pasport's made, Exit Leonella.
Charon shall drag you to the Stygian Shade.
Pluto will get a Cooler for your Lust,
There Is roaring Company, and go you must.
Ive taken care you shall not go alone --
O what a gallant plotting Rogue I Am grown!
I kill but five to night; it is true, my hand
Is unconcerned, I do it by command:
Like stately Tyrants, on my powerful Breath
Depends the Thread of Life, the Key of Death.
Suppose I fall, if Hell pays me a Shame,
Yet shall I leave an everlasting Name.
The hour draws on apace, the Moon shines bright,
I Will stain her Horns with Blood if all hit right. Exit Mingo.

Scene 2.
In the Field. Enter Larasco laden with ridiculous Armor. Leon. The hour is
past, and yet she does not come;
My Heart fails me -- O that I were at home!
Yes, I do love her, and this Act does show't,
Do I not hazard here my naked Throat?
For ought I know, it may be Planet struck:
Heavens! it thunders; no 'twas my Armor shook.
I would go home but for the noise I make:
What dreadful Acts we Lovers undertake?
Ha! what is that pursues me? a Spright! a Spright!
It follows me, I shall be killed this Night,
Mercy! sweet Spright, mercy! It haunts me yet --
Yes it is my Shadow: I am blind with Sweat.
O whoreson Love! what do I undertake
To suffer here, for Leonella's sake!
Din but a wandering Child now ask the way,
Or harmless Sheep pass by that is gone astray,
Were this true Cannon proof, down must it lie,
My Sword and all, I should the faster fly.
O Death! a Lion roars, farewell my Friend!
Ha! it is a Beetle; surely she intends
To murder me, else why should I stay here,
Like stout Knight Errant, and no Creature near.
Now if I could but pray --
But how can such poor Rogues as I come to it?
When Gentlemen themselves now cannot do it.

Enter Sanchez in a Shroud. Sanc. If she were come, 'twould be a pleasant Night;
No noise stirring! I Am in a woeful fright!
All in a clammy sweat; did she not swear,
At ten precisely she would meet me here?
Well Sanchez! if some Brother Spright should come
To scrape Acquaintance, and conduct thee home;
Some Lovers meagre Ghost, some crafty Fiend,
Should by thy Garb mistake thee for a Friend;
Think thee some idle Spirit, and command
Thee down to darkness, how could thou withstand?
Danger from Men, I think I need not fear,
I fright my very self -- Ha! who is this here?
In Arms from head to foot! then I Am betrayed,
Drawn to my Ruin by this wicked Maid.
False deluding Woman! is this thy Love?
Did thou not vow to meet me in this Grove?
I may steal off, he has not seen me yet --

Lar. Fear will not let me pray; Ha! the noise of feet!
Oh the Devil! the Devil!

Sanch. Where! where! where!


Larasco runs out, and Sanchez after him. Scene 3.
Enter Mingo alone. Mingo. It Is late, Alonzo does not yet appear;
He promised faithfully he would be here.
I hear him coming --
Enter Alonzo. Sir! you are fairly met --
This Credit does increase your Servants Debt.
Pardon my boldness Sir! before you go,
I will discharge part of the Debt I ow.

Alon. Honest Mingo! although I cannot guess
Thy earnest business, I believe no less;
I will reward thy care, now speak it out --

Min. The Story is so strange, that I much doubt
Your want of Faith; and wish withal my heart,
That I had better tidings to impart.
Call all that is Man about you, this will make
The strongest of your Resolutions shake.

Alon. Thy strange beginning makes me fear the end.


Min. You Are cheated by a Mistress, and a Friend:
They both are false --

Alon. Malicious Fool beware:
Think not to take me in a jealous Snare.
Thou lie, nor did a Mortal meet with two
Such blessings as they are; so kind, so true:
Repeat it not again, this I forgive;
After a second blasphemy thou shall not live.

Min. So, this is my reward. What will you do?
Pray draw upon your Servant, kill me too.
Yet I Will pronounce it true, and on your Sword,
My loss of life shall justify my word.
This night he takes her with her own consent,
Yet trust me not, swear they are innocent:
Your Faith's at liberty -- Yet go but home,
And kill me there, if Fenise does not come.

Alon. Take heed! I take thy word; but if he do,
I Will kill that faithless Friend, and cherish you.

Min. You need not kill him Sir! that is too severe,
He may repent it when he meets you there.
Remember Sir! his Faith never knew a Crime,
Nor wandering thought, till this unhappy time.
Will you destroy a Friend so often proved,
Because your Mistress has so falsely loved?
Perhaps the Lady first began to Woo;
It Is not so strange, to find their Sex untrue.

Alon. No more! thou have raised an Earthquake in my breast,
But through his Blood, I know no way to rest.
Yet I would spare him, but the Crime's too foul,
A strange Convulsion tears my wavering Soul:
It Is but a faithless Woman at the most,
She soon was won, and is as quickly lost.

Min. He cools too fast, I must renew his heat;
This brave Resolve has made you truly great,
Perhaps they will glory in their base success,
And call your Mercy stupid Easiness --
But let them laugh; your Conscience still is clear.

Alon. Friendship be gone! thou have no interest here.
Yet, witness Heaven! how unwillingly
I take his Life, for He (or I) must dye.
It Is Honor murders him, that gilded Air,
No other way remains to keep it fair.

Min. Pray think again


Alon. I Have thought too much, away! --


Min. Thou will repent thy rashness ever it is day. Aside.


Exeunt Alonzo and Mingo. Enter Fenise as watching them. Fen. That base
contriving Eunuch leads him on;
Well Renegado! we shall meet anon.
Ye Gods! --
But why should I invoke your partial aid?
By whose permission it is that I Am betrayed?
These little Crimes of perjured Love, you slight,
That you may punish them --
I know your aim, Revenge is your delight.
But since you use me thus, I Will seize your right,
I will not for your drowzy Justice wait,
Even now your Vengeance I Will anticipate.

Ezit Fenise with his Sword drawn. Scene 4.
A Summer House in a Garden. Enter Don Manuel alone. Man. In this close
Summer House, I keep my State,
And like a Prince, dispose of others Fate.
My General stout Mingo takes the care
To manage my Affairs of Peace, and War:
If any danger springs, from blood that is spilt,
I shall the profit reap, and he the guilt.

Enter Leonella with a Cabinet. Leon. What mutt'ring voice is that which
strikes my Ear?
O my unhappy Fate! Don Manuel here!

Man. Is your business to me Lady? Let Us see,
What have you here? pray spare your modesty;
This is too troublesome for you to bear,
Deliver up your Charge, and walk in here.

Exeunt Manuel and Leonella. Enter Teresa with a Pistol in one hand, and a
Dagger in the other. Ter. Are you so nimble? are your Bloods so hot?
Here Is Coolers for you -- These will mar your Plot.
O my dear Mingo! that thou could but see,
What dangers I despise to merit thee.

Exit Teresa after Man. and Leon. Scene 5.
Enter Alonzo and Mingo. Min. This way he will come --
Pray Sir! think on the sacred name of Friend,
May this sad difference have a happy end.

Alon. Ha! here he comes! be gone! by Heaven it is he,
My seeming Friend: Good Mingo pardon me;
I Will study how to recompense thy care.

Min. In your success my pains rewarded are.


Exit Mingo, but returns again, watching them with his drawn Sword. Enter
Fenise. Fen. O have I found thee Traitor!


Alon. Sir no words --
Our diffrence hears no Umpire but our Swords.
They fight.
Min. peeping. Bravely fought Boys! So, that thrust was home,
When one is fallen, then does bold Mingo come.
I Will soon dispatch the other; how, not yet? Alonzo disarms Fenise.
Sure they are immortal, that was kindly met:
Mischief! what damned luck have I? his Sword's lost.

Fen. O my cursed fortune -- Truth is ever crossed.


Alon. Now, if thou have any thing to say make have;
But know this very Minute is thy last.

Fen. Use thy advantage, kill me, do base man!
I will have Justice when we meet again:
There thou shall suffer for thy treachery,
And that false Woman too for whom I die.

Alon. What means this language Sir? did I not woo
Thy Mistress for thee, and obtain her too?

Fen. Must I hear this and live! no way to die!
Do thou upbraid me with thy Villainy?

Alon. Thy Crime does in thy ill success appear;
Did thou not come to meet Rosella here?
I knew thy foul intent, I knew it well,
What Charms did thou employ? what cursed Spell,
To rob me of her Heart? What can thou say?

Fen. Thou kill'st me ten times over in this delay.
Pr'y thee dispatch, lest I some blushes show,
To think those Crimes, thou can not blush to do.
Let me not stand a Witness to my shame,
Since you, to meet the false Alcinda came.

Alon. Then we are both abused --


Ming. O hellish spite!
Yet I Will get something, if the rest hit right. Exit Mingo.

Fen. Abused! am I awake? did I not see,
When Leonella gave a note to thee?
A Letter from Alcinda? and when you
Vowed not to fail, Ha! is not this true?

Alon. That very Letter you may here peruse.

Fenise takes the Letter and reads it. To Signior Alonzo.
My breast is loaded with unhappy News,
Which only in your Ears I dare relate;
If y^u vouchsafe your presence when it is late,
Conceal it from your Friend, and come alone;
Else you will lose, and I shall be undone.
Your Slave Mingo.


Fen. O subtle Villain! And thou crafty Maid!
What have I done? That I should be betrayed?
I fear this is not all, -- sure they intend
Some mischief to the Ladies e're it end.

Alon. Mingo just parted hence, we may with speed
Prevent all danger, 'sdeath how fast you bleed?
Forgive my rash belief! --

Fen. I must from you
The same entreat: But let us the Rogue pursue --

Alon. He shall not 'scape, I Am sure he went this way.
My fears grow stronger by the least delay. A Pistol fired within.

Fen. Ha! a Pistol! I fear we are too late.


Alon. We will prevent, or we'll revenge their Fate.

Exeunt Alonzo and Fenise. Scene 6.
Enter Manuel wounded. Man. Oh cruel Witch! inhumane Sorceress!
I Am peppered now for all my wickedness:
Incarnate Devil! for my Ruin sent!
All Curses Men and Devils can invent,
And mine besides, fall on thy bloody Heart --

Enter Teresa with a Dagger in her hand, dragging in Leonella. Ter. Come! come
along, I Will teach you a new Art
To couple; do ye roar in consort now?
Dried Dog! I was not good enough for you:
Would ye be yoked? I Will see ye yoked, I will,
You shall be joined; what are you roaring still?
Silence! and hear your heavy Doom: Now Dame!
Now bold Hussy! was there no other Game?
No Pipe but mine to make you dance? I Will try
Who shall be Mistress now, of you or I.

Leon. Dear Madam! O Heavens! hear what I can say --


Ter. Noble Signior! pray bow your head this way,
See your Ven'son quartered, and when that is done,
With you I Will finish what I have begun.

Man. My Royal Donna! dear Teresa hold!
I Will be thy Slave --

Ter. Poor Fool! thou art too old:
In Prayers spend thy time, for it is but short,
Or curse me if thou will, I care not for it.
Have at thee --

Enter Larasco running in his Armor, and Perez following him in his Shroud.
Lar. Oh a Ghost! a Ghost away! --


Perez. No Ghost! I am no Ghost! good Neighbors stay --


All run off in a fright, Perez pursuing them. Scene 7.
Don Manuel 's House. Enter Mingo with Bags of Money. Ming. Now Fortune, if
thou have not sworn my fall,
Grant me one happy hour, and have at all.
The House is yet my own; and here is my Mint --
If all my Plots should fail; the Devil's in it. Exit Mingo.

Enter Alcinda and Rosella. Alc. Now Madam! does the tedious time draw nigh,
When we shall have our long wished Liberty.

Ros. May this blessed Night, like some auspicious Star,
Shine bright in Fames Eternal Calendar.
May it produce no sad unhappy Birth,
But be to all the World a Night of Mirth.

Alc. May after times, when they would sum their bliss,
Wish happy Days, and all their Nights like this.

Enter Mingo. Ming. This way, your Servants wonder at your stay --
The watchful Cock foretells approaching day.

Rosel. Good Mingo! lead the way; how my heart beats?


Alc. This little trouble all our joy compleats.
What noise is that? A noise at the door.

Ming. Hell! they have forced the door --


Alc. If Fate frown now, I Will never trust it more.


Rosel. That noise has made me fear we are undone.


Ming. Yet, through this other door we may be gone.


Mingo going out, meets Fenise and Alonzo, with their Swords drawn. Ming. Then
to my last shift -- He draws a pair of Pistols.


Alon. Sir! y' are fairly met --
This favor does increase your Servants debt.

Ming. Not so well met as you imagine yet.


Alon. Yes Hell-hound! you are;
And ere you part, I will reward your care,
Your care to ruin us -- thou can not fly.

Ming. If you but stir a foot, they both shall dye. He presents the Pistols.


Fen. Inhuman Dog!


Ming. Good words, stand further yet --
What I have done, I need not now repeat.
I know you will kill me, but before I dye,
I Will make you sharers in my misery.
Your Mistrisses shall lead the way: D' ye stare!
Their Destinies within my power are;
And thus I Will ruin them --

Fen. Hold! good Rogue hold!
We'll be thy Slaves, thou shall have Mines of Gold.

Ming. A Kingdom shall not buy one hours delay:
Yet, to torment you more, a while I Will stay.

Alon. Art thou so heartless* and so childish grown,
To fight with Women? when this Act is known,
Thou will be branded with a Cowards name,
A fearful Rogue, Art thou so lost to shame?

Fen. So lost to policy?
For if to mischief thou art so firmly bent,
By killing us thou may thy death prevent.

Ming. That Is well advised --


Rosel. I dare thy sharpest spite, and will not grieve
To dye, so my Alonzo may but live.

Alc. See what thou do, thou bloody Devil! do!


Min. Seal up your lips, or I Will begin with you.


Alc. Brave Villain do! I will requite thy pain,
If spite will not make thee shoot, yet do it for gain.
Here Is Gold and Jewels, if these will not do,
I Will call thee Coward; nay I Will curse thee too.

Min. No more! I Will quickly end this Generous strife.
These Ladies never injured me, it is true,
But I Will kill them, to be revenged of you.

He flashes in the pan; and Alonzo and Fenise disarm him. Alon. Thou cruel
Rogue! now we'll command thy fate.


Min. I will not beg your love, nor fear your hate.
Had not my foolish pity staid my hand,
My Life had never been at your command.

A great noise within. Rosel. Another Storm begins, ere this is gone.


Alc. If it is your Father, we are yet undone.


Larasco within. For pity's sake let us in, who ere you be.


Fen. That Is my Rascal's voice.


Lar. within. Ay Sir! it is me! it is me! Enter Larasco armed.


Fen. What does this folly mean?


Lar. O Sir! as I to meet my Love did go forth,
The very Devil followed me; and so forth --

Enter Manuel, Leonella, Teresa, falling over one another for haste -- followed
by Sanchez in a Shroud -- Alon. What tricks are these?
Speak Devil! or I Will kill thee if I can.

San. Hold! good Sir hold! I am your very Man. Pulls off his Shroud.


Leon. There Is the Original of all this Rout.


Ming. Were ever things so crosly brought about?
Nay Sir it is true; and had my Plots hit right,
There had not one of you survived this Night.

Rosel. O my dear Father! --


Ming. Lady you mistake, nay I Will make you known:
Since I am lost, I will not fall alone.
He Is not your Father, he is a Rogue, a Cheat,
He is in nothing, but in Mischief, great.

Man. Malicious Rogue! dear Daughter hear him not:
He Is raving mad now he has missed his Plot.
Dear Child lead me to Bed, I Am very sick --

Ming. To Bed! to the Gallows; this is a mere trick,
To get off --

Rosel. Let him not use my Father so --


Ming. Madam! he is a Villain, and your mortal Foe.


Alon. Mingo speak out, what is it thou can say?


Teres. Damned Lies! mischievous Lies! lead him away --


Ming. Woman hear thy Charge --
My Crime's so great, and so prodigious grown,
Though I beg pardon, I can hope for none.
But when their faults in competition come,
Mine are but Ciphers, theirs a total Sum.
Had you not Sisters once, whom you think lost?

Fen. Nay, more than think, we know that they were drowned.


Ming. Sir? spare your Sighs, the Ladies soon are found.
When Don Valasco your brave Father died,
You being too young to be your Sisters Guide,
Were left with her, to noble Pedro's care;
Your honored Father Sir -- To Alonzo.

Fen. Thou seek'st delays in Story fetched so far.


Alon. All this we know, and how my Father strove,
To join our Families with Bonds of Love.

Fen. Then how our Sisters with Don Pedro went,
When in Peru he had a Government:
We know the time when they took Ship again,
But never heard when they returned to Spain.

Ming. The rest I can relate, and mean to do,
More in Revenge to them, than Love to you.
The Sea moved gently, and with flattering Gales,
The amorous Wind did court the flying Sails.
But Fate, that knows a thousand paths to Death,
Sent a Disease to take your Father's Breath.
To Sanchez his old Servant, and a Maid,
He left your Sisters, and the Wealth he had;
With careful duty, to restore again
Their Charge to you, when they returned to Spain.
But in the very Port, they met with one
Gorzell, a cruel tattered Pickaroon;
Sanchez they murdered, made the rest their prey,
And took your Sisters very names away.
What they did since is partly known to you,
None but themselves know what they meant to do:
This is the Villain, that the cursed Maid,
By whose infernal Plots they were betrayed:
This Woman's names Guttarze, that Man's Gorzell,
By whose inhuman hands poor Sanchez fell.
And those your Sisters are, those Ladies there!
What Heaven decrees, cannot be altered here.

Alon. O that we could believe thee --


Fen. What say you?


Man. and Teres. Mercy! mercy Gentlemen! it is too true.


Alon. Which is my Sister? which must be my Bride?


Teres. You Have fixed those Knots your Father long since tied;
Madam Alcinda, Sir, your Sister is,
And you Rosella are Don Fenis's.

Fen. Excess of happiness! thy Life's thy own, To Mingo
Dangers so great, so suddenly o'reblown,
Make all our joys like pleasing Dreams appear.

Rosel. I cannot look this way without a Tear.
Can I see him, I once called Father, kneel,
And weep to me? --

Alc. Methinks I fear him still.


Rosel. You shall forgive him --


Alon. The greatest Injuries were yours; if you
Can pardon them, with all my Heart I do.

Fen. But we forget the blackest Crime they did,
Although we pardon them, for that they will bleed.
Poor murdered Sanchez does for Vengeance cry,
The Law will seize them, and for that they will dye.

Man. Cruel Woman! had not thy restless Will
Urged on his death, he had been living still.

Ter. Thou foolish Man! why would thou hear me then?
Nature allows our Sex less Wit than Men,
That you may rule us when we go aside;
Had I been governed, Sanchez had not died.

Rosel. No other ways to save their lives? pray try.


Sanch. Madam! there is, this time they shall not dye.
Look on me well, have you not known this Face?
Time has not changed it much from what it was.

Man. It Is he! it is he! good Sanchez pardon me.


Ter. O Sanchez! we confess our cruelty:
Pray forgive us --

Sanch. May your forgiveness be,
From all the World as hearty as from me.
Since I have seen my Mistrisses again,
No more remembrance of my Wounds remain.

Fen. Then you are free, but ere this Sun goes down,
We charge ye every one to leave the Town.

Alon. Where we reside be never seen again,
The Law shall seize ye if we meet in Spain.

Ming. Pox of thy trembling Paw! had thou but died,
Or done thy work, I had been satisfied.

Ter. Curse on thy plotting pate, and wheedling tongue,
Had thou been hanged we yet had flourished long.

Leon. Hard-hearted Mingo! would thou murder me?


Ming. No pretty Rogue! I was to marry thee.
Save your Lordship mighty Manuel hight!
And eke your fair La-dee Teresa bright.
Great Don! pray shut your Lordly Gate, against all
Of your own Sex; hate every thing that is Male.
Such tempting trash would make a Saint grow vain:
Take heed no smooth face't Eunuch come again --
Bezo las mannos Signior!

Alon. No more!
Sanchez I to his former place restore.
Let Us to the Sacred Temple haste, and pay
Glad thanks to Heaven for this happy day.

Fen. Let smiling Hymen, with his Nuptial bands,
As we have joined our Hearts, unite our Hands.
Now all our Doubts and Fears, with joys are crowned,
Our Cares are lost, and our lost Sisters found.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE
Spoken by Mrs. KNEPPE.
When Wit, and Native Beauty found Success,
Without a daz'ling Scene, or gaudy Dress,
Then Plays were good, and wholesome your Amor;
But when these downright Blessings pleased no more,
Poets, from France, fetched new Intrigue, and Plot,
Kind Women, new French Words, and Fashions got:
And finding all French Tricks so much did please,
'T oblige ye more, They got -- even their Disease.
That too did take -- and as much Honor gets
As breaking Windows, or not paying Debts.
O it is so gente! So modish! and so fine!
To shrug and cry, Faith Jack! I drink no Wine:
For I Have a swinging Clap this very time --
Poets saw this, and brought their Stages Crimes,
Changed Comedy to Farce, and Sense to Rimes.
That took your very Souls --
But now, you are so strangely hum'rous grown,
That even these, your dear Regalio's will not down:
The newest Miss, with all her little Arts,
Sometimes cannot soften your obdurate hearts:
At other times, you are so far from Pride,
A swarthy Gypsy would be deify'd.
Then, to your Friends, you tell such horrid Lies,
You had a Pers'n of Honor in disguise!
Dam'ee the pretty'st Creature! O such Eyes --
No Play without a new Machine will do,
Shortly, Your Miss must act with Engine to:
For brisk, and pretty, you will cry at last,
Can she Curvet? and is she Thorough-pac't?
You Have Fiddle, and Motion now, and all That --
'Zbud! I wonder what a Devil you would be at.
If you persist in these lewd damning ways,
You Will have no more new Misses; nor new Plays.
Per T. D.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 23. read Fenise for Mingo: p. 14. l. 24. r. and for are: p. 16.
l. 15. r. Her Sword -- p. 24. l. 6. r. lived here -- p. 29. l. 11. r. or for
od: p. 33. l. 11. r. so basely -- for so bravely -- p. 41. l. 3. r. talk for
take: l. 33. r. Sot for Scot: p. 43. l. 1. r. a for her: p. 45. l. 24. r.
thousand -- Curses: l. 31. r. learn for lrarn: p. 48. l. 14. r. darted for
darte: p. 57. l. 12. r. did for din: p. 59. l. 1. r. never for nor.


