AN ESSAY, PROVING, We shall Know OUR Friends in Heaven.

Writ by a Disconsolate Widower, on the Death of his Wife, and Dedicated to her
Dear Memory.

Being a Subject never handled before in a distinct Treatise.

Sent in a Letter to a Reverend Divine.

Then shall I know, even as also I am known, 1 Cor. 13.12. LONDON: Printed, and
are to be Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers Hall, School.

THE Dedication, To the Memory of Dear Eliza.
THese Mournful Lines (my dear Eliza) were Writ over thy Grave (whilst I was a
Widower) and are now Dedicated to thy Pious Name, as a Memorial of our Constant
Love. As for the -- Essay -- Annexed, 'twas Writ presently after thy Death, to
mitigate my Sorrow for it, which is in some part Justified by the greatness of
my Loss, in being separated, after so long Conversation, from so kind a Wife.
It Is no wonder that Phil. who Loved thee so much on Earth, should attempt to
Prove, He shall know thee again in Heaven.

We are taught by the Holy Scriptures, That Love is strong as Death; and that
the Love of Christ to his Church, who gave Himself to the Death for her, is
proposed to Christian Husbands as a Pattern of Love to their Wives. He loved
his Church with an Everlasting love, and so must I thy Memory, my Dearest,
while I continue to be, and think. It is no more possible to rob my Soul of
thine Idea, than to deprive it of its Immortality; Death, which has made a
Separation betwixt our Bodies, is not able to Separate our Souls; thou wast
lovely and pleasant to me in thy Life, and therefore can not be divided from
me by thy Death; though the unspeakable Joys whereof thou art now made
Partaker, make thee ignorant of me, because thou art wholly taken up with
Transports of Heavenly Love. If it were otherwise, I am sure thy Happiness
could not be complete 'till thy other half were also Transported into Heaven. I
don't envy thee, though I groan also to be delivered from this Earthly
Tabernacle, which hinders me from partaking of Heavenly Society with thee,
which if I may make bold to say so, makes Heaven it self the more desirable to
me.

But for that, I must stay 'till the Decree of the Eternal take effect, and
therefore seeing thy place here on Earth knows thee no more, that I can no more
enjoy sweet Communion with thee, 'till we meet in Heaven. I have no other
Relief at present, but to refresh and torment my self at the same time with the
remembrance of thy Virtues. Did Religion allow any Sacrifice to thy Shrine, or
Adoration at thy Tomb, my headstrong Affection would push me on to it; but
that is We are sure there is neither Command, Example, or Promise in all the
Scripture to encourage us to make our Application to the Saints departed. Mr.
Rogers's Discourses of Sickness and Recovery, p. 79.
reserved for Him alone who is the Author of our Being, and blessed me with
such a Meet-help, as I found thee always to be, till the arrival of that fatal
Moment which made the cruel Separation. I call it so, as 'twas my frequent
Wish, we might expire in each others Arms, that we might imitate herein the
Mayor of Litomentias's Daughter; who leaping into the River where her Husband
was drowned, she clasped him about the Middle, and expires with him in her
Arms; and what is very remarkable, they were found the next day embracing one
another. The same Instance we have in the Captain and his Wife, who were last
Week cast away in the Tilt-boat; for they were taken up so closely Locked in
each others Arms, that 'twas hard to part them. Thus had Heaven seen it meet,
that as we were United in our Life, we should not have been Divided in our
Death; it would have perfumed the Arrow of Mortality to me, and made that King
of Terrors a King of Pleasures. But thou wast Riper for Everlasting Joy, and
therefore sooner transported thither, and I must not repine. For those whom God
has joined together, no Man must put asunder; yet when he that made the Union
makes the Separation, there is no saying What do Thou?

Yet the Holy Spirit which has taught us, that the Righteous shall be had in
Everlasting Remembrance, will not be offended if I perpetuate thy Memory to my
self, and carry the Idea of thy Virtues constantly in my Mind, that I may do
nothing unworthy of my better half, which is in Glory, as I have read was the
Practice of a certain Great Person, who constantly carried his Father's Picture
about him, that he might not do any thing unworthy of such a Progenitor. I
shall imitate this Example, by always carrying this Essay in my Pocket, to
Re-mind me daily of that Pattern you set me, and as a Memento I shall see thee
again, which I cannot but passionately desire, as I enjoyed both Worlds in Dear
Eliza; and were I to wed again (and this I speak after Ten Years Trial) I Would
prefer thy self to the Richest Nymph (God saw thee most This was the Posie of
our Wedding Ring.
fit for me) and I could not find such another, had I a thousand Advisers, and
as many Worlds to range in, to please my Eye and Fancy. Thus you find (if you
Saints above know what is done below) how constant my Love is, and that even in
Death it self you can die but half, whilst I am preserved. And tho you're gone
to Heaven before me, yet I hope I shall speedily follow after Thither, Eliza,
will my Soul pursue,
When I like you have bid the World adieu:
There, if my Innocence I still retain,
My Dear Eliza, I shall Clasp again.
And there, when Death shall stop her Pious Race,
With a more Charming and Angelick Face,
I shall behold the Witness Her Ingenious Answers to the Letters I sent Her
about the Miseries of Humane Life.
Matchless Daphnes Face:
(And when, dear Friend, so near to Bliss you be,
Remember Cloris, and remember me.)
But could the Fair Eliza see me mourn,
From that Blessed Place she would perhaps return.
But vain, alas! are my Complaints, you are gone,
And left me in this Desert World Alone:
For ah! deprived my dearest Life of Thee;
The World is all a Hermitage to me.
Let every thing a sadder Look put on;
Eliza's Dead, the loved Eliza's gone.
Philomelas Poems. p. 53.

What a melancholy thing does the World now appear? However, Eliza, I can
retire to God and my own Heart, whence no Malice, Time, or Death, can banish
thee. The Variety of Beauty and Faces I have seen since thy Death, tho they are
quick. Vnder-miners of Constancy in others, to me are but Pillars to support
it, since they then please me most when I most think of you. I Have engraved thy
Virtue so deep in my Breast, (as is seen in the following Essay, sent to our
Friend Ignotus) that 'twill near out, till I find the Original in the other
World. Don't think, My Dear, that Conjugal Affection can be dissolved by Death.
The Arms of Love are long enough to reach from Earth to Heaven; Fruition and
Possession principally appertain to the Imagination; If we enjoy nothing but
what we touch, we may say farewell to the Money in our Closets, and to our
Friends when they go to Agford. Part us, and you kill us; nay, if we would we
cannot part; Death, it is true, may divide our Bodies, but nothing else, and
scarce that: For (to use your Words, whilst alive) We may on Earth lawfully
please our selves with Hopes of meeting hereafter, and in lying in the same
Grave, where we shall be happy together, if a senceless Happiness can be called
so. But suppose Death should part our Bodies, yet we have Souls to be sure; and
whilst they can meet and carress one another, we may enjoy each other, were we
the length of the Map asunder.

Thus we may double Bliss, stolen Love enjoy,
And all the spite of Place and Friends defy:
For ever thus we might each other bless,
For none could trace out this new Happiness;
No Argus here to spoil, or make it less.
It Is not (properly) Absence, when we can see one another, as to be sure we
shall, tho in a State of Separation.

'For sight of Spirits is unprescrib'd by Space,
'What see they not who see the Eternal Face?
Vid. P. 54. in the Essay. The Eyes of the Saints shall out-see the Sun, and
behold without Perspective the extremest distances; for if there shall be in
our Glorified Eyes the Faculty of Sight and Reception of Objects (as I prove to
Ignotus there shall) I could think the visible Species there to be in as
unlimitable a way as now the Intellectual. St. Augustine tells us, The Saints
of God, even with the Eyes of their Bodies closed up, (as now Yours are) shall
see all things not only present, but also that from which they are Corporally
absent; for then shall be the Perfection, whereof the Apostle says, we
Prophecy but in part, then the Imperfect shall be taken away. Whither this be
so I cannot say (tho you know who have shot the Gulf) yet sure I am that
nothing can deprive me of the Enjoyment of thy Virtues, while I enjoy my self:
Nay, I have sometimes made good use of my Separation from thee, we better
filled, and farther extended the Possession of our Lives, in being parted, you
lived, rejoiced, and saw for me, and I for you, as plainly, as if you had your
self been there.

The World may perhaps censure this as a piece of Flattery, or at least as the
Fruit of unwarrantable Passion; but had they known thy Worth as I did, they
would not presume so much as to blame me. The Letter you sent me Printed in Mr.
Turner's History of Remarmable Providence, p. 146.
in your last Sickness shows you are above Praise, I Will insert it here as a
Proof of this, and as a Pattern for other Wives. Thy Letter's this. Viz.

I received (my Dearest) thy obliging Letter, and thankfully own, that tho God
has exercised me with a long and languishing Sickness, and my Grave lies in
view, yet he has dealt tenderly with me; so that I find by Experience no
Compassions are like those of a God. It Is true, I have scarce Strength to
answer your Letter; but seeing you desire a few Lines, to keep as a Memorial of
our Constant Love, I Will attempt something, tho (by reason of my present
Weakness) I can write nothing worth your Reading.

First then, As to your Character of me, (Love blinds you;) for I don't deserve
it, but am pleased to find you enjoy (by the help of a strong Fancy) that
Happiness, which I cannot (tho I would) bestow. But Opinion is the rate of
things; and if you think your self happy, you are so. As to my self, I have met
with more and greater Comforts in a Married State, than ever I did expect. But
how could it be otherwise, when Inclination, Interest, and all that can be
desired, concur to make up the Harmony? From our Marriage till now, thy Life
has been one continued Act of Courtship, and sufficiently upbraids that
Indifference which is found among Married People. Thy Concern for my present
Sickness (tho of long Continuance) has been so Remarkably tender, that were it
but known to the World, 'twould (once more) bring into Fashion Men's loving
their Wives. Thy WILL alone is a Noble Pattern for others to Love by; and is
such an Original Piece as will never be equaled. I next come to consider the
Imprudence of -- where I must say, I am so far from blaming your Conduct, that
I admire the Greatness of your Conjugal Love, (in that very Particular) which
showed it self to be like the Apple of the Eye, which is disturbed with the
least Dust. But, my Dear, be concerned at nothing; for I am pleased with all
you say or do, and have such a Kindness for you, that I dread the Thoughts of
surviving thee, more than I do those of Death. Could you think I Would marry again,
when it has been one great Comfort under all my Languishments, to think I
should die first, and that I shall live in him, who, ever since the happy Union
of our Souls* has been more dear to me than Life it self? --

I shall only add my hearty Prayer, That God would bless you both in Soul and
Body; and that when you die, you may be conveyed by the Angels into Abraham's
Bosom; where I hope you will find

Your Constant E --


This Letter shows what a Wife thou were, and justifies this Address, but to
show thy Piety was the same in Health as on a Sickbed, I Will trace thy Life
from the Cradle to the Grave. And here, when I remember you Unmarried in your
Father's Family, in your Blooming Years, and Flaming Piety. How does it pierce
my Soul with fresh pangs of my first Love, and sometimes transports me so far
with the Thoughts of my Beloved Object, that I am ready to forget I have lost
her, and willing to indulge my self, as Men do in a Dream, that they actually
are in Possession of that which they admire; but when I come to my self again,
and consider that I have lost thee, the Thoughts of thy Excellency renders me
inconsolable.

Again, when I reflect on the Love of our Espousals, our Mutual Affection and
Endearments, [which many Waters could When I went beyond Sea I gave Eliza a
Ring with this Inscription, Cant. 8.7.
not quench] nor distance of Place diminish; I fancy my self in the midst of
Greater Pleasures than the Poets ever fancied in their Elisian Fields, My old
Joys begin to revive, and their Fruit is sweet to my Taste; but when I consider
that God has poured out such a bitter Cup to me, as the depriving me of one
half of my Soul, I am not able to contain my self, nor to express my Grief.

In the next place, when I think on the Sweets I enjoyed by thy Excellent
Society, who did prefer before all things the pleasing of God and thy
Husband. I am unwilling to be diverted from such a delightful Subject of
Contemplation, but like the Men in a Dream, who is pleased for a while with his
fancied Enjoyment of things delicious to his Palate: Nature will not be so put
off, tho the Imagination may; but presently convinces him that his Enjoyment is
but a Dream, and that his Body must needs have a more substantial Support; so
my real Want of that Happiness, which I formerly enjoyed, quickly renews my
Grief, and redoubles my Desires to be where thou art.

Should it be my Fate to be engaged again in another Marriage, which my
Inclinations are at present who^ly averse from, because I think it utterly
impossible for me ever to find such another as thy self, who were a Meet-help
for me of Gods own providing; but should it, I say, be my Fate to draw again in
a Matrimonial Yoke, and meet with one of a Temper opposite to thine, I should
look upon it as one of the Greatest Plagues that ever befell a Man, Yet this one
Comfort, it should, in spite of ill Nature, afford me; that is to say, It would
be a Foil to set off thy Virtue with so much the Greater Iustre; and as it is
impossible for me ever to Race thy Idea out of my Soul, tho God knows whether a
Second Marriage, may not be made necessary for me by his Providence, as it is
lawful for me by his Word; but if it should be so, it must necessarily be a
piercing Grief to me, and that also more sensible than to another Man, if I
should meet with one of a Cross Nature after one of thy Mild Temper; and tho
the Sense of my Duty will never suffer me to be unjust, yet Heaven will pardon
me if I cannot express so much Kindness to her as I did to thee; for when a
Man's House all on a sudden is turned from a Family of Love to a mere
Billingsgate, it may be allowed to alter his Natural Temper (for a kind Wife
makes a kind Husband) neither can such Alteration detract from his Kindness to
his first Wife, or to a Third; should he marry so often, which will scarce be
my Fate, my Design being to imitate the Primitive Widows, who would not hear of
a Second Husband. If we look back into ancient Times we find there was hardly a
Widow among the Primitive Christians that complained of Solitariness, or sought
Comfort in a Second Marriage. Second Marriage then was counted little better
than Adultery. Dr, Horneck's Lives of the Primitive Christians.
I think they carried this Point too high, tho I must say, Second Marriages
(for the most part) are a sort of Who bids most; for my own Share I am such an
Enemy to 'em, that I question whether I shall ever be brought to draw again in
the Conjugal Yoke. It Is said by one of the Rabbis concerning Methusalah's
Wife, that she had Nine Husbands in one for Age and Years, so I may say of thee
that I had Nine Wives in thee alone, for Matrimonial Sweetness and Love, and
have no need to marry a Tenth. -- It Is true, the World is a Desert without the
Society of Women, and my self no Enemy to 'em (as Argus thinks) but for all
that they are [ay that they are] dangerous things to meddle with, especially
[for better for worse] whatsoever Gold one bestows upon Fetters, and how
Glorious soever Servitude may be, yet I persuade my self, for all the
Glittering Show, that Shackles and Slavery are but a couple of bad Masters, and
therefore will dance no more to the Music of Fetters (except Phoenix like)
from thy Ashes a New Eliza could arise, and then I cannot say what I might do;
for I love to look on thy Image, tho but in a Friend or Picture, and shall ever
receive thy Kindred with honorable Mention of thy Name. -- Then no wonder (now
you are dead) if I live and pine like the constant As is mentioned in the
following Essay.
Turtle -- Thy Love deserves a great deal more. King Charles the I. told his
Queen that he had never strayed from her, either in Thought, Word, or Deed, and
I am apt to believe him, for I am such a Platonic my self, as never to touch
the Lip or Hand of a Lewd Woman, and as much averse to a Second Marriage; Now
Eliza's Dead I shall fly the Sex in general; there is Pitch and Birdlime in
their Lips and Fingers an Itch of Amourousness of Skin all over; Democrates put
his Eyes out, to avoid the Sight of 'em: -- These Patterns I design to imitate,
for thy Love was that Nonsuch Love we were pressed to in our Wedding Sermon; and
I must add, (as the unknown Ariadne told Leander) -- Thou art much above
The Vulgar World in Sense as well as Love.


This was thy true Character, and I knew it too, which are two Blessings that
seldom go together; but Miracles are ceased, and I must not expect such
another. We find the First Man Adam, the Righteous Lot, the Meek Moses, the
Philosopher Crates, and the Orator Cicero, were all either over-reached or
afflicted with Women; and I am not so stupid to think I should meet with a
better Fate, or find a Second Wife that can match the First.

But should I marry again, and meet with a Shrew -- The General Pity -- I
should have from those that knew how well thee and I lived, would not be
Vindication enough, I Would therefore (in my own Defense) write -- A Parallel
'tween a good and a bad Wife, and prove (by a Narrative of her Carriage every
day) that as a Virtuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband, Prove. 12.4.
so she that makes ashamed is as Rottenness in his Bones -- But God forbid I
should meet with one, whose Folly should urge me to this (for it is nothing but
what is unsufferable shall ever do it) but if I should I Would lay the Saddle on the
right Horse, and clear my Innocence in the Face of the Sun. If this works her
Conversion, That Is the Thing I drive at.

Oh! with what Joy would I receive the Returning Prodigal!

But this Happiness I cannot expect, for I am pretty sure (from an Instance in
our Street) that the most Soft, Constant, and exact Humourings, wont cure a
Grumbling Wife, or a Scraping Miser; such (having no other Cause for their
Discontent) will quarrel with their good Fortune, and suffer even Happiness it
self to disappoint them; I am told, Eliza, that the kinder I am to such a Wife
(if it is my Fate to have her) the deeper she will bite; and if I oppose her
she will rave, that she will make my very Love the Cause of her Hatred, or the
occasion of some Mean-reflection, -- A Prudent Wife (a) is from the Lord, Prove.
19.14.
but such a Spirit is from the Devil; should such a one be my fate (I mean a
Devil in Petty-coats) what must I do (for I am but Flesh and Blood, and tho I
can bear long, cannot bear The Protestant Mercury (Feb. 23. 1897) tells us, that
an Ale-draper near Barnet, having the continual plague of a Scolding Wife, cut
his own Throat last Sunday, choosing rather to destroy himself, than to live
with such a Contentious Woman.
always?) I hope you would send some stout Angel to tame her; I know you will if
you can, but if not permitted, the Lord give me Patience, and when overwhelmed,
lead me to the Rock that is higher than I (Psalm. 61.2.) But methinks I hear
thee reply, why (Phil.) are you averse to a second Marriage? for suppose you
should meet with a Brawling Zantippe (where you expected a kind Wife) yet you
know Disappointments are good sometimes; besides it is your own fault, If which
Socrates, You don't learn more by a Scolding Wife, than by all the precepts of
Philosophy. Consider, Phil. no man had all he desired in this Life, then if you
marry again (as I desired you would on my Deathbed) whether Spouse be good or
bad, In that state be happy and rejoice,
Which either is thy fate, or was thy choice.
If your Wife be good, you will be ready to follow this advice, but if bad,
consider,

(1.) That God has a special hand in this Affliction, he made the Match in
Heaven before it was made on Earth, and therefore is to be eyed in all the
consequences that attend

(2.) Consider tho this be a sharp Trial, yet it is for good where it is
sanctified; a Furious Wife perhaps may drive you nearer to God, wean you from
the World, keep you humble, and learn you to be pitiful to others.

Again consider, That tho this Cross be heavy, yet Patience and contentedness
will make it lighter; the more the Beast strives the more the Yoke pinches him,
the more quiet he is the less it hurts him. If this don't quiet your mind, then
consider in the next place, that Death will soon put an end to this Cross, it
will not be long before you must come to your Dear Eliza, the thoughts of which
(I Am very sure) will make death welcome to Phil. and support him under all
vexations. But if it does not, consider in the last place, you may ease your
mind with thinking, all is righteously ordered by God, and therefore all must
be contentedly undergone by you. Read Dr. Jacmob's In the supplement to the
Morning Exercise.
Sermon, ('tas given your Eliza great Relief) and there you will find how
Christians may learn in every state to be content.

Answ. This is kind advice (My Dear) (and all of a piece with thy former love;)
but should I marry a Vixen after such a Wife as thou were, I should scarce go
further to seek a Grave. It Is true, I have heard of those that have weathered
such a Point as this, that could laugh faster than their Wives scolded, and
that under all their GRINS, could fit like Patience, smiling at Grief; and by
this (conquest of themselves) got the Victory, but I am no Stoic! and much
fear (tho the Heart is a tough thing) that I should sink under such a Plague,
not but I have more to support me under such a Vexation than some I know; for
it could not but be a very great satisfaction to me, that I attempted (as to be
sure I should) to make a good Wife of a bad one; for this is to do my duty,
which is its own reward, and the best preservative against murmuring, repining
and despair and perhaps a presage that God would cut down the Crabtree, or
change its Qualities; and as it was in Job's case, make the latter end of my
life more happy than the former. And who knows (my Dear) but the Sun that sets
may rise again, and there may be one opportunity more of making happy your
mournful Spouse, who lives (if he lives now you are dead?) on naught but Hopes.

And none can be unhappy, who,
Amongst all his Il^s, a Time does know,
Though nere so ill, when he shall not be so.
But I am weary of this Subject as much as I should be of a continual dropping
in a very rainy day, to which Solomon compares a contentious Woman; for I am
satisfied, that it is better to dwelt on a House top alone, than in the finest
Palace with such a Companion (Prove. 21.9.) But my Dear Eliza fully Answers
Solomon's Character in the 30th of Proverbs, and has had no Equal since the
World began. If any come near thee, it is the witty Cloris (mentioned in this
Essay) but she is an Angel grown, and will not be tied to a Clod of Earth, or if
she would, I'se too much a Platonic to tell her Twice I am flesh and blood; no
my Dear, (tho the Reverend Plenipotentiary that appeared once is generous
enough to appear twice) yet now you are gone, I can easily part with every
thing; my leave now is soon taken of all but my self -- never did any man bid
adieu to the World more absolutely and purely, and shake hands with all Women
in it, than I can do now thou art dead.

I love Eliza, 'cause she pleases me,
And therefore only pleases, 'cause it is she.
But I need not bring Arguments to prove I love you, seeing your charity for me
(whilst on Earth) made you say, I out-lov'd every thing, and your self to
Excess, (as you expressed it) if such a thing could be 'tween Man and Wife, But
so much for Love and Wedlock first and second Marriages. I now return to the
further contemplation of thy Virtues.

Thy Early Piety was nothing abated by thy Married Life: and to convince the
World thou really were that extraordinary Wife hereafter described, I Will insert
here what I find in one of thy Diaries, it being the Rules you Writ whilst a
Virgin, and which you punctually observed for the whole time I was married to
you. Your words were these, viz.

What I intend to do, if it please God to bring me into a Married State.
FOr the Choice of a Husband, his Person shall be such as I can entirely love
and delight in. His Humor, as near as I can judge, suitable to mine; so that
we may delight in each others Company. I would not have him Hasty, nor
Passionate, no not to others. A Competency of Estate, so that we may live, and
not be beholding to Friends, is all I desire: For I do not, nor never did
reckon, that the Comforts of ones Life, will, or does consist in having
abundance of the World. I would chiefly, and above all, have one that does
truly fear God; not only a Professor, but one that is seriously Godly, and
whose chief Delight is, as near as I can judge, and learn by others, in the
things of God. I will, if I can possibly, have my Judgment go before my
Affection, in the Choice of a Husband. If it please God my Parents live to see
me married, I will not entertain any Discourse with any that I intend to marry,
without their consent and liking. If I am able to keep Servants, they shall be,
as near as I can discover, and by enquiring, know of others, those that truly
fear God; at least they shall be Civilized. As for Menservants, if I should
marry a Citizen, I shall think it my Duty, to let my Husband alone with them;
but if he does neglect his Duty to them, by not calling them to an Account, for
the Sermons they hear, Reading, etc. If I cannot persuade him to it, I shall
then think I may, and must take some care of their Souls. As for Maids, I Will,
before ever I hire them, tell them, they must go with me to hear at the same
place I do; but if they are joined with any others, then I Will let them go
sometimes there, and sometimes with me. They shall give an Account of what they
hear, until the Affairs of my Family are such that I cannot do it; They shall
read to me, at least, once a day; or else I Will ask them about their Reading:
for I shall think it to be my Duty, when I take any into my Family, to take
some care of their Souls, as well as for their Bodies, and to do all I can for
their Souls good, by admonishing them, and giving them all the good Council I
can, and giving all Encouragement I can in what is good. If they grow wicked
and careless, and will not bear Reproof, I shall look upon it my Duty to change
them, and not to mind what People say of my frequent changing of Maids. David
would not abide a Liar in his sight: and I am sure that is most pleasing to
God, to have, as near as I can, all in my Family that fear him, and delight in
his ways. As for Children, if it please God to bless me with them, I shall look
upon it to be my Duty, if I am able, to Nurse them my self* and to take all the
care of them I can in their Infancy, and betimes to check the Buddings of
Original Sin, by not encouraging of Revenge or Pride in them; and as soon as
they are able to learn, to teach them their Catechism, and what is good; but so
as not to tire them, but make it as pleasant to them as I can, by giving them
all the Encouragement and Praise when they do well, and timely Correcting them
when they do what is sinful.

As for my Carriage to my Husband, I shall reckon it both Prudence and my Duty,
to study his Humor when we first come together, and then to do all I can
without sinning to please and oblige him, to obey him in all things that are
not contrary to the Commands of God. -- If I should light on one that is
wicked, I Will endeavor what I can by my Carriage to engage his Affections
thoroughly to me, and then to make use of that tie to engage him to God, and by
my Christian Carriage to try what can be done to win him over to Christ by
reproving of him with all Meekness, and acknowledging my great Love to him, and
that it is Love that makes me do it, and my desire of his being happy for ever.
I shall reckon it my Duty, if I have a good Man, to be willing to learn of him,
and to do what we can to engage each other more entirely to God, to make use of
our Love to one another, to inflame our Souls with Love to Christ. -- Being
convinced from Scripture and Reason that it is my Duty to give to the Poor, I
now resolve when I marry to give according to my ability. Though I cannot Resolve
upon any Sum, yet I Will give according to my Ability. -- When I make any
Provisions that I Would have kept, I Will give some to all in the Family, that so I
may not put 'em upon the Temptation of Stealing. And as for other Victuals they
shall have sufficient, but none to waste if I can help it. This is a thing that
I hate for People to repeat my words after me: I will not therefore allow any
under my care to do it; and if ever it please God that I keep Servants, I now
resolve to endeavor to do my Duty toward them, though they should not do
theirs toward me, and to endeavor conscientiosly to discharge my Duty toward
all Relations; begging of God that he would now help me to do it: O that I
could now do all with an Eye to God, and be willing always to be at his dispose
in every thing.

My Dear, by these your Rules for rendering Marriage happy may not only be seen
what a suitable Wife thou were (for you fully practiced 'em,) but also the
happy Effects of a regular course of Piety, for certainly never was there seen
(on a Sick bed) a greater Instance of a willing Resignation to the Will of God
as to either Life or Death. -- You would often say to Philaret, Oh my Dear, it is
a solemn thing to dye, but I can freely leave all the World but you, (and at
saying so you would still burst out into Tears,) you would say at other times
-- Sickness is no time to prepare for Death, were my work now to do, I were
undone for ever. -- Neither Marriage, nor the troubles of it could make thee
less serious than thou were in thy Vergin-state. Thou made Conscience of
taking care, that the Encumbrances of this World should not make thee neglect
the weighty Duties relating to the other. Thy Kindness to other Relations was
not diminished by a fond Affection to me at first, as is usual with other Young
Brides, because thou did look upon due kindness to thy Relations as an act of
Duty to thy Maker, and their Generous Favors to me did mightily heighten your
esteem for them.

Thy Closet was the Withdrawing-room wherein thou did most delight, because
there thou did entertain Communion with Heaven; and many times when thou
retiredst thither in sadness, thou came out again refreshed.

Oh how it pierces my Soul to think I have lost such an Heavenly Companion, an
Helpmeet indeed, not only as to the things of this World, but as to those of
another? How Fervent were thy Prayers for my Self, and all thy other Relations,
for the Church of God, and mankind in general?

How seasonable have I found thy directions to my self when under affliction?
And how powerful have I found thy Joint-prayers to our Common God and Savior.

Thy Devotion had more of Seriousness than Pomp, and the Seasons of it many
times stolen to avoid Ostentation, not like those fluttering Women, who will be
sure to frequent Publick-Prayers Morning and Evening, and hug their Prayer
Books in their Hands as they walk the Streets, and tuffle them over in their
Closets, without any thing else that looks like Religion in the whole Course of
their Lives. Thy Closet was furnished with the Holy Wherein thou have marked a
milion of remarkable Texts.
Bible and Practical Books, instead of Dead, Lifeless Formularies, Play-Books
and Romances.

When thou came from thy Retirements, it was perceptible to thy Family that
thou had been with God; thy first Visit in the Morning was to Heaven, and the
sweet smell of that was not to be worn off by any other Visits throughout the
day: Thou wast like Martha, not slothful in business, and at the same time like
Mary, fervent in Spirit serving the Lord. -- Thou knew that thy Soul was
more excellent than thy Body, and therefore did spend the chief of thy time
about the affairs of Eternity, and wast more frequent at thy Prayers, than at
the Toilet or Glass; the Review of which made thee say (in thy last sickness)
-- were my work now to do, I were undone for ever.

Thy Carriage in thy Family was Mild and Gentle, not provoking but encouraging
to Servants, both by Example and Precept. Thou shewedst thy Goodness by thy
dutiful behavior to my self, and remembredst that thou wast a Subject as well
as a Companion and did exactly resemble Sarah and Rachel, in thy loving and
dutiful deportment toward me; thou did bear with my Infirmities, coveredst
them in love, did not run to this Neighbor, and that with abusive or silly
stories (a) but overcam'st me by gentle He that will but one ^^de hear,
Tho he judge right, is no good Justicer. Herbert.

Exhortations and Entreaties, and in all thy Prayers my Soul was minded as thy
own.

Thy Words nor Carriage were never disrespectful to me. Tho thou were 'kin to a
Noble Family yet the Blood that filled thy Veins See Mr. How Is Sermon at Mrs.
Hammond's Funeral.
did not swell thy Mind. Thou wast always ready to gratify me in all my lawful
requests, and thoughtest nothing below thee that might tend to my satisfaction
and advantage.

When I was abroad thou longest to see me, and wheh I returned home, I was
received with Smiles. If at any time I was perplexed in mind, thou wast not
quiet till I was so too. Thy Sympathy with me in all the Distresses of my Life,
(both at Sea and Land) will make thy Virtues shine with the greater Luster, as
Stars in the darkest Night, and assure the World you loved me, not my Fortunes.

Fair course of Passions where two Lovers start,
And run together Heart thus yoked in Heart.
In my Health thou lovedst me as a Wife, and in my Sickness attended'st me as a
Nurse.

My Head no sooner ak'd, but thy Heart felt it; and had I fallen Sick (in your
dying Hour) you would even then have Eliza spoke often to this Effect in her last
Sickness.
crawled up Stairs to have seen me.

Thou wast afflicted with all my Sorrows, and delighted with all my Joys. When
Man and Wife love so little, that the one is unconcerned in the others Trials,
there follows a Hell of Disquiet in the Mind, a greater Clog upon the
Conscience than Man is able to bear, and ordinarily a Blast upon the Estate,
besides Guilt and Shame unspeakable; but thou (like a Wife, who studied duty,
in order to practice) did not expect God would bless thee in any thing,
whilst you saw me uneasy, and did not attempt to remove it, or lessen it, by
taking part of the Grief. And indeed all our Distresses of Body and Mind were
so equally divided, that all yours were mine, and all mine were yours; we
remembered we married for better for worse, for richer for poorer, and that we
were one Flesh, and therefore were no more offended with the Words or Failings,
and Wants of each other, than we would have been, had they been our own. And
this made thee as careful to conceal my Losses, as thou wast forward to repair
them.

A Woman of Sense knows she must shine by her Husband's Honor, and must be
darkened if he suffer an Eclipse; and therefore did never keep this Jointure
for the sake of thy Husband, that House for the sake of a Brother, and this Bag
for the sake of some She-Cousin; no, if my Occasions required it, they were all
forced into my Lap with -- My dear, I rejoice I am able to serve thee, and as
long as I have it, it is all thine. In this you imitate Madam C -- y, who sold
her Estate (unasked) to oblige her Spouse, and indeed the Design of Jointures,
is to defend against bad Husbands, and not to ruin those that are Sober, and
would be Honest if their Wives would let them; and therefore did often say,
What does a Jointure signify to a Woman that loves her Husband? Thou were not
Sordidly As is hinted in the following Pages.
Covetous (or as Cowely calls it) so Emphatically poor, as to talk of wanting
in the midst of Plenty; under all my Distresses thy Motto was -- God will
provide.

When I into thy Closet look,
Wherein you greatest Pleasure took,
I find in the Front of every Book,
God will provide.
Let an Anatomist with Art
Dissect each Member, and each Part;
He Will find this written on thy Heart,
God will provide.
God will provide -- was ever in thy Mouth (as a Cordial to ease thy Cares and
Mine) -- This encouraged thee to a generous Charity -- with this you cheered
the Spirits of those that had lost their Friends and Estates -- 'twas from this
we both of us received a fresh and full Supply under all the Losses we ever met
with; and in a word 'twas to this Motto, and your Prayers for me, that (in some
measure) I owe all the Blessings I now enjoy, or hope to receive hereafter.

How often would you cheer Philaret with saying; See how the Birds of the Air do
all depend upon God! and the Sparrow that has dined, and knows not where to
get his Supper, yet cheerfully waits on Divine Providence, and shall not we?
God has (my Dear) Provided for us hitherto, then why should we mistrust he
will not provide for us for the future? -- Our Unbelief indeed may make him
hold his Hand, and hinder him from doing any mighty Work for us; but what can
we fear, if in the Use of Lawful Means we throw our selves upon him? How often
have we been in Straits and Exigencies, and God has found some way or other to
deliver us? and shall we by our Unbelief hinder him from working such another
Deliverance for us? Of how many Men have we read and heard that have trusted
God in despite of all Improbabilities, and God has succored and assisted
them beyond all Expectation? How often would you say, Come Phil. we do not want
for the present, why should we believe we shall want hereafter, when we know
not whether we shall live a Day to an end? Come, come, tho your Bag is empty to
Day, 'twill be filled to Morrow. You never yet wanted Money when you had
occasion to use it; those unexpected Friends I met with when you were in
America should cure us of all Distrust of Providence; besides, what did we ever
get by immodeate Carckings, but torment of Mind? Is it not much sweeter to rest
upon God's Goodness, and enjoy Content? We are never the nearer a Supply when
we have afflicted and vexed our Minds, and why should we put our Spirits into
an Agony for nothing -- Rest satisfied, (Phil.) God will provide -- This was
your Which you learnt from Dr. Horneck's great Law of Con^^derations, Page 320.
Advice to me in all my Straits; Then how much should this endear thy Memory to
me? And as thou did perform the Duty of a tender Wife, by thus easing me of
my Worldly Cares, so this made me (for a kind Wife makes a kind Husband) ready
to part with Garment My voluntary and frequent Engagements for Eliza's Sister
is a convincing Proof of this.
after Garment, strip my self to my Skin; yea, Mortgage my very Flesh to serve
thee. You know, my dear, I did not pretend Affection, and carry on two
Interests, and I Will say this for Eliza, that she wan't false enough (her self)
to mistrust me in any thing, but so Remarkably kind, that I must turn your own
Words upon you, and say; That I have met with more and greater Comforts in a
Married State than ever I did expect, and how (as you expressed it) could it be
otherwise, when Inclination, Interest, and all that can be desired, concur to
make up the Harmony: So that were thy Tenderness known to the World, 'twou'd
once more bring into Fashion Women's loving and trusting their Husbands. My
Dear, 'twas thus thoroughly performing thy Duty as a Wife that gave thee Peace
on thy Deathbed, and such Hopes of Heaven, as has scarce been heard of.

In a word, thou were such a Wife as fully answered the Description of a good
Housewife given by Solomon.

[My Heart did safely trust in thee, because I knew thou would do me Good,
and not Evil] thou were true to my BED, did discover P -- ps, W -- t, and all
that attempted thy Chastity; and as true to my PVRSE, did not deceive and
cozen Whole Duty of Man, P. 301.
me, by employing my Goods to such Uses as I allowed not of. [You worked
willingly with your Hands] witness your Curious Bed; to this I might add, you
did that in my Warehouse in a Months Whilst I was at Tunbridge, in the Year
1696.
time, which I could scarce have done in a Year -- [You rose while 'twas yet
Night;] did often 'wake me out of my Sleep by thy early Devotions. [You
looked well to the way of my Household,] and eat not the Bread of Idleness; such
you was -- but where is such another? For Solomon himself, who had tried as
many as most, says, after all, Who can find a virtuous Woman? And therefore,
when I had thee, I made as much of thee as ever I could, for I thought I should
never get such another.

Being blessed with such a Wife as loved both God and me; I was easy when
abroad, and delighted to be at home. Were there nothing betwixt us but Sea and
Land; or if thou were to be found in the remotest parts of the Earth, the
Raging Seas, and howling Wilderness, should not keep us asunder. Nor should the
most dange^ous Rocks and Shelves, nor the fiercest of wild Beasts deter me from
undertaking the Voyage or Journey; but our Separation is of another Kind, and
not to be remedied till this Earthly Tabernacle be dissolved. But could I see
thee again on Earth, (but why should I have such a vain Wish?) I should think
my self still in Paradise, or had met with this Life but as an Earnest of the
Happier to come. Again, When I consider the Calmness and Quietness of thy
Temper [How thy Mouth was opened with Wisdom, and the Law of Kindness was in
thy Tongue] I cannot but pity the Unhappiness of their Lot, who have Wives of a
Boisterous Temper, that speak whatever their Passion and ill Nature suggests,
to the disquieting of others, and fretting their own Bowels, you avoided this
Brawling and Discontent, which makes the Wife (as the Duty P. 301.
of Man tells us) the Burden and Plague of the Man, instead of a Help and
Comfort. Thou knew, my Dear, if 'twas a Fault to carry it rudely to
Strangers, 'twas a much greater to carry it so to thy Husband, to whom a
greater Affection is due. How many Men Whole Duty of Man, p. 302.
to avoid the noise of a froward Wife fall to Company-keeping, Poverty, and a
Multitude of Mischiefs. But thy winning Carriage kept me from these Evils; thou
were no Fool, Gossip, or Scold, did never THVNDER away my Friends, or fright
them with WRY FACES. A meek and a quiet Spirit is a vast Ornament to Religion,
and of great Value in the Sight of God and Man.

All we know, of the blessed above,
Is that they sing, and that they love.
Herbert.
Then why should they that hope to live in one and the same Glory, See Mr.
Roger's Discourse called Fall not out by the Way.
now Revile, or reflect upon one another? All their differences will be
composed when they arrive there; and why should they now differ? There Luther,
and Calvin, and Dr. Owen, and Mr. Baxter, will be all of one Mind; there will
be no misunderstanding of one another in Heaven, nor no giving of Ill Words;
no thinking the Wife Distracted, or calling the Husband N -- gate, but all will
be as kind and friendly there, as Eliza was to her Philaret; and I think they
can scarce be more, for you were Mistress in the Art of Obliging, in which you
attained that Sovereign Perfection that you reigned over all Hearts, with whom
you did converse. And this brings me, in the next Place, to consider thy Words.

Thy Words were far from being idle or affected, but always useful to the
Edification of others; nay, I may truly say it, that thou had neither a
Thought, a Word, nor a Look, contrary to the strict Rules of Virtue. How far
were thou from receiving or delighting in Tale-bearers, who separate chief
Friends -- or in entertaining Visiters with censures upon the Failures of other
Women, which is too much the Practice now adays. Talkativeness, the common
Failure of the Sex, was no blemish of thine; thou were far from Monopolizing
all Conversation to thy self, but were readier to hear than to speak. And
could bear of hearing thy Faults, (if thou had any) without thinking thy
self affronted; neither could the Greatest Abuse make thee implacable, as
knowing 'twas the Glory of Man and Woman to pass by Infirmities; for as we pray
daily to God to pass by our own, so God expects the same from us one to another.

Thy Visits were not tedious nor trivial, but designed for the Advantage of
Conversation, and the Continuance of Friendship; and when thou were visited thy
self, thou entertain'st thy Friends not with a starched Formality, or foolish
impertinent Trifles, but with something that might be useful to their Minds, as
well as to exercise their Tongues.

How serious were thy Preparations for Public Worship, and how much concerned
to have thy Family delivered from those Encumbrances which might hinder them to
attend the same; thy Care to have thy Soul in readiness, to hear what God had
to say, was greater than that of having thy Body adorned, contrary to the
common Practice of our Age. How attentive wast thou when at Sermons? and with
what Greediness did thou suck in the Sincere Milk of the Word, and how
Conscientious to see that thy Servants took heed to what they heard, and that
they performed their Duty to God as well as to th^e. -- Neither did thou
think to compound with Heaven, by being thus zealous in Religious Duties, that
thou may Slander, Covet, Lie, and act other Sins with the greater Freedom
here, (and in other Places) none but the Guilty are meant, and none but such
will wince; but these (Eliza) will have more Wit than to publish their Guilt,
by declaring their Innocence.

The Extensiveness of thy Charity is another Character, which endears thy
Memory, and makes it precious to me, as well as to many others, who felt the
Effects of it. How like to the Author of all Good did that excellent Grace make
thee, and how did it Adorn thy Holy Profession. Dionysius the Tyrant wondered
at his Son, that with all the Gold and Silver he had in his House, he had made
no Man his Friend; but thou wast innocently frugal, that thou might be
boun^ifully Charitable. And the Truth is, the best and surest way to have any
outward Mercy, is to be content to want it, or to make good Use of what we
have; when Men's Desires are over eager after the World, thy must have so much
a Year, and a House well furnished, or else they will not be content; God
usually, if not constantly breaks their Wills, by denying them, or else puts a
Sting into them, that a Man had been as good he had been without them. If a Man
have but a little Income, if he have a great Blessing, (and like Eliza,) have a
Heart to do Good with the little he has; that is enough to make it up; alas! we
must not account Mercies by the bulk, what if another have a Pound to my Ounce,
if mine be Gold for his Silver, I will never change with him. 'Twas you, my
Dear, that crossed the Proverb, That Fortune sees not where she bestows her
Gifts; that most commonly they fall to the Share of those who have not Hearts
to use them; for your Great Charity brought that exellent Character upon you,
of being Kind and Generous beyond others -- you would often say, We 1 Timothy 6.7.
brought nothing into this World, and shall carry nothing out; so did all the
Good you could whilst you lived in this; imitating Sir John Frederick, who made
his own Hands his Executors, and his Eyes the Overseers. -- It Is observed that
Covetousness is the only Sin that grows young as Men grow old; But 'twas not so
in you; you lived in the World so much above it, as was an Evidence of the Real
Greatness of your Soul, and that you thought that a little thing wherein others
place Greatness, this made Charity so natural to you, that 'twas scarce a
Virtue. There was in your Nature an Aversion to a Covetous Person, as he is one
which the Lord abhorts. Psalm. 10.3.

When I read, That it is easier Mat. 19.24.
for a Camel to enter through the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich Man, who sets
his Heart on his Riches, to enter into Heaven, I am almost frighted with the
Expression. Could Aristippus throw his Gold into the Sea, and say, It Is better
I should, drown thee than that thou should undo me; and shall I who have one
Foot in the Grave, be a Slave to my Wealth. I complain of my Dr. Horneck.
Neighbor for being hard hearted, and unkind to People in Distress; and is
that a Virtue in me which is Vice in another?

A good Bishop (says a late Writer) could have preached an Hour together, in
saying nothing but Beware of Covetousness; And so charitable was Dear Eliza,
that her whole Life seemed to be one continued Satyr against Avarice. You durst
not rake together what you could in your Life, to bequeath it to your self at
your Death. I say, to your self; for who that has half a Soul, would creep to a
Miser all his Life for Wealth he may lose with the next Breath, neither will he
obtain it if the Wretch can carry it to the other World, as is seen by the
following Instances. Hermocrates (a Grecian Philosopher) dying, bequeathed all
his Estate to himself, his Mind being fixed immoveably on the Trash he had
scraped together. -- And Cardinal Angelot was so wrapped up in Covetousness, as
by a Trap-Door to get into his Stable, and so steal the Corn his Groom had
given his Horses. And I knew one my self so wretchedly covetous, as to steal
Candle-ends in the Church (after Evening Lesture was over) to serve his
Occasions at home; and this he did, tho worth soveral Thousand Pound. Well,
what shall we say?

There is (says the Wise Man) a Man, to whom Eccl. 24.4.
God has given Riches, Wealth and Honor, so that he wants nothing for his
Soul of all he desires, yet God gives him not Power to eat thereof, but a
Stranger eats it, This is Vanity, and an evil Disease. It Is clear from hence,
(that tho a little suffices Nature, and less Grace yet) that Covetousness is
never satisfied, and is certainly cursed. The contented Man is never poor let
him have never so little. The Discontented Man is never rich, let him have
never so much. Tho I have a Just See the Case of the Young Lady, P. 40
Title to 6000 l. (as may THAT IS ONCE.
appear in Conjunction with my own Birthright) and so much clear from any
Encumbrance, and have neither Child nor Chick to waste it, and my self as great
an Enemy to Extravagance, as to what is Sneaking; yet if I an't contented with
this Estate, I am poorer than he that begs, if content with the Scraps he gets.

Content is all we aim at with our Store,
And having that with little, what needs more?
But the Covetous or Disconted Man (for they are all one) always thinks himself
miserable, and so he can never be happy. But Eliza was none of these, had
nothing in her mean or little; no, my Dear, had thy Purse been as large as thy
Heart, you would never been rich whilst any Man was poor; and I am sure Eliza, you
had more Piety than to think your self undone, had we lost all but one another.
Would the Miser See Dr. Horneck's Great Law of Consideration.
study Eternity, he would see it is little material to him whether he is Poor or
Rich: Your Generous Temper, Eliza, might fully convince him of this. Neither
was thy Extensive Charity any Let to thy strict Justice, or to the Punctual
Performance of all thy Promises in thy Dealings with Men; you knew that none
must dwell in the -- HOLY Psalm. 15.1, 2.
HILL -- but those that walk uprightly, and speak the Truth in their Heart, (at
least to the best of their Knowledge) and therefore thy Promises ( like the
Laws of the Medes and Persians) were unalterable; neither could Passion,
Interest, or the Greatest Affronts (either Pretended or Real) make thee break
'em; and I thought thy keeping thy Word none of the least of thy Excellencies
-- for Promises are Sacred Things, as appears by this. If I invite a It Is
common for silly Women to undervalue their Husband's Estate; tho superior to
their own, or atleast not inferior to the account given, and to blast that
Reputation that supports them, I say, Supports them, for Man and Wife are
Inseparable in all they enjoy or suffer. These Instances are common in some
Counties, as will appear by the following Passage in Mr. J -- n's Letter to his
Client, for it runs thus. I received yours, and am now to tell you I could not
have an Answer from M -- till last Monday, but now I have an Account of Mr.
Carterson 's Estate according to his own Particulars; which is all at present
from -- your Servant -- J -- n

-- Could it ever be thought that any Parent that had received such an Ample
Account from her own Creature, would privately have lessened her Kinsman's
Estate. But thus was this Gentleman served, tho his Lands in present Possession
and Reversion may be worth Four Thousand Pound, notwithstanding his great
Losses at Sea, by Suretiships, by lending Moneys to a distressed Friend, and
paying some Hundred Pounds for Fines and a deceased Heir.


Lady to my House, and tell her if she marries my Son, I Will give him 4000 l. at
my Death. If this Promise was to encourage the Match. If I fly from it when
effected, I live in a known Sin, which (without Repentance) is certain
Damnation, and the present blasting my Reputation, as I Am chargeable with all
the Damages, attending the Breach of my Promise, which was so solemnly made,
that I told the Lady I Would make it good under my own Hand, in case I married; and
it is no Gift, but plain Justice, if I do so; seeing this Ladys trusting to my
Word, made her reject those would have made her Rich and Easy; from all which
it is plain, that Promises made by Word As I may prove hereafter from an
Original Letter.
or Letter, tho they are not binding at the Lawyers Bar, yet are so in the
Court of Conscience; neither can any small Pett, taken with or without Cause,
Cancel the first Promise any more than the private Lies of a Wife or a hasty
Word can untie the Marriage Knot. They that doubt this to be Scripture, let
them read Nehemiah 5th. from the 11th to the 14th Verse, which is such Advice
as I took my self; for (you know Eliza) being once blamed for not performing a
Promise, made by my own Father, (which I rejected, as made against my Consent)
but afterward finding His Promise necessary, I fulfilled it to the Persons
Content: How much more then is a Promise binding which is made by my self,
confirmed by Letter, and repeated in the hearing of several, and more
especially so, if made to influence such a Solemn Thing as a Marriage. How
punctual would Eliza have been to such a Promise, (for she was so to all) and
how uneasy till performed.

But as the End Crowns the Work, and Perseverance deserves the Reward, thy
Constancy in the Exercise of Grace and Good Humor completed thy Excellency,
thou diedst as thou livedst, and no Change of Condition could make any Change
upon thee; thou never insultedst over me in my Affliction, as is the Custom of
too many ill natured Wives; but in all my Afflictions thou wast afflicted, and
lov'dst me to the last breath.

But though these are mighty Instances of a Pure Love, yet all inferior to thy
Garden-Walks Two hundred every Night for the space of a whole Year.
, and something else I forbear to mention: Nothing can Love like the Dear
Eliza, or be so Constant as Phil. who strove to become [not thine alone, but
even the same with thee This was the Motto in a Ring I gave Eliza, before
Marriage.
.] There was such a Union between us, from our first Interview to thy last
Breath, that we seem d as two Souls in the same Body, or rather two Souls
transformed into one. This made such an even Thread of Endearment run through
all we Thought or Did, that as you ever commanded me in any equal Matter by
your constant Obeying of me, so I as readily scrupled every thing that was not
agreeable to your Will; but nothing happened that was not so; for like
Spanbeimius's Wife, thou were willing to be Governed by me in all things. If
any Quarrel happened, 'twas who of the two should live the most Content: we
proved a Chain of Hearts, and the first Link was Heaven.

Let no Man then Censure me as Idolizing thy Memory, when I draw up such a
faint Resemblance of thy Character, seeing Infinite Wisdom it self has given
us this Character of a good Woman, that She is more Precious than Rubies; A
Ship of Jewels would not have been such a Blessing to me as thou wast. Thou
did not cool my Zeal for God with Vanity and Games, and needless Diversions,
but quickenedst me to good. No Man could be rough and harsh to a Person so mild
and submissive. No Man could be so much a Brute, or Rocky-hearted, as not to be
softened by so Constant a Love -- What reason have I to be thankful to
Providence, that when a Good Woman is not to be found among a Thousand, Eccl.
7.28. that yet one of them should have fallen to my share; and seeing it was
next to impossible to overvalue such a Blessing, I have more reason to think
that it was want of esteem enough for thee (though I loved thee beyond Life,
Liberty and Estate) than Idolizing of thee, that provoked God to deprive me of
thee.

Was it possible, my Dearest, to overvalue a Child that never once disobeyed a
Parent, or to overvalue a Wife that would never give Ear to those that went
about to divide, even in the least thing betwixt her and her Husband. Could I
have too high an Esteem for a Wife that lived so near to God, and loved me out
of a Principle of Conscience and Judgment, more than from a fond Affection, or
from the ordinary Motives of an agreeable Person and Competent Estate, etc. I
confess that my Interest in thee, and height of Affection toward thee, may
make my Testimony concerning thee suspected, but if I should be silent, thy own
works would Praise thee; thy Servants, Relations and Acquaintance, know I don't
flatter thee; and certainly so many Indifferent Persons cannot have their
Tongues and Affections bribed, to conspire so Unanimously to assert a Falsehood.

It has not seemed meet to the Divine Providence that thou should leave any
Pledge of our Conjugal Love and Society behind thee, but what is Indelibly
Impressed upon my Soul, I have not the Comfort of any Child by so blessed and
sweet a Yoke Fellow, to be a living Evidence of our Mutual Endearments, then
God and Man I hope will pardon me, if I endeavor to have the Idea of thy
Perfections always before me, and that I have drawn this faint Shadow of 'em
with my rude Pen, as a more useful and valuable Portraiture of thee, than any
that could be drawn by the Pencil of the most Famous Artist; that is but the
Outside, but this is the Inside -- and what I was taught by the Divine Records,
That the King's Daughters are Glorious within; I found it to be true by
Experience in thee; you convinced me what Charms there are in a Virtuous
Spouse! What a Mine of Pleasure! What sprightly Life and Vigor did my Dear
give to all my Thoughts, Looks, and Actions? How many new Satisfactions in
every thing you did? How did I even live in your dying Words? Oh the kind and
tender Farewells you gave me with your last Breath; such as, Poor Rogue, thou
art the kindest Husband that ever lived -- Ill love thee as long as I live --
Thou art a dear Child to me -- I love thee dearly -- I pray God bless my dear
Yoke Fellow, and give him Grace -- I pray thee give him Grace to live so here,
as he may live with thee hereafter; which you repeated over and over very
earnestly, further begging that God would make me his, for there was Grace
enough in store. To the last Minute of your Life you spoke nothing so sensibly
as when you spoke of Heavenly things, and all this you uttered at the time when
you were actually dying.

It would be a pleasant and delectable Subject for me further to expatiate upon
thy Graces and Moral Virtues, but I shall conclude with the Wise Man's Character
of a Virtuous Woman, that Many Daughters have done Virtuously, Prove. 31.29.
but thou excellest them all; and therefore, tho it should be my Lot to engage
in a Second Marriage, yet it will be impossible for any other Wife to deface
the Impression which thou have made upon me; and seeing I can no more enjoy thy
sweet Fellowship here on Earth, I will contemplate upon thy Perfections, and
view this Picture which my Affection has copied from the Original, that thy
Virtues had impressed upon my own Soul -- And thus (my dearest) I must with
unexpressible Grief bid thee a long Adieu; but that which still comforts me is,
that we shall meet in Heaven, where there shall never be any more perplexing
Separation.

And it should be a great Satisfaction to me to consider, That the Providence
of God ordered thy Death when I could be present, and perform the last Offices
of my Love. That it did not happen at such a time when I was in Holland, and at
a great Distance from thee: So you had the Comfort of my Love to the last
moments of your Life. And doubtless it pleased and comforted you much, and
allayed your Affliction, to see that you enjoyed in your distress the constant
Attendance of so dear a Friend. And if this softened your Affliction, it may
justly lessen my Sorrow for what you endured. I may be satisfied too in this,
That I sought and procured for you the best Means and Helps to recover you,
that Art and Nature could afford, and sure I am, could any Physician or Friend,
have saved your Life, it had been Dr. T --, Mr. C --, and Cousin J -- n, whose
unwearied Endeavors to preserve thy Life shall be As you desired on your
Deathbed.
(thankfully) acknowledged to my Dying Day; but it being evidently God's Will
to take you from me, no Care or Tenderness could retain you amongst us; but my
Comfort is, that as you was Virtuous and Pious, you was in the same measure
willing to Die; and able to receive your Death with an undanted Courage and
Resolution. Virtue See Mr. Dorington's Consolations to a Friend.
is an Essay, a kind of Preludium of Dying: As it mortifies our Affections to
this vain World, and fixes them on better Objects, the Gifts and Felicities of
Heaven. Eliza was practicing Death by Degrees while she lived* and mortified
first one Affection, then another, To make the Burden of Dying more easier to
bear, you took it up by Parcels; and so having delivered your self from them,
you did not bear it all at once. Thus it came to pass, that Eliza was no sooner
sensible she must die, than willing to do so. She was ready to resign up her
good Soul into the Hands of a Faithful Creator. Eliza, whose Death I am tempted
inordinately to Lament, did not at all Lament for her self. Your willing
Submission and Resignation to the Divine Disposal, should teach me the same
thing. You went away perhaps, not only contented, but joyful that you was to
go. Tho your Love to me, and your Wisdom, might make you Conceal that you was
willing to leav^ me; yet you was glad, I may believe, to find that you had
finished your Course, for you had such Foretastes of the Heavenly Bliss, as
even ravished your Soul away! Then it is very incongruous that I should attend
your Triumph and Joy, with my immoderate Sorrow and Tears; the Remembrance of
your Happiness in the unseen World, should give Comfort to me under the great
Loss I have by your Death.

Have I not taken Satisfaction heretofore, to reflect upon the obliging and
charming Conversation of Eliza, when my Affairs have kept me absent from her?
And have not such Reflections sweetened and allayed that Absence? Why then
should not such Reflections do me the same Kindness still? If I let this
Impertinent Thought afflict me that I must no more enjoy the same Delight, it
will deprive me too of all the Use, and Comfort, and Pleasure, of what I once
enjoyed in Eliza, which would make my Condition still much the worse.

Then why should I grieve See the Note at the end of the Dedication, with this
Mark *
thus, seeing Eliza is only departed from me for a while; she is not lost, nor
annihilated. Thy Body (Eliza) is laid in the Dust, to rest in the quiet Grave,
and is there watched by the careful Eye of Divine Omnisience: And wheresoever
any Parts of that may happen in Ages to come to be scattered, the Divine Power
will certainly collect them all again, and thou shall be perfectly restored to
Being and Happiness.

But the mean while thy better Part, the noble Soul, is returned to God that
gave it: And since so much of thee still lives, I may say, thou art gone to thy
Celestial Kindred. Upon your Departure from the Body, I do believe you
immediately found your self, like the Soul of good Lazarus, attended by kind
and glorious Angels: And they, I must needs think, were not silent at their
meeting you. They congratulate your Delivery from this World, applaud your
Patience in suffering the Evils of it; your Diligence in doing Good, your bold
Conflicts against the Assaults of many Temptations, and your Perseverance to
the end of your Life.

If I could look within the Veil, and view the Celestial Temple, I should see
you there, in Transports of Joy, surrounded with a Glorious Ring of Rejoicing
Spirits. Then how unsuitable is it that I should immoderately grieve for Eliza;
when she is gone to inhabit a Joy unspeakable and glorious Eliza, while I am
mourning for thy Death, thou art giving Thanks for it; you are overjoyed to
think that it is over with you; and that you have finished your last and worst
Conflict with the Enemy of your Salvation. How happy soever your Condition was
on Earth, it is much happier now. The Place and Condition you are in, is
represented in the Divine Writings, by all that is great, pleasant, and
glorious in this World; but we are also told there, that all these
Representations fall short of it. I cannot know then how happy Eliza is till I
go to see; and that must be now the Care that engages me. With all my Sorrow,
with all my vain Wishes, I cannot bring you back again from thence, and I
should do you the greatest Diskindness if I could: I must then, if I am truly
sorry to have parted with you, be earnestly concerned to meet you again. And
that I may do so* I will earnestly concern my self to serve and promote the
Glory of God among Men, and to do all the good Offices to the World that I can:
And I will, as often as I think of Dear Eliza, who is gone before, excite my
self to these things, in Consideration that this Course will bring me to dwell
with her again.

And if I make such Resolutions as these, and perform them, then I may promise
my in a little time, to meet you, where the Spirits of Just Men are made
perfect, where we shall love again, and that with an Affection more pure, and
more ardent than before. Where both of us shall be more happy than ever we
could be here: We shall have no Griefs to communicate, no Complaints to make to
one another: No Burdens or Cares to divide hetween us, no It Is the Saying of
one that to distrust the word of an honest Man is not only to expose him to H
-- C -- but to rank him in the number of V -- lets; such Carking Jealousy
justifies the severest Resentment, as Reputation is a tender thing, and dearer
to a good Man than his Life; then what Conscience must that Person have that
makes those Resentments a C^ime, which were occasioned by the Provocations
given: But I stop here for the Barbarous Treatments that (...) and oth^^^; meet
with (in this kind ^ sufficiently proves at what Door such Quarrels lie.
Distrust to allay our Happiness, or damp our Joy, no Distance of As I hinted
before in P. 8.
Place shall part us there, or hinder our delightful Communion with one
another: We shall be of one Family, in one Sacred Temple, and in one rejoicing
Quire; joining to pay Eternal Adorations, and Thankful Praises to the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. We shall never be parted more.

Within a little while this happy Meeting may be, It cannot be far off, since
it will come at the end of my Life. Then seeing a Part of me is now in Heaven,
I shall take Mr. Rogers Advice See Mr. Rogers Character of a Good Woman* P. 163.
to his Friend; Make this Use of my Loss more diligently to prepare to meet you
in Heaven, where our Conversation will be infinitely more pleasant, and more
durable than it ever was on Earth and there (as you told me on your Deathbed)
We shall meet, and never part.

This is also the Opinion of our Friend H -- n; for in his last Epistle He
wishes he may so live this Year, and the Remainder of his time; That at last he
may meet Eliza, etc. and the rest of the Saints -- There we shall have Joys eo
the full! And I think (adds he) this will be ONE HAPPINESS to have sweet
Conversation with Pure and Spotless Creatures, without Hindrance or Disturbance
for ever, etc.

Some Hope that they in Heaven their Learning share,
But sure Love and Friendship enter there.
I am impatient till I find it again in Eliza, and till that happy Minute come
(as I told your Brother) All my pleasant Days are over. It Is true, I have been
at Agford since your Death, (and you saw me there if you know what is done on
Earth) to see that Dear unknown you so much admired (and as you thought could
have made me happy) but when I arrived -- My Heaven was still as distant as
before; all I got was Joy in Reversion, and scarce that; For ever since that
Fatal Afternoon I first saw Cloris, Madam Shute, and Madam W -- ch, I have not
tasted a Minutes Joy, nor expect it now till I meet Eliza, and she is gone to
Heaven.

Poor Miserable Phil! If Fate happen to guild over one Inch of thy Unhappy
Span, and lend a Glimpse of Heaven in a Wife, how soon does the Beauteous
Vision, vanish out of Sight.

Ah Cloris! must we part then, first let me close thy Eyes; bedew thy The
Chinese always before they bury their Dead, if he was a Married Man, bring him
to his Wife, that so she might first kiss him, and bid him farewell.
Cheeks a little, compose thy Body for the Grave, follow thee thither, see thee
put into it, be one of the last that shall come thence (as I desired of thee if
I died first) and then farewell, till we meet in the Silent Grave; where, I Will
visit thee, and when I leave this Light,
Come spend my time in the same Cell at Night:
Till then farewell, farewell, I cannot take
A Final Leave until thy Ashes wake.


Dr. Brown applauds those ingenious Tempers that desire to sleep in the Vrns of
their Fathers, and strive to go the nearest way to Corruption.

'Twas the late Request of a great Divine, to lie by his Wife in Shoreditch,
and for that reason he was buried there; and Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston in his
last Will desires his Executors that the Bones of his Father might be dug
out of the Earth (where they were buried) and laid by his own Body in a new
Vault he ordered them to erect for the same purpose; that tho he could not live
with his Father as Iong as he would have desired, yet he designed their Bodies
should lie together till the Resurrection. As it is good to enjoy the Company
of the Godly while they are living, so it is not amiss, if it will stand with
Convenience, to be buried with them after Death. The old Prophets Bones escaped
a burning, by being buried with the other Prophets; and the Man who was tumbled
into the Grave of Elisha, was revived by the Virtue of his Bones. So good it is
to be buried with those that are accounted Pious. 'Twas for this reason I
formerly desired to Lie in the Chancel of -- with my Reverend Father, but Love
to a Parent, tho never so tender, is lost in that to a Wife. And now, (as is
mentioned in the following Essay) if I can mingle my Ashes wi h thine, I have
nothing farther to ask those few Hours I do survive thee (but can I word it so
when your Letter says, When dead and gone you sha^^ still live in Phil. who is
dearer to you than L^fe it self) thy Tomb shall be my Breast, till on six
Shoulders I am brought to thee and -- n, as the only Companions of my long Home
-- So that now leaving All Pleasures behind me, and my Dear fast asleep in her
Grave, I Will drop a few Tears on thy Coffin, and so depart to my own House;
which tho once so pleasant to thee and me, will now (whilst thou art found in
no room of it) appear a very melancholy thing.

Tears To the Memory of DEAR ELIZA, who departed this Life in the Year 1697.
SAcred Urn! with whom we trust
This Dear Pile of Sacred Dust:
Know thy Charge, and safely Guard,
'Till Death's Brazen Gates unbarr'd:
'Till the Angel bids it rise,
And remove to Paradise.
A Wife Obliging, Tender, Wise,
A Friend to Comfort, and Advise.
Virtue mild as Zephir's Breatb,
Piety which smiled in Death.
Such a Wife, and such a Friend,
All Lament, and all Commend.
Most with Eating Cares oppressed;
He who knew and loved her best:
Who her Loyal Heart did share;
He who reigned Unrivaled there.
And no Truce to Sighs will give,
'Till he die, with her to live.
Or if more we would comprize,
Here Interred ELIZA lies.
Thus you see, my Dear, (if you can see from Heaven to Earth) how loath I am to
give the beck'n of Farewell, the best of Wives, and my Truest Friend, is but
part of your Character, and I cannot leave such a Treasure in Post haste.

I had kinder things to add, but my whole Family (Friend J -- n, and honest N
-- y,) call me down, so must reserve the rest 'til we meet in Heaven, The
Primitive Christians buried their Saints with Hymns and Psalms of Joy.
Chrysostom on the Hebrews says, We are to glorify God, and give thanks to
him, that he has crowned the Deceased, and freed them from their Labors, and
chides those that mourned. And the Days of their Death were called the
Birth-days of the Saints. And Hierome in his Epitaph on Holy Paula, says, That
at her Funeral no Shreeks were heard, but Multitudes of Psalms and Hymns were
sung in diverse Languages. See Mr. Henry's Life, p. 206.
but here is enough to let you see, that as in Life, so in Death I am wholly
Yours, and shall so continue, as long as I am

Philaret.
From Eliza 's Grave, July 10th. 1697.
AN ESSAY, PROVING, We shall know our Friends in Heaven, etc.
In a Letter to a Reverend Divine.
OUR Secret Correspondence (my Dear Ignotus) as it owes its Rise to the
melodious Notes of the WESTERN NIGHTINGALE, so it has been continued ever since
with a World of Harmony; Maugre the great Opposition it met with from Argus and
his Aged Friend. In this long Correspondence I attempted to prove (as the First
Step to our Friendship) That there may be a greater Love 'tween Man and Man
than 'tween Man and Woman. I next proceeded to other Subjects, and from thence
to treat of Conjugal Love; where I gave you the Character of my First Wife;
told you how she designed to Love, if ever she married; proved the practiced
her own They were Rules she writ (whilst a Virgin) for her own practice, if
ever she entered into a married state.
Rules; and having told you what her Rules were, I next (from my own
Experience) compared a single Life and a married together; -- defended my
Loving again in a months time; and having ended with Honey-Moon, it is proper
next, to speak of that state of Life where they neither marry, nor are given in
Marriage. And this leads me to enquire, Whether we shall Know our Wives,
Parents, Children, and Friends, in Heaven, if ever we get thither?

I told you in my Last, the Answering of this should be the Subject of this
Letter, and that I Would send it by this Post. I have now kept my word, and
heartily wish (you having so much desired it) the Mountain may not produce a
M^use. However, I have done my best. But before I discourse of Knowing our
Friends in Heaven, I must first tell you, That good Eliza (that dearest part of
my self) went thither in May last. Her Death has made me so very melancholy,
that I had pined away in a few days, had not the hopes of finding her again in
Heaven, given me some Relief. Oh! the Sighs, the Wishes, the Languishments,
with a long, etc. Chargeable on that Account; really, Sir, there are yet Tears
in my Eyes left undried for the Dear Eliza (the best of Wives and best of
Friends): I yet feel the Torments to which a Heart is exposed, that loses what
it Loves, none love as I have l^ved; My sentiments have a delicacy, unknown to
my others but my self, and my Heart Loved Eliza more in one Hour then others do
in all their Lives, Witness the Tears shed on her Grave, to what excess I love
her! I want to know what sullen ^^^r ^ul'd at my Birth, that Phil. should Live
when Eliza i^ Dead; or at least Dead to me; or if there be a Beam of Comfort,
it is n't to shine till the Resurrection, or till I meet her in Heaven. Thus the
kind Turtle, parted from his Mate, passes by a Thousand Objects, and only
mourns at all he sees; but met, their Life and Love is through each others Bill
conveyed. But Mum for that; for Valeria and I have now compounded with one
another, and, Resolved, for better for worse, have been at, I Ned take thee
Hannah; But on what Conditions, with the Terms of our Honey Moon, you shall
know hereafter. It Is enough if I say at present, That she fully understands and
practices all the Duties of a Tender Wife, so that she seems to be Eliza still,
in a New Edition, more Correct and Enlarged, or rather, my First Wife in a New
Frame; for I have only changed the Person, but not the Virtues.

But I leave Valeria here (for the Dearest Friends must part) to answer this
Curious Question, Whether we shall know our Friends in Heaven?

I send you my Sentiments in this matter, in hopes you will Rectify my Judgment
where you find it Err, and supply my Defects with better thoughts of your own
(that so between us this Curious Subject may be fully handled); which I the
rather mention, for that te'nt my way to say much to the purpose on common
Suhjects, much less can you expect it in such a Theme as this, where, had I an
Angel's Tongue, I should be at a Loss. The way to Heaven is Long and Difficult;
and therefore no wonder if now and then I mistake a Turning; but when I do, I
hope (Ignotus) you will set me again in the right path. If not, Some Courteous
Ghost tell this great Secrecy,
What it is you are, and we must be. Norris.


For I have small Acquaintance with the Future State, and never met with any
one of those Millions of Souls that have past into the other World, to learn
any News concerning the Knowledge they have of each other: And therefore 'twill
be excusable if now and then I advance what I cannot prove, and follow their
Examples, who fill their Maps with Fancies of their own Brains. And I am the
more willing to treat concerning the Nature, and Condition of separate Souls,
because it agrees with a Humor of Curiosity I have a long time been
distempered with. I have often thought, what would I give for the least glimpse
of that Invisible World, which the first step I take out of this body, will
present me with, and have tried by an Eye of Faith to look within the Veil; but
still find my Intellect too light a Plummet, and the whole Thread of Life, tho
spun out in finest Speculations, still proves too short to reach the endless
bottom. But though I have never yet seen the Innumerable company of Angels,
converst with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, or the Spirits of Just Men made
perfect, which daily minister about the Throne, that I might know the mutual
Love and Entertainment of the blessed, the Spirituality of their Glorified
Bodies, how they communicate their Thoughts to each other, or the Knowledge
they have of their Old Acquaintance; Yet have I here with my Pen drawn a Scheme
of my thoughts of our Invisible Friends, on purpose to see whither it would
lead me, and whither I could follow it. It was but last Night, I was
complaining to a Water Drinker Mr. Sh -- ley.
(for I Am now at Tunbridge swilling on Nature's bounty to Crazy Mortals) of my
Great Curiosity; especially in things relating to the other World, and in my
Conversation, by way of Prolepsis, I have frequently been making Remarks that
way. But I tell you beforehand, in treating of this Subject, I shall leap over
all Subdivisions, and inferior Sects of Christians, and profess only to the
World, that the Divine Mercy and Favor is not limited to a particular Canton
or Party. I am not only a Lover of good Men of all Persuasions, but a mere
Enemy to those Names which distinguish one Party from another in the Church.
Good men often contend about words, when they heartily think the same thing,
and therefore I as little doubt to find Dr. Sherlock in Heaven, as Mr. Aisop;
And do as little question their being of one mind in Heaven (after all their
Jangling) as that they will presently know and rejoice to see one another, when
they come there. In Heaven (says a late Mr. Dorrington in his Discourse called.
The separate State of Good Souls.
Writer) shall we meet many Dear Relations and Intimate Friends, and perhaps
some Enemies who shall then to our Great Joy and Satisfaction be perfectly
reconciled to us, which was that we most passionately desired before, but it
may be, could not find means to accomplish it. However, be it as it will, I
Live and Move by the Divine Providence, and am willing to assert it in spite
of all those Narrow Souls, that dare trust God no further then they can see
him, or think none can be saved, but those that are distinguished with their
own Superscription. But (I should remember) I Am writing to one of an Extensive
Charity, and need not enlarge here; So I come now to prove, That if Infinite
mercy bring us to Heaven, we shall know one another there.

There are two things that comfort us under the Death of Friends.

The one is, the hopes they are gone to Heaven.

And the other is, That if Infinite Mercy bring us thither, we shall one day
see 'em again, and have those very Friendships which they had Con^racted here
below, Transplanted to the Mansions above.

But what the knowledge is of our Souls, separated and glorified, we shall then
know when ours come to be such: In the mean time, we can much less know their
thoughts, then they can know ours: Sure we are, they do not know in such manner
as they did, when they were in our Bosoms; by the help of Senses and Phantasms,
by the discurssive inferences of Ratiocination.

But though we cannot see what manner of Metaphysical Matters our Souls are,
yet we know they really exist; and act our Bodies, although they are not
Subject to Sense, yet this does not hinder but that a Spiritual substance may
be separated from our Body, and may be again Clothed with a Body, or Vehicle
that may be Airy, Fiery, or Cloudy, and be visible to our Senses, although the
existence or essence of the Spirit, we cannot see but it is outward Clothing,
and that such appearances have been in all Ages, the Learned as well as the
unlearned affirm from real matters of Fact.

But now, whether the Soul, in a state of separation, acts independently of
Matter, purely by the strength of her own Powers, or whether in order to the
better knowing her self and other beings, the makes use of a Body of Air shaped
out into such Limbs and Senses, as she has occasional Employment for; Whether
or no the want of her old Companion is supplied this way, is uncertain. But
whatever abatements of happiness the pious Soul, may suffer for want of a
suitable body between the time of Death and the General Judgment, then we are
sure this inconvenience will be removed, and it will be repossessed of its
Ancient Seat, out of which Violence or Nature had forced it. But we cannot know
these things, Till we are stripped into Naked Spirits, and set a shore on the
other invisible World. Yet this we know at present, that when our Souls are
elevated to a condition suitable to the Blessed Angels, so they know like them;
Though not by the means of a Natural Knowledge* as they, yet by that
Supernatural Light of Intimation, which they receive by their glorified Estate:
Whether by virtue of this Divine Illumination, They know the particular
occurrences which we meet with here below, he were bold thas would determine.
(Or if they do I Am sure Eliza but her Love will tell you the rest) only this we
may confidently affirm, that they do clearly know all those things which do any
way appertain to their Estate of Blessedness. Amongst which, Whether the
Knowledge of each other in that Region of Happiness may justly be ranked, is
not unworthy of our disquisition. Doubtless, as in God there is all perfection
eminently, and transcendantly, so in the sight and fruition of God there cannot
be but full and absolute felicity; yet this is so far from excluding the
knowledge of those things which Derive their Goodness and Excellency from him,
as that it compriseth, and supposes it. As then, we shall perfectly love God,
and his Saints in him; so shall we know both: And though it be a sufficient
motive of our Love in Heaven, That we know them to be Saints; yet it seems to
be no small addition to our happiness, to know that those Saints were once
ours: And if it be a just Joy to a Parent here on Earth to see his Child
gracious, how much more accession shall it be to his Joy above, to see the
Fruits of his Loins Glorious, when both his Love is more pure, and their
improvement absolute? Can we Bishop Hall.
make any doubt that the Blessed Angels know each other? How Senseless were it
to grant that no knowledge is hid from them, but of themselves? Or can we
imagine that those Angelical Spirits do not take special notice of those Souls
which they have guarded here, and conducted to their glory? If they do so, and
if the knowledge of our beatified Souls shall be like to theirs, why should we
abridge our selves more then them, of the comfort of our interknowing? Surely
our dissolution shall abate nothing of our Natural Faculties; Our glory shall
advance them; so as what we once kne^ we shall know better: And if our souls
can then perfectly know themselves, why should they be denied the knowledge of
others?

Not but (I own) 'twill make me shrink to go from them I know to Persons I
never saw, Mr. Norris.
To wing away to an unknown somewhere, to be I know not what, and live I know
not how; to leave Dear Ignotus, the Dearer Cloris, and yet Dearer Sapho,
Friends with whom I have familiarly Conversed and Corresponded, to go into a
World of Spirits, where I may not meet one I know; How strangely shall we look
on one another? What little content do I take in any Company on Earth where I
meet with shiness! but sure I am, there will be nothing of this in Heaven.

That Excellent Society Mr. Dorrington in his Discourse of separate Souls.
( says Mr. Dorrington) which the Saint shall enjoy in Heaven in his Fellow
Creature shall add much to his Happiness. He shall not spend his long abode
there in an uncomfortable Solitude; Even in this Paradise, it would not be good
for Man to be alone; He shall therefore enjoy much, and that very Excellent
Society -- He then meets, and shall enjoy for ever, with all those Excellent
Persons, those brave Examples of Piety and Virtue, whom he has seen, or heard,
or read of in this World, with the Goodly Fellowship of the Prophets and
Apostles, and the Noble Army of Martyrs, Souls joined below in Virtuous Love,
and sad at parting here, shall meet again there, and Love again, and dwell
together for ever -- He shall dwell with the Souls of all Good Men, that have
ever lived in this World; and the Company there is a Rev. 9.7.
great multitude, which no man can Number, of all Nations, Kindred, People and
Languages. So that you see it is this Author's Opinion, That the Saints above
hold a Kind, Friendly and Familiar Correspondence; and I hope, I shall be able
to prove that the Saints in Heaven, do not only see and know one another, but
also what passes in Hell amongst the damned, as the Patriarch Abraham, did see
Dives in his Torments ( Luke 16.25.) But you will say, all this is but
supposition, and that I don't prove whether Ignotus and Phill. (who will not
believe Death can part 'em) shall as distinctly know each other in Heaven (By
Face, Stature -- Voice the Relation they stood in to each other on Earth, and
by the difference of Sex) as they did when they first met in London, to deceive
the tedious hours with Discourses of Ph -- la, who by the by, I wish will be
one we shall know in Heaven for a Thousand Reasons, and this among others, as
she was- The blessed occasion of our first Acquaintance, neither can I be just to
her Friendship should I wish my self in Heaven without her. 'Twas said, See
Herberts Life, p. 25.
Mrs. Jane became so much a Platonic as to Fall in Love with Herbert unseen --
The case was the same with me, for I loved Cloris before I saw her, neither did
I for many Years expect that Happiness, till I came to Heaven, where I shall
see her again, for in that Heavenly Court she will be still -- A SINGER -- Of
Praises and Hallelujahs to God Almighty, and to the Lamb that sits on the
Throne for ever and ever; When I was first blessed with a Glimpse of her, and
'twas but a Glimpse I had (Angels Visits are short and sweet) so chaste was my
Errand to her, that I desired to dye with Cloris in my Arms. And if ever
Friendship showed a Miracle, my Heart shall bear her Picture to the other
World, tho I never see her again in this: But tho I Love Cloris with a Flame as
Pure as Light, as kind as Love, and as strong as Death, yet I Am now a pure
Platonic again, neither will my Flesh (as Eliza In a Letter she sent her
whilst I was at Tunbridge.
told her) Ever creep in for a share, not but she might with a smile lead me
like a Dog in a string, which way she pleased, and with a Word, make me leap
over Steeples to serve her, yet you know (Ignotus,) that the least indifference
cures Love-Melancholy in a few Minutes, I do assure you, Valeria's Great
Alembic has refined all my Love, and it is now become as spiritual as Cloris.
But this has cost me many a Sigh, many a Tear. But being at Tunbridge, I can
tell my Grief to the Rocks and Groves; for they will Listen, though she will not,
and echo back her endearing Name as often as I sigh it out.

But these melancholy Groves have kept me longer than I did expect; but you
will not be angry, (Ignotus,) since they are grown so civil as to listen to an
honest meaning, and do Reply (in their way of speaking) to every word I utter;
but there be no Rocks in the New Burying place, So I expect no Echo thence;
no, though 'twere to a dying Gasp, or a Letter writ with primitive Ink. But in
the other World, when Argus and his Friend get to Heaven (for I hope to meet,
and know 'em there) they will License our Thoughts, our Words, our very Looks! and
know us better than to stop, or blame our Correspondence, which was begun in
time, and discontinued a while, that the Sadness of parting here, might be
abundantly recompensed by the Joy of meeting hereafter. And this, among other
things, was that with which Augustine comforted the Lady Aug. Ep. 6.
Italica, after the Death of her dear Husband, telling her, That she should
know him in the World to come, among the glorified Saints. The Story is thus
See Bolton's Four Last Things.
: Italica craved very importunately both by word and writing, some Consolations
from him, to support her under that incomparable Cross of her Husband's Loss,
and Widow-hood; and as it may seem, she desired to know whethet she should know
him in the second Life. For the first, he hits upon the sweetest, and most
sovereign Comfort which could possibly be imagined. You can by no means says
he) think your self desolate, who enjoy the Presence and Possession of Jesus
Christ, in the inmost Closet of your Heart by Faith. About the other, he
answers P^^emptorily, This thy Husband, by whose decease thou art called a
Widow, shall be most known unto thee. And tells her further, that there shall
be no stranger in Heaven, etc.

And Bullinger on his Deathbed said to his Friends and Relations then standing
by him, I exceedingly rejoice that I am leaving this miserable and corrupt Age
to go to my Savior Christ. Socrates (said he) was glad when his Death
approached, because he thought he should go to Hesiod, Homer and other Learned
Men deceased, and whom he expected to meet in the other World; then how much
more do I joy who am sure that I shall see my Savior Christ, the Saints,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and all Holy Men which have lived from the
beginning of the World; These I say, I am sure to see and to partake with them
in Joys; why then should I not be willing to dye to enjoy their perpetual
Society in Glory, and having said thus, he patiently resigned up his Spirit
into the hands of his Redeemer. The knowing our Friends in Heaven has also been
the support of the Christians of this Age. See the Account of her Life
Published by her Husband.
Mrs. Lucy Perrot on her Deathbed said thus to her Husband, God has been a
long while weaning thee from me: we must part, but we shall after a while meet
again. She farther adds, I am going home to my Fathers House, where are my dear
Children, will they not follow after me to Heaven; Being asked again, whether
she was not afraid to dye, she replied, I am not, I do not look upon Death
singly but at it brings me to Rest, I must go through the dark Entry before I
can get to my first Husband.

Bishop Atherton died saying to his Friends, I dread not Death, God send us an
happy meeting in Heaven, I am but going before you. And in his Letter to his
Wife, he has these words, My dear Wife, tho we part in this World, yet I hope
we shall enjoy a more happy meeting in Heaven.

Mr. William Hewling said to his Sister before his Death, When I went to
Holland you knew not what snares, sins and miserys I might fall into, or
whether ever we should meet again. But now, ('it was spoke just before his
Execution) you know whither I am going and that we shall certainly have a most
Joyful meeting; And one taking leave of him, he said, Farewell till we meet in
Heaven. To another that was by him to the last, he said, Pray Remember my Dear
Love to my Brother and Sister, and tell them, I desire they would comfort
themselves that I am gone to Christ, and we shall quickly meet in the Glorious
Mount Sion above. And Mr. Benjamin Hewling in his last Letter to his Mother,
has this Expression, The Lord carry you through this vale of Tears with a
resigning submissive Spirit, and at last bring you to Himself in Glory, where I
question not but you will meet your dying Son, Ben. Hewling.

Mr. William Jenkins in his Letter to his Mother has this Expression, Honored
Mother, I take leave of you (also) hoping that I shall again meet with you in
that place of happiness where all Tears shall be wiped away from our Eyes, and
we shall Sorrow no more. And in his Letter to his Sister Scot, he says,
Farewell till we shall meet again in Glory, and never be separated more.

Mr. Eliot of New England dyed asserting he should know his Friends in Heaven,
which made him often say, that the old Saints of his Acquaintance especially
those two dearest Neighbors of his, Cotton of Boston and Mather of Dorchester,
who were got safe to Heaven before him, would suspect him to be gone the wrong
way because he staid to long behind them, but they are now together, (adds the
Author of his Life) with the Blessed Jesus, beholding of his Glory, and
Celebrating the High Praises of him that has called them into His mavelous
Light; whether Heaven was any more Heaven to him (continues this Author)
because of his finding there so many Saints with whom he once had his Celestial
Intimacies, yea and so many Saints which had been the Seals of his own Ministry
in this lower World, I cannot say, but in that Heaven I now leave him, but not
without Grynaeus Pathetical Exclamations, Blessed will be the day, oh. Blessed
the day of our arrival to the Glorious Assembly of Spirits, which this great
Saint is now rejoicing with. -- Some months before Mr. Eliot died, he would
often tell us that he was shortly going to Heaven, and that he would carry a
deal of good news thither with him: He said he would carry Tidings to the Old
Founders of New England, which were now in Glory, that Church-work was yet
carried on among us; that the number of our Churches were continually
increasing, and that the Churches were still kept as big as they were, by the
daily Additions of those that shall be saved, and thus died, The first Preacher
of the Gospel to the Indians in America in a firm belief that he should meet
and know his Friend^, in Heaven.

I shall next add the words of Bp. See Ar. Bp. Tillotson's Ser. on Phil. 3. v.
20.
Tillotson, who tells us when we come to Heaven we shall enter into the Society
of the Blessed Angels and of the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect, we shall
then meet with all those Excellent Persons, those brave Minds, those Innocent
and Charitable Souls, whom we have seen and heard and Read of in this World.
There we shall meet with many of our dear Relations and intimate Friends, and
perhaps with many of our Enemies to whom we shall then be perfectly reconciled,
for Heaven is a State of perfect Love and Friendship, there will be nothing but
kindness and good nature there, and all the prudent Arts of Endearment, and
wise ways of rendering Conve^sation mutually pleasant to one another. M^ dear
Ignotus, I need not add a greater Authority then the Assertion of this Great
and Learned Prelate, to prove we shall know one another in Heaven.

But to come yet nearer home, I might have added to my one self, (For I
instance in one that I Love as well) 'Twas the Opinion of this Friend (I mean
of my dear departed) That she should know me again in Heaven, the thoughts
whereof gave her comfort on her Deathbed; for when her approaching end gave me
a deeper Sorrow than before, she endeavored to solace me, by saying, It Is
true, my dear, Tho I desire to live for thy sake, and nothing else, tho I have
all the World in having thee, and had rather die than thou should be sick,
yet don't be so concerned about parting, for I hope we shall both meet, where
we shall never part. That she died in this Belief, yet furthet appears by the
Letter she writ about her Funeral, which concludes with saying, My Dear, as to
what you mention about our Funerals, I like it well, and am yet further pleased
with our Ground Bedfellows, I doubt not; but dear, O -- thee and I shall make
as wholesome a Morsel for the Worms as any; and as we sleep together in the
same Grave, so I hope we shall be happy hereafter in the Enjoyment of the
Beatifick Vision, and in the Knowledge of one another; for (adds she) I agree
with you that we shall know our Friends in Heaven. Wise and Learned Men of all
Ages; and several Scriptures plainly show it, tho I verily believe, was there
none but God and one Saint in Heaven, that Saint would be perfectly happy, so
as to desire no more, but whilst on Earth, we may lawfully please our selves
with Hopes of meeting hereafter, and lying in the same Grave, where we shall be
happy hereafter, if a Senseless Happiness can be called so.

You mention Writing your Thoughts of the Nature of the Soul, and that other
World we are hastening too; but seeing you did not send them, I shall wait with
Patience till those things are no longer the Object of our Faith, but Vision.

I shall only add my hearty Prayer, that God would bless you both in Soul and
Body; and that when you die, you may be conveyed by the Angels into Abraham's
Bosom, where, I hope, you will find your constant -- Eliza.

And as Eliza (that part of my self now in Heaven) believed she should know me
^^ere, so I also find my Reverend Father of this Opinion, as appears by the
following Letter, This Letter was sent me during my Apprentiship in the City of
London.
Viz.

My Dear Child.
If you endeavor to please God and your Master, I do not doubt but I shall
meet thy Face in Heaven, hereafter, tho through my Corporal Indisposition I fear I
shall see thy Face no more on Earth, and in that New-Jerusalem (if thou die
in Christ) I shall see thee not disfigured with Pockholes, but dignified with
Celestial Glory, and there thou will see thine own Mothers Face, who killed her
self with Excess of Love to thee, and who died praying so earnestly for thy
Everlasting Salvation.

It Is clear from hence that my Father thought he should know my Face in Heaven,
and that I shou d see my Mother there, so as to know her again.

My dear Mother was also of this Opinion, as appears by the Letter to her
Brother Jeremiah, it concluding thus: Pray Brother earnestly contend for the
Faith, once delivered to the Saints, that you may follow the Lord fully in your
Generation; and, that you and I, with all our Relations, may one day sit down
in Heavenly Places together, with Jesus Christ.

And Cloris too (for I cannot speak of Heaven without her) is of this Opinion,
where she says, (speaking of Mr. --) That Saints and Angels listen to his Song,
and knew him so very well, that not an Angel Critic durst correct his Verse --
Dear Charmer, shall we see thee too in Heaven!

Phil. Then Cloris know in Heaven I Will be
Your Friend and Guardian-Angel too;
And tho with more refined Society,
I Will leave Elysium to converse with you.

Cloris. But grant Sir Phil. you still are kind,
You cannot long continue so;
When I like you, become all Thought and Mind,
By what Mark then shall we each other know.

Phil. With Care on your last Hour I wi l attend,
And least like Souls should me deceive;
I closely will embrace my newborn Friend,
And never after my dear Pithia leave.

You see (Ignotus) I am all Rapture when I talk of Cloris, but it is Excusable
sure! if not,

Phil Forgive, Bright Maid, this little Ecstasy;
Ah! who can be composed that thinks of thee?
Who can Pindarick Flights refuse,
Whilst thou do lash the Fiery-foaming Muse.
I Will curb her in, and try if I can be
As Grave, as Sober, and as Wise as thee.

Nor think, dear Friend, I ramble now from you, for I never talk to the
Purpose; but when I bring in Cloris -- our Friendship (both here, and
hereafter) would be imperfect without her. -- It should sweeten the Thoughts of
Heaven to us both, to think we shall one day see her there. Which, if we do,
with what Ardours shall we then caress one another? With what Transports of
Divine Affection (as one expresses it) shall we mutually embrace, and vent
those Innocent Flames, which had so long lain smothering in the Grave? How
Passionately, Rhetorical, and Elegant, will our Expressions be, when our Tender
Sentiments, which (an aged Father and) Death had frozen up, when he congealed
our Blood, shall now be thawed again in the warm Airs of Paradise -- like Men
that have escaped a common Shipwreck, and swim safe to the Shore, shall we
there Congratulate each other with Joy and Wonder?

I need not tell you (says the Ingenious Boil) Tha we shall be more justly
Transported at this Meeting than was good old Jacob at that of his Son Joseph,
whom having long mourned for dead and lost, he found not only Alive, but a
great Favorite, ready to welcome him to an unknown Court For, whereas the
Patriarch said to his Son, Now let me dye, since I have seen thy Face; the
seeing of our Friends in Heaven will assure us, that we shall for ever Live
with them there.

Dear Ignotus, wonder not at this Rapture, for if Eliza whilst on Earth, had
Christian love enough to Embrace the whole World, in Heaven, she has not left
her Nature, but only its imperfections, she has not changed her affections, but
only hightened and improved them, and therefore judge how happy I shall be when
I see her again, and how much more happy in her Excellent friendship; for my
part I can imagine nothing but an Extacy when we shall Live in such great
Hearts which are nothing else but LOVE and JOY; Nay, this seems to be the sum
of what we can say of the happiness of that State, that it consists in a
rapturous Love of God and one another. Where this is found, that Place is
Heaven. See Mr. Foes Car. of Dr. Annesly.
Could I Reheatse to your Conception what is Heaven above, -- twould be
Concisely thus, all Heaven is Love. Sure I am we shall behold no narrow
Conclusive Soul in Heaven habitually prefering their private before a public
good: and on this Score (had I no better Grounds) I should hope to meet Eliza
in Heaven, as she preferred that, and the pleasing her Husband to all the Baggs
in the World. Then surely if I meet her again my first Address to Eliza will be
'a Dialect of Interjectons and short Periods, the most Pathetick Language of
surprise and high wrought Joy, and all our after Converse (even to Eternity)
will be Couched, in the highest Strains of Heavenly Oratory, methinks (at this
vast Distance) I Fancy her running to me and saying, Ah! Philaret this place
where I have now met thee (never to part more) shows how Loyal I was to thee,
could I dye, undutifull and meet thee here; and though thou were too sincere thy
self to distrust my Love, yet in a State of Mortality I might have deceived
thee, but by meeting here, thou find my Love was as true as thine; she is no
sooner gone to Congratulate other Spirits, but methinks I see Argus (having
repented the injuries he did me) Fido, H -- n, Ignotus and a Troop of Friends,
all coming to give me a particular welcome. Dear Ignotus, wonder not at this
Conjecture, for the Souls of those that have left their Bodies, are as much
alive in the other World, as we are in this, See his Ser. before the Qu.
and do there, as (Dr. Beveridge tells us) as Familiarly Converse together as
we do here with one another.


It much Sweetneth the thoughts of Heaven to me, says Mr. Baxter, To Remember
that there are a multitude of my Friends gone thither; to think such a Friend
that died at such a time, and such a one at another time (O! what a number of
them could I name) and that all these I shall meet again.

It Is true, (adds he) it is a question with some whether we shall know each
other in Heaven or no? but it is none with me; for surely there shall no
knowledge cease which now we have, but only that which implies our
imperfection, and what imperfection can this imply? Nor is it only my old
Friends, [such as Essex, Russel, Sydney, etc.] that I shall know in Heaven, but
all the Saints of all ages, whose Faces in the Flesh I never saw. See Dr.
Annesley's Ser. of Commun. with God.
We also find Dr. Annesley of this Opinon, for in his Sermons of Communion with
God, he there tells us, Those whom we have Loved and Prized, with whom we have
wept and prayed, whose Company on Earth has been refreshing; how welcome will
a never parting meeting be in Heaven, ay, those whom we have admired tho we
never saw them, we shall then see and enjoy for ever. Mat. 8.11. they shall
come from the East and West, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in
the Kingd^m of Heaven; Those that know what it is to Converse with Saints on
Earth may be able to give a Guess what it will be in Heaven. How sweet will it
be to discourse with Moses, when your Face shall shine as well as his; to
converse with Solomon, when your Wisdom shall exceed whatever is recorded of
his, to join in the Consort of Praises with the sweet Singer of Israel, when
you shall be Persons after God's own Heart, without a But in your Commendation.
-- We shall here converse with Saints of the highest Form, with Enoch, that
walked with God, with Elijah, that was taken up in the Fiery Chariot, and with
Paul, that was Christ's Principal Secretary on Earth (as to the Riches of Free
Grace); we shall freely converse with all these, and with that beloved Disciple
that could whisper to Christ what others durst not mention.

Our Savior tells the Jews, Luke 13.28. that they should see Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God; and therefore we shall
know them: And what is there in reason that should hinder it? why may nor
Abraham and Isaac (once so nearly related) be again acquainted, and with Joy
repeat the History of the intended Sacrifice? Why may not Moses and Aaron meet
and discourse their Old Adventures? Why may not the blessed Apostles and holy
Martyrs be known to one another, and entertain themselves with gladsome
Relations of what they did, and what they suffered together.

Thus the Saints in Heaven, as they receive Happiness from the sight of God, so
they communicate the purest Pleasure to one another. An unfeigned ardent
Affection unites that pure Society. Our Love is now kindled, either from a
Relation in Nature, or a civil Account, or some visible Excellencies that
render a Person worthy of our Choice and Friendship; but in Heaven the Reasons
are greater, and the degrees of Love incomparably more fervent. In that blessed
Society (Says a See Dr. Bates's Four Last Things.
Learned Author) there is a constant Receiving and Returning of Love and Joy.
And that double Exercise of the Saints, in the perfect Circle of Love, is like
the pleasant Labor of the Bees, who all the day are flying to the Gardens, and
returning to their Hives, and all their Art is in extracting the purest Spirits
from fragrant Flowers, and making sweet Honey. O how do they rejoice and
triumph, in the Happiness of one another? With what an unimaginable Tenderness
do they embrace? What Reciprocations of Endearments are be^ween them? O their
Ravishing Conversation, and sweet Intercourse! for their Presence together in
Heaven is not a silent Show. In the Transfiguration. Moses and Elias talked
with Christ: We may understand a little of it, by the sensible Complasence that
is among sincere Friends here. In pure Amity there is a threefold Union: a
Union of Resemblance that is the Principle of it; Likeness causes Love: a Union
of Affection, that is its Essence; it is said of Jonathan, that incomparable
Friend. His Soul was knit with the Soul of David, and he loved him as his own
Soul: the Union of Conversation that is requisite to the Satisfaction of Love.
What an Entertainment of Love and Joy is there in the Presence and Discourses
of dear Friends! their mutual Aspects, like a Chain, composed of Spirits
luminous and active, draw and fasten their Souls to one another: The Felicity
of Love consists in their Conversation. Now in Heaven whatever is pleasant in
Friendship, is in Perfection; and whatever is distastful by Men's Folly and
Weakness, is abolished. With what excellent Discourses do they entertain one
another?

But these particular Friendships in Heaven (says an Ingenious Writer) they do
Dr. Patrick's Parable of the Pilgrim.
not at all spoil the Universal Kindness of the place, others will not be loved
the worse for them, but rather loved better, because they will teach those
united Hearts the greatest Love. They may be esteemed also one of the Beauteous
Spectacles of the place, and be reckoned among the grateful Varieties, which
will entertain us, when after the Pleasures of a more general and large
Conversation, every one may retire to the Company of those he loves most; and
if a particular Friendship in Heaven will give such unspeakable Joys: What a
Happiness will it be to see and embrace the Blissful Society of all the Saints
and Angels at once about the Throne, to see all the Martyrs with their Glorious
Scars of Honor; nay, Angels, Cherubims, Seraphims, and all that blessed Quire
of Spirits, who have done us while we were in Dangers here, many an invisible
Courtesy, which they could never thank them for, they being Ministering
Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation. --
If a Diagoras, when he saw his three Sons crowned in one day at the Olympic
Games, as Victors, died away while he was embracing them for Joy; and good old
Simeon when he saw Christ, but in a Body subject to the Infirmities of our
Natures, and had him in his Arms, cried out, Now, Lord, let thou thy
Servant depart in Peace, for my Eyes have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2.29. What
unspeakable Joy will it be to see all our Christian Friends, to whom we have
been instrumental in their new Birth and Regeneration, all crowned in one day
with an Everlasting Diadem of Bliss, which never shall decay: there shall be no
Hypocrite then for us to loose our Love upon, which is now the great Cooler of
our Friendship, and keeps our Affections in a greater Reserve -- When the
Glorious Angels begin their Hallelujahs, the Saints shall also join in one
common Quire, They shall be joyful in Glory, and sing aloud upon their
Everlasting Beds of Rest, Psalm. 149.5. Oh how the Arches of Heaven will echo
when the High Praises of God shall be in the Mouths of such a Congregation.

With what Life and Alacrity will the Saints in their blessed Communion
celebrate the Object of their See D. Bates's Four Last Things.
Love and Praises? The Seraphims about the Throne cried to one another, to
express their Zeal and Joy, in celebrating his Eternal Purity and Power, and
the Glory of his Goodness. O the unspeakable Pleasure of this Concert! when
every Soul is harmonious, and contributes his part to the full Music of
Heaven. O could we hear but some Echo of those Songs, wherewith the Heaven of
Heavens resounds, some remains of those Voices, wherewith the Saints above
triumph in the Praises of God, etc.

For Angels and Saints to make one Consort of Praise to God, what Music will
that be? So that the thoughts of leaving my dear Priends and Acquaintance shall
never sadden me more, since they shall all follow me e're long, and be ever
with the Lord, to enjoy each other in the Lord in a more Triumphant way than
now we can; and for these few Friends left behind for the present I shall enjoy
an innumerable Company of Blessed Angels, and the Spirits of just Men made
perfect, and all such Godly Friends as died in the Lord, (particularly my dear
Eliza) whose Departure for the present seemed to rend a piece of my Soul with
her. These I shall all meet again, and never part more.

How often have I measured a long and foul Journey to see some Good Friend, and
digested the Tediousness of the Way, with the Expectation of a kind
Entertainment, and the thought of that Complacency, which I should take in so
dear Presence? And yet perhaps when I have arrived, I have found the House
disordered, one Sick, another disquieted, my self indisposed; then with what
cheerful Resolution should I undertake my last Voyage, where I shall meet with
my best Friends, and find them perfectly happy, and my self with them.

And therefore Phil. will no longer think himself a Stranger to all the Spirits
of the Just now in Heaven, seeing Eliza and half my Kindred are now there, and
many others that I Have sometimes formerly had sweet Fellowship with in the
Ordinances of the Gospel: If I shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in
the Kingdom; surely I shall know them to be such.

Besides, their Natures in Heaven are all perfectly Gracious and Holy, and I
shall be like them, and we shall know each other to be so; -- And what shiness
can there possible be among such who are satisfied in each others sincere Love
and Affection? -- Thou may (Ignotus) be acquainted with a thousand Saints
and Angels in an Hours time, as if thou had known 'em a Thousand Years, we
shall see them without any thing of Fear or Dread, and be acquainted from
themselves with their Offices on Earth.

There is no See Dr. Patricks Parable of the Pilgrim.
Strangeness at all among them, or the Saints; you can meet with no Body there,
but they will entertain you with as much Kindness and Sincerity, as if they had
known you many Years. When many come together in one place, there is no danger
of their Jarring, by reason of their different Sentiments; there they entwine
in the dearest Embraces, and study to increase, not to diminish their mutual
Happiness. If this be so, poor Phil, be not amazed at the great Change of
Company at Death; for as Dr. Preston said, We shall change our Place, but not
our Company.

It is a pleasant See Mr. Showers Discourse of Mourning for the Deed.
Thought, (and proper to support under the Death of those we have honored, and
loved, and profited by on Earth) to think that hereafter we shall meet, and
know several Ministers of Christ, whose Preaching and Converse and Writings,
have been useful to us: That we shall then meet and know several of our Holy
Relations and Acquaintance, with whom we were wont to walk together to the
House of God, and meet often at the Table of the Lord; with whom we conferred
about the Mysteries and Promises of the Gospel, and many a time discoursed
together of the Heavenly Inheritance; believingly to foresee, and consider,
that though they are gone before, we shall meet 'em again, at the last great
Supper of the Lamb, in the Celestial Kingdom.

Shall we thus know our Friends in Heaven, then as Mr. Showers further advises
I Will resolve to have Communion with them, though they are Departed; by
Contemplating what they are, and where they are, and what they do, and what
they possess; and by Rejoyceing in their Blessedness, more than I would have
done for their Temporal Advancement in any kind on Earth. I Will desire and
endeavor to be as like 'em as I can, by imitating their Temper and Work above,
in the Love of God, and the delightful thankful Praises of the Redeemer. When I
look up to Heaven, I Will think they are there, when I think of Christ in Heaven,
I Will remember they are part of his Family Above. When I think with hope of
entering into Heaven my self, I Will think with Joy of meeting Eliza and the rest
of my Friends there. Oh welcome, welcome, happy meeting with Christ, and them;
Never more to Part, never more to Mourn, never more to Sin. O happy Change! O
Blessed Society! Fit me Lord! for such a Day, and Come, Lord Jesus! Come
quickly. Amen.

Thus you see this persuasion of a Restoration to a mutual knowledge of each
other, contains great Advantages and Motives to a Godly Life; for the fear of
being Eternally divided from those I sincerely Love on Earth, will draw me to
an imitation of their Sanctity, if herein they be Exemplary, or give me the
Courage to lead them into the way; if their Course be irregular and exorbitant
For those who unfeignedly desire to meet at the Journeys end, will study to
preserve each other in the Way: And they who would wear the same Crown of
rejoicing in the Presence of Christ, will assist each other here, that they
perish not in the agony and conflict.

The Egyptians Embalmed the Carcasses of the Dead, to preserve them, if it were
possible, through all the parts of Time; being guided by an opinion, that so
long as the Body continued undissolved, the Soul would not forsake the Earth,
but continue hovering about the place where the Bodies lay: In like manner the
Souls of men, which by many kinds of Association may be united into one mass
and heap, and as it were become parts of one another, will continue the more
vigilant and active for each others everlasting Welfare, so long as they are
persuaded against an eternal divorce and dissolution, and do contrarily believe
they shall be rewarded by a sense of each others happiness; and that that union
which is among themselves (as of one member to another) shall not be dissolved,
but perfected by that Union which shall unite them to Christ as to their Head,
and through him unto God.

Ignotus, I might stop here, for I hope by this time, I have made it plain,
that the Saints know one another in Heaven; But this being a Curious Point, I
shall yet bring more Authoritys to prove it, and the next I shall Name is the
Pious See His four last things.
Bolton, Who positively asserts, The knowing of our Friends in Heaven; his
Words are these, All comfortable knowledge shall be so far from being abolished
in Heaven, that it will be enlarged, increased, and perfected.

But to know one another is a comforta^l^ knowledge.

Yherefore we shall know one another in Heaven.

Our knowledge shall be perfected: For, We shall know as we are known, 1. Cor.
13.12. Which is set out by Comparison of the less: That our knowledge then,
shall differ from that now, as the knowledge of a Child from that of a Perfect
Man.

In Heaven all the mists of Ignorance and Blindness being perfectly cleared up
and taken away; we shall see one another, together with all the Saints, though
we did not know them before. For, if Adam by virtue of the Divine Image stamped
upon him, knew Eve, though taken out of his Body while he was asleep; Why
should not we, being Transformed according to the same Image, from Glory to
Glory, by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, know the Members of the same Body?

Those full of the Spirit and Wisdom of God, may as easily be supposed to know
one another, as Adam before the Fall, while he retained the Image of God, knew
Eve who, and whence she came.

And as Samuel knew Saul by the Inspiration of God, though he had not seen him
before, Sam. 9.17. And John knew our Lord Christ in the Womb of the Blessed
Virgin. So their Minds were Enlightened by the Rays of the Holy Spirit.

Then Conceive if thou can, Ignotus, how grateful that knowledge will be, by
which we shall know all others as all others shall know us.

The Knowledge which all men in this Life unprofitably desire, shall be such,
to the Good, that they shall be ignorant of nothing they are willing to know.
For the Good shall be filled with the perfect Wisdom of God, and shall see Him
Face to Face, and in seeing of this, shall behold the Nature of all Creatures,
which they shall see in God better then themselves. For then the Just shall
know all things which God has made knowable, as well those which are past as
those which are to come.

When the Elect shall see the ancient Fathers in their Eternal Inheritance,
they shall know them by Sight, whom they knew in their Work; for they shall see
them all by a common Illumination: What is it they can there be ignorant of,
when they know him who knows all things?

The Vision of God is not only promised to the Saints in Heaven, but also of
all things that God has made; as the Sun, Moon, Stars, Earth, Seas, Rivers,
Living Creatures, Trees and Metals. But our Minds know nothing, i. e. No
perfect Substance, nor Essential Differences, nor Properties, nor Virtues. Nor
did ever any Man see his own Soul, but we grope like the Blind, and acquire the
Knowledge we have by Discourse. What shall the Joy then be, when we shall see
by the Light bestowed upon us, the nature of all things barefaced. And how
wonderfully shall we be transported when we shall see innumerable Armies of
Angels in the Differences of their Degrees and Order.

And in Heaven, as we shall know the Saints not in Outward, Worldly Respects,
but as we know them in Christ, by the Illumination of the Spirit, so also we
shall know the Spiritual Substances, Offices, Orders, Excellencies of the
Angels, and the Nature, Immutability, Operations, and Original of our own
Souls, etc. and in a Word, all things knowable.

Here it is the happy Residentiaries Understandings are wide opened to all the
amazing Lights and Discoveries of Truth, to the Mysteries of Creation and
Providence, of Redemption and Sanctification; to the now puzzling Difficulties
of Nature and of Grace; of God's Prescience, and Man's Free Will. Here it is the
Wills also of the Glorified are rendered conformable unto, are swallowed up in,
and made one with God's Holy Will and Pleasure.

' There (says the ingenious Boil) we shall have clearly expounded to us those
Riddles of Providence, which have, but too often, tempted even good Men, to
question God's Conduct in the Government of the World, whilst the Calamities
and Persecutions of Virtue and Innocence, seem approved by him, who accumulates
Prosperities on their Criminal Opposers.

And I must profess (adds he) (as Unfashionable as such a Profession man seem
in a Gentleman, not yet Two and Twenty) that I find the Study of those
excellent Themes, Gods Word, and his Providence, so Di ficult, and yet so
Pleasing and Inviting, that could Heaven afford me no greater Blessing than a
clear Account of the Abstruse Mysteries of Divinity and Providence, I should
value the having my Understanding Gratified and Enriched with Truths of so
Noble and Precious a Nature, enough to court Heaven at the rate of renouncing
for it all those unmanly Sensualities and trifling Vanities; for which,
Inconsiderate Mortals are wont to forfeit the Interest their Savior so dearly
bought them in it.

But this is not all, for here we shall with wonderful Ravishment of Spirit,
and Spiritual Joy, be admitted to the sight of those Sacred Secrets, and
Glorious Mysteries. 1. Of the Holy Trinity, into which some Divines may
audaciously dive, but shall never be able to explicate. 2. Of the Union of
Christ's Humanity to the Divine Nature; and of the Faithful to Christ. 3. Of
the causes of God's Eternal Counsel in Election and Reprobation. 4. Of the
Angels Fall. 5. Of the manner of the Creation of the World, etc. Neither is
this all, for we shall also be beatifically enlightened with a clear and
glorious Sight of GOD Himself, about which Schoolmen fall upon differing
Conceits.

Some say God shall then be known by a Species, representing the Divine
Essence; and by a Light of Glory, elevating the Understanding by a
supernatural Strength.

Others, That the Divine Essence shall be represented to the glorified
Understanding, not by any Species, but immediately by it self; yet they also
require Light of Glory to elevate and fortify the Understanding, by reason of
its Weakness, and Infinite Disproportion and Distance from the Incomprehensible
Deity.

Others hold, That to the clear Vision of God there is not required a Species,
representing the Divine Essence, as the first sort suppose; nor any Created
Light elevating the Understanding, as the second sort think; but only a Change
of the Natural Order of knowing. It is sufficient (say they) that the Divine
Essence be immediately represented to a Created Understanding. Which, tho it
cannot be done according to the Order of Nature, as Experience tells us: (For,
we so conceive things; first, having passed the Sense and Imagination.) Yet it
may be done according to the Order of Divine Grace, etc.

But it is sufficient for a sober Man to know, that in Heaven we shall see Him
Face to Face. -- And if we shall do this, and have our Understandings so
enlarged, as has been mentioned; Why then should we doubt of Knowing one
another; especially since our Savior Christ sets forth the State of the
Blessed, by the knowledge one of another, Matthew. 17.

In Heaven (says Mr. Bolton See his Four Last Things.
) we shall enjoy every good thing, and Comfortable Gift, which may any way
increase and enlarge our Joy and Felicity.

But meeting there, knowing then, and conversing for ever with our old dear
Christian Friends, and all the Glorious Inhabitants of those Sacred Palaces,
will mightily please and refresh us with sweetest Delight.

Therefore we shall know one another.

Society is not comfortable without familiar Acquaintance: Be assured then, it
shall not be wanting in the Height and Perfection of all Glory, Bliss, and Joy.
Nay, our Minds being abundantly and beatifically illuminated with all Wisdom
and Knowledge, we shall be enabled to know, not only those of former Holy
Acquaintance, but also Strangers, and such as we never knew before.

In the Elect (says a Learned Author) there is something admirable; because
they do not only acknowledge those whom they knew in this World; but also, as
men seen and known, they know the Good, whom they never saw.

There (says Anselm) All men shall be known of every several man, and every
several man shall be known of all.

Again, Conceive if thou can, how comfortable that knowledge will be, by
which, as thou of all others, so all others shall be known of thee in that Life.

Yet let me tell you, (adds this Author) That this for the most part is the
Curious Quaerie of carnal people; who feeding falsely their presumptious
Conceits with golden Dreams, and vain hopes of many future imaginary
felicities in the World to come, whereas in the mean time they have no care at
all, use no means, take no pains, to enter into the Holy Path, which leads unto
that blessed Place. It is even, as if one should busy himself much, and boast
what he will do in New England when he comes thither; and yet (poor man) he
has neither Ship, nor Money, nor Means, nor Knowledge of the ^ay, nor
Provision before hand for his comfortable Planting there. Thus far Mr. Bolton.

I may further add, If there be Joy in Heaven, at the Conversion of a Sinner
here; it cannot be thought but they will know that Convert when he comes to
Heaven. -- And it is worth observing that the Martyrs frequently Cited their
Adversaries, Witnesses, etc. to the Just Bar of Heaven, which supposes knowing
them there: Besides there are several Texts (as I shall afterward prove) very
plain for it. Not one of the Primitive Fathers ever doubted it, and it is
impossible it should be otherwise, seeing Heaven is to be a Place of
Perfection, but to be limited in our Knowledge would argue imperfection.

Thus you see it is not only mine, but the concurrent Voice, of my Reverend
Father, my pious Mother, my dear Departed, and several Learned men, That we
shall know one another in Heaven. But lest some should say these Opinions have
no Foundation, but are the idle fancies of a Distempered Brain, I Will further
prove the Point, with Arguments drawn From Reason, and the Authority of Divine
Revelation.

And this task I shall undertake (though with unequal Ability, ^ yet) with
equal Zeal, to what you have shown, in the Progress of our Friend ship; For,
there is nothing in the World I would more willingly prove, nor any Proposition
can be advanced, which I more desire should be true then this, -- That the
Saints in Heaven shall particularly know those again, they have known on Earth,
and that Cloris, Ignotus, and Phil. etc. (Whose Love is a Kin to that pure
Flame that burnt in the Breasts of the first Christians) if they are so happy
as to meet in Heaven, shall not only know, and Lovingly greet one another
there, (as was said before) but Remember likewise, and sweetly reflect on all
those Innocent, and en^^ring Words and Actions, (human Frailties only abated)
that past between 'em in their Earthly State. -- Indeed (as Flavel says) We
shall not know our Friends in any Carnal Relation, -- Death Dissolved that
Bond, -- But we shall know 'em to be such as once were our Dear Relations and
Acquaintance in this World, and be able to single them out from among that
great Multitude; and say,

This was my Father, -- Mother, -- Husband, -- Wife, or Child, -- This Eliza
--, Cloris --, J -- son, C -- t, H -- n, -- This was the Person for whom I
wept, and made supplication, who was an Instrument of good to me, or to whose
Salvation God then made me instrumental.

It Is a great Relief (says a late See Mr. Showers Ser. Preached soon after his
Wifes Funeral.
Writer) to a Christian Mourner, to consider that his deceased Friends are not
lost, but Live, I know (continues this Author) That I shall shortly follow the
desire of mine Fyes; I hope I shall be silent, and adore, and not charge God
foolishly. But methinks I know (with sensible supporting Influence from such a
thought) that she is not dead, but sleeps; she is not lost, but lives. And if
I get to Heaven, shall meet her there in the Presence of the Lord our Redeemer,
and then the Company of our Holy Relatives will be more sweet than ever it was
on Earth.

For tho the Blessed Vision This Eliza also mentions in her Funeral Letter.
of God be our chiefest Hope and Joy, yet the Presence of all the Blessed
Spirits will make a Real, tho Subordinate Part of our Happiness and Delight. I
am so far from Mr. Baxter, of the Knowledge of God, Part 3. Page 331.
doubting whether we shall Know and Love one another in the Heavenly State,
that the Belief and Expectation of it is, or should be, one great Motive why we
love 'em so well now. If we thought we should not Know and Love them after
Death, we ought to Love 'em but as Earthly Transitory Things, and not as Heirs
of Heaven, with such a Love as shall be perfected, and last for ever.

Doubtless the Angels who rejoice at the Conversion of a Particular Sinner, and
the Departed Saints too, do know more, even o^ the State of this World, than we
d^, who are acquainted with so very little a part and spot of it. Which, by the
way, should check an inordinate fond Desire, of living to see Glorious Times on
Earth: For if we get to Heaven, we are like to know much more of those Happy
Times, than if we remained alive in a Corner of the Isles of the Gentiles.

But as to our Mutual Knowledge in the Heavenly State; Shall those whom we
Relieved on Earth, welcome us to Heaven? and are therefore said to receive us
into Everlasting Habitations, Luke 16. And shall not the departed Saints know
one another in Glory? Shall we then know, as we are known? And shall the
Thessalonians be the Joy, and Crown, and Glory, and Rejoicing of the Apostle
Paul, in the day of Christ? And shall he not know them, or they him, who
profited by his Ministry? Did the Rich Man in Hell know Abraham afar off in
Heaven, and can we think a blessed Lazarus shall not? For though that be a
Parable, there is some Truth as the Foundation of it. Shall it aggravate the
Misery of lost Souls, to meet their wicked Companions in the Place of Torment?
as few deny, or doubt; And shall it not rejoice the Blessed, to meet their Holy
Friends, whom they knew in this World? Did Peter, James, and John, know Moses
and Elias in the Transfiguration, whom they never saw before? (and we read not
that Christ told 'em who they were:) And shall those who were acquainted upon
Earth, and helped one another to Heaven, utterly forget and lose the
Remembrance of any such thing.

Now we may allow in that State all that Knowledge which is Cumulative and
Perfective, whatsoever may enlarge and heighten our Felicity and Satisfaction,
as this must needs be allowed to do, as I shall yet further prove from Reason,
Scripture, and the common Voice of the understanding part of Mankind; and in
this Point they are all in perfect Harmony, and unitedly concur together to
give us all desirable Satisfaction in so agreeable a Curiosity. -- For tho the
Immortality of the Soul has been questioned by some Old and New Scepticks, and
in direct Terms oppugned by some ancient Epicureans, and is still so by too
many baptized Infidels, who are not ashamed to oppose their senceless Banters
against it. Notwithstanding Christ by his Triumphant Resurrection, and
Appearance from the Dead has abolished Death, cleared all Doubts concerning the
supposed Dissolution of the Soul. -- I say, tho there have been many that have
denied the -- Souls Immortality, -- yet none have granted it to be Immortal,
but have believed withal that -- Its Memory -- survived with it as one of its
chief Faculties, and so essential to it, that as the Soul is the Life of the
Body, so the Memory was ever justly esteemed to be the Life of the Soul,
without which, it not having any remaining Sense of its past Actions, would be
no better than dead, whilst alive, and be no more than the Soul of an
Insensitive Plant or Tree; even in this Life, if we look back to the Years of
Childhood and Infancy, we find the Will and Unstanding, to act but little till
the Memory be vigorous enough to assist them; and afterward, should not this
Faculty keep a Faithful Register of every remarkable things they do, all they
had done would be insignificant and lost in the Air, and the Soul it self would
be an idle useless thing in Nature, and less valuable than the meanest Particle
of Matter, which is not without its Use in the Fabric of the World -- ( And
such Dunces are we, that we have not yet attained a perfect Vnderst^^ding of
the smallest Flower, and why the Grass should rather be Green than Red. How
many Curiosities be framed by the least Creatures of Nature, unto which the Wit
of Man does not attain, and what is all we know, compared with what we know
not. But more of this in my Essay on the Works of Creation.
) Nay -- without Memory -- there could be no Principles of Knowledge fixed in
the Mind; and much less any Conclusions could be drawn from them; or if drawn,
could they be treasured up for use? -- There could be no Knowledge, no Arts or
Sciences, ( no studying Philosophy with Cloris, or learning French with
Daphne;) nor so much as any Mechanic Trades (tho of greatest Necessity)
exercised: No Observations, no Experiences could be made, and there could be no
such thing in Nature, as Wisdom -- Prudence -- or indeed common Sense and
Discretion to guide Men in their Actions. There could be no Societies, no
Kingdoms erected, or maintained, and it would be to no more purpose to set up
Courts of Judicature over Men, than over so many Flocks of Cattle, or rather
over so many Herds of Wolves and Tigers, since both the Judges and the Judged
would be in a worse State than that of Beasts, who are not without some share
of Memory, and are accounted by so much the more perfect in their Kind, the
more Ready and Quick they are observed to be in exercising their --
Reminiscence. --

Memory is the Seat of Conscience -- the Guide of unexperienced Reason the
Mother of all Practical and Useful Knowledge, and the Grounds of all
Judicatures, both in this World, and that to come. Since therefore -- Memory --
is so necessary in this Life, it must needs be so in another; and this all that
have taught a future State, have always taught and believed -- so the old
Druids of Gaul and Britain -- so the ancient Egyptian, and Babylonian Sages,
and Indian Brachmans held -- that Soul's not only retained in their separate
State; The Memory of all their past Actions, and knew again (distinctly) their
former Friends and Enemies, but that they carried out of the World with them
the very same Inclinations they had here; of this Judgment also were the Latin
and Greek Poets, who were the Divines, and their Writings the Scriptures of the
Heathen, and who had their Doctrine from those Eastern Nations, as you may see
in a Summary of their Opinions in Virgil 's Description of Elysium. For those
very Heathens could easily see by the very Light of Nature, that 'twould be
very idle and impertinent, to assert the Soul Immortal -- without affirming --
Her Essential Faculties, and particularly Her Memory -- to remain; and that as
'twould be nonsensical to summon before any Court of Justice on Earth a Man
without Wits or Memory, -- so it would be ridiculous to fancy a Judicature in
the other World, to Condemn or Reward Men, for what they could have no
Remembrance of -- Seneca (tho a Heathen) could say -- My Habui enim illos
tanquam amissurus amisi tanquam habeam, Senec. Ep. 63.
Thoughts of the Dead are not as others are; I have fair (...) pleasant
Apprehensions of ^he^, for I enjoyed them as one that reckoned I must part with
them and I part with them, as one that makes account to have them. -- Those
great Wits though following the Dim Lamp of Nature, yet were in the right so
far, that they thought as we Christians do, that this Life was but a State of
Probation for another, and that the other Life was to be the State of Reward or
Punishment, for the Actions of this, accordingly in all their Discourses of a
Future State, we find their Poets always describing proper Cells allotted to
every sort of offenders, and peculiar Punishments awarded to every particular
sort of Crime -- and on the other side, peculiar Mansions and Pleasures
allotted to every Rank of Heroes according to the Degrees and Species of Virtue
they did excel in whilst on Earth. -- And indeed how can a Future-State be
Imagined to be ^ounded on any thing else but a perfect Remembrance of all
passages in this Life? For, the very Individuality of our Soul Consists in
Memory, and therefore if that perishes, the Soul perishes too of Consequence,
For; it is not my thinking, or understanding, or willing, that makes my Soul to
be a particular, Individual Soul distinct from others, but it is Rem^mbering,
and Reflecting* that I that think now, am the same Soul that thought so and so
an hour ago, and not another, it is that, that chiefly makes me an Individual.
-- It Is the Conscience or Memory we have planted in us of good and bad Actions,
drawing along with it by main force, our own Judgments to censure or approve us
that is the great Evidence of another Life. -- It Is this Conscience, that tells
us this Life is but the way to another. If Memory and Conscience then be so
necessary in this Life, now can we ^^ppose that God would continue the Soul in
B^ing, after 'its separation from the Body, and much less join it afterward to
it again at the Resurrection, if Memory above all things were not to be
preserved, for if God* should continue our Souls in another Life without
preserving in them the -- Remembrance -- of the passages of this; it would be
the same thing as if he Created new Souls, and not gave us the same again. --
Nay they would not be the same, because their -- Individuality being lost, they
would not differ from New Beings, and then all the Actions of the past Life
being totally forgot, that Life would be in vain, and as if it had never been;
and the Grounds of Reward and Punishment in another State, would fall to the
ground, and it would seem unjust to Condemn or Recompense men for things they
could not be sensible they ever did or performed.

Besides, it would be still more absurd to suppose -- A Resurrection from the
Dead, for the main Reason of the Bodies being restored to their several Souls,
being that the Souls may visibly receive the Recompense of what they have done
in their Bodies, and that their Bodies may share with them in the final Doom
allotted to their Souls, as they have shared with them in the Actions upon
which it is awarded. How could this (with any Congruity to the Wisdom and
Justice of God) be executed, if all Memory of Actions done in the Bod^ were
after Death to cease. The A^lwise Pr vidence is not capable of doing any thing
so vain, and so absurd as this. -- No we are not placed in this World, but for
some great end, and what other end is worthy of us or of our Creator, than that
we may be ^^^d here to serve him in a better Life hereafter; which Future State
is to be regulated according to the Records taken of our Actions in this. -- So
that it is certain (my Dear Ignotus) that nothing we do here shall be forgotten,
but be exactly Registered, both in our Consciences below, and in Heaven above;
and that our Memory ^ill be so far from being destroy 'd by our Bodily Death,
that it will awake up a much more exact, quick, and lively Faculty than
heretofore. -- For, our Savior tells the Wicked -- That the Worm of
Conscience, (whose seat is chiefly in the Memory shall never dye, Mark 9.44.
but always torment them with the dreadful -- Remembrance -- of the particular
offenses they have committed, and that it shall be reserved as Gods-Book, in
which all their Wickedness shall be set in order before them, Psalm. 51.3. and
that so exactly, that men shall be obliged to answer not only for the smallest
actions, but even for every idle Word, Mat. 12.36. -- And when Abraham answers
Dives, he appeals to his Memory -- Son, remember says he, that thou in thy Life
time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, Luke 16.25.
In this Parable of the miserable Epecure, and the happy Beggar, (as Mr. Boil
observes) The Father of the Faithful is represented as knowing not only the
Person, and present condition, but past story of Lazarus, -- So that the case
is plain, that though we know not the nature of that abode into which the Soul
passes after Death; Yet that it is certain that our Souls will then preserve the
facultys that are Natural to 'em viz. -- To understand, to will, to remember.
As it is represented to us in the fore mentioned Parable. It Is true (as I hinted
before) We little know how the People of the disembodyed Societys Act* and
will, and understand; and therefore I even long to know it. What Conception can
I have of a separated Soul (says a late Writer) but that it is all Thought. --
And that at the Resurrection all men, whether good or bad, shall be restored
with all their Senses and Facultys, they shall see, hear, feel, and above all
-- Remember, -- all things, and in such manner as may give them the most
Pleasure, or Pain, they in their Blessed or Cursed estate shall be capable of, --
For then all the Heavy matter that clogged the Facultys of their Souls, being
taken away, and their very Bodies exalted as near the Nature of Spirits as
possible, all their Senses and Facultys will be lively and quick in affecting
them with the most vigorous Impressions of Torment or Delight, If then, in
order to give so exact and minute Account as we must do at the last Judgment,
our Memory will re-mind us of our smallest Actions and most rivilous Words,
then it evidently follows that we shall no ^ess exactly know and remember all
those particular Persons too, we ever Conversed with, either in good or evil --
For when Men shall be Examined about the Good or Evil, of such or such a
particular Action or Expression, it will be a great Aggravation of their Guilt,
or Inhancement of their Virtue, to be made to consider to, or with what
particular Persons they did such a thing, or to whom they uttered such and such
a Word -- The Quality, Condition, or Circumstance of the Person very much
adding to, or taking from the Goodness or Badness of the Action or Expression.

Neither See Mr. Shower's Mourner's Companion, P. 63.
can it well be Imagined, how the Process and Proceedings of the Judgment Day,
according to the Scripture-Account of it, can be manag d by the Man Christ
Jesus (or the Lord Redeemer, clothed with human Nature) without our Knowledge
of one another in the other World, who were Acquainted, and Conversed together
in this. It Is true, the present Relations by Marriages and Blood, will then
cease; but there is no reason to think, that the Remembrance of those Relations
must also cease; yea, their Knowledge and Remembrance of us, and their
Affection to us whom we knew, and loved in the Lord, is not like to be
Abolished, but perfected by dying -- A particular Remembrance of our Actions
and Words in the other World must needs infer, as particular a Remembrance of
the very individual Persons to whom they refer; and do not think (my Ignotus)
that God will preserve so entire a Memory in the Wicked for their Torment, and
will not preserve as perfect and exquisite a Remembrance in the Virtuous for
the increase of their Joy. As God will exact an Account for every idle Word Men
shall speak, so He will bring to the Remembrance of his Chosen, all the good
Actions they have done, nor will He let them forget their dear Companions, and
pious Conversation they have had one with another. -- So much as a Cup of cold
Water given to a Disciple, in the Name of a Disciple, Matthew. 10.42. He will not
let us forget, nor the Disciple neither to whom 'twas given -- He will show us
every one of those Persons when we come to Heaven, to whom we have done any
Good on Earth -- and pointing to them will say to us -- Forasmuch as ye have
done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me,
Matthew. 25.40.

And as we shall be made to know and remember, all the particular Persons we
have done any Good to, and with whom we have been acquainted -- So it is as
plain they shall be made to know and remember us -- as appears by the Parable
of the unjust Steward, since it is intimated there, that the Poor to whom the
Richer Christians had been liberal, shall plead with God, that their
Benefactors likewise may be received into the same everlasting Habitations with
themselves, which how they could do, unless they were some way or other made to
know those particular Friends again that had relieved them, is hard to
conceive. -- But since Christ assures us, That the very Angels (though they be so
far from being related to our Persons, that they are Foreigners to our very
Nature, which by the way, is an addition to our Glory, that our Natures, not
theirs, was taken into the Personal Union with God) receive accession of Joy
for a relenting Sinner, Luke 15.7. that by Repentance begins to turn toward
God. You will not think it absurd (says the Ingenious Boil) That in a place
where Charity shall not only continue (as St. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 13.8.) but
grow perfect, our dear Friends should rejoice to see us, not only begin to turn
toward God, but come home to Him; nor is it unlikely (as I hinted before) that
our Transported Souls shall mutually Congratulate each other, their having now
fully escaped the numerous Rocks, and Shelves, and Quick Sands, and threatening
Storms, and no less dangerous Calms, through which they are at length arrived at
that peaceful Haven, where is both Innocence and Delight (which are here so
seldom matched) -- with those Friends we here lamented, we shall there
rejoice. -- And 'twill be but needful that the Discovery of each others Virtues
should bring us to a mutual Knowledge of our Persons; for otherwise, we shall
be so changed, that we should never know our Friends; (and should scarce know
our selves, were not an Eminent Increase of Knowledge a part of that happy
Change) for those departed Friends, whom at our last Separation we saw
disfigured by all the Ghastly Horrors of Death, we shall then see assisting
about the Majestic Throne of Christ, with their once vile Bodies, transfigured
into the likeness of his Glorious Body, mingling their glad Acclamations with
the Hallelujahs of Thrones, Principalities and Powers, and the most dignified
Favorites of the Celestial Court.

In Heaven (continues this Author) we shall not only see our elder Brother
Christ, but probably also all our Kindred, Friends, and Relations, that living
here in his Fear, died in his Favor. For, since our Savior tells us, that the
Children of the Resurrection shall be (...), equal to, or like the Angels; Luke
20.46. who, yet in the Visions of Daniel and St. John, appear to be acquainted
with each other: When the having turned many to Righteousness, Dan. 2. shall,
as the Scripture foretells, confer a Star-like and Immortal Brightness. Since
(which is chiefly considerable) the knowledge As was hinted before in P. 34.
of particular Actions, and consequently, Persons, seems requisite to the
Attainment of that great End of God, in the day of Judgment, the Manifestation
of his Punitive and Remunerative Justice; considering this, it is very probable,
that we shall know each other in a place; where, since nothing requisite to
Happiness can be wanting, we may well supp^se ^at least, if we can imagine
here, what we shall think there) that we shall not want so great a
satisfaction, as that of being knowingly happy, in our other selves, our
Friends. Nor is this only probable, Lindamor, but it is not improbable, that
those Friends that knew us in Heaven shall welcome us thither.

It was no small Contentment and Satisfaction to St. Paul, that he should meet
his beloved Thessalonians in the Presence of Christ; for thus much seems to
be intimated by that his exu^ting demand, what is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown of
Rejoicing, are not ye even in the Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming? Which must needs imply his distinct Knowledge of them in that day,
which must be many Hundred Years after Death has separated them from each
other.

And the same Apostle, when he would set Bounds and Limits to a Christian's
sorrowing for the Dead, tells us, that we must not sorrow, as those that have
no Hope: Such Men's Sorrow finds no Ease, because that Good whose Absence they
bemoan, in their Opinion is irrecoverably lost; and to shake Hands with a Dying
Friend, is with them as much as to bid them everlastingly farewell: But a
Christian's Tears (like Drops from a Cloud) may sometimes fall; they must not,
like a River, be always running. He may sorrow because he is parted from some
Good (suppose from a loving Friend) but this Sorrow must be tempered with this
Hope, that he shall see his Friend again. And we find the late Athenians of
this Opinion; for being asked by one of their Querists then deeply in Love with
a fine [Twas the Ingenious Daphne, who I have Reason to think is dead.]
Woman, whether if she died first he should know her again in Heaven? their
Answer was, We must first enquire whether we shall so much as know one another
there; if not, we doubt Lovers Souls will be in the same Case with others,
unless they make use of Mr. Dryden 's Expedient, and wear Inscriptions to
distinguish 'em: See Mr. Dryden's Tyrannick Love.
Tho we must confess our Judgment is for the Affirmative, as we think we have
formerly declared it, and that separate Souls shall know each other, at least
glorified Saints, when perfect in Heaven; because their Knowledge would be
imperfect if they should not, and that in relation to such Objects, as would
conduce to the Addition and Perfection of their Happiness, as well as the Glory
of him who chiefly makes it; because the Societ^ of Saints in Glory, is by all
granted to be one of the Blisses of Heaven, but Society without knowledge cannot
be easily conceived. Because we shall be then like the Angels, who we are sure
know each other, and whom we believe endued with all Knowledge they are capable
of, as they seem to be of all but what is Infinite. Because otherwise we should
be less perfect than we are upon Earth. Because if there be any thing of
Humanity left, (and the Essentials will still remain) it seems congruous to
suppose we shall not be without what we should think would conduce so much to our
Happiness, as to see our Friends partake thereof, Because there are no valuable
Objections against it, that of Abraham 's being ignorant of us, and St. Paul' s
knowing no Man after the Flesh, relating plainly to our State in this World.
And lastly, because it seems agreeable to the Divine Equity, that the
Obligations of Gratitude should never cease, but last even to the other World;
we mean such real Obligations, as the Effects of 'em are Eternal, such as make
us more Virtuous and Holy, and such especially as bring us to Heaven; and if
they last so long, how can they be acknowledged and repaid, unless we know
those who conferred 'em: Not withstanding which lower degree of Happiness, the
^nfinite Being may be still All in All, and we may in a the rest only Admire
and Love the Expressions, or Emanations of his Goodness. Thus far the
Athenians, -- to which I shall add the Opinion of Martin Luther.

It being propounded as a doubt to Martin Luther, Chemnit. Harmon. Evang. cap.
87.
a little before his Deathbed, Whether Glorified Saints should have mutual
Knowledge of each other? He thus resolved his Friends, That as Adam knew his
Wife in Paradise, when she was first presented to him; for he asked not what
she was, or whence she came, but says, she was flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone.

Among those transcendent desires which issue from our Natures, this is one,
that those Acquaintances which were virtuously begun on Earth may be renewed
and perfected in Heaven. This desire was once of so great Authority, that
former Ages had respect unto it; for when they found it easier to overcome a^l
other terror^ of Death, then that one of an everlasting absence from a Friend,
they were careful to cheer a departing Soul, by assuring it, that the happiness
of the other World, next to the Contemplation of the Divine Nature, consisted
in the gaining of new, and the indissoluble recovery of old acquaintance.

Our Creed moreover calls upon us to believe a Communion of Saints; which if it
be a matter of our Faith here, it must be an object of our Knowledge hereafter;
if we must believe that there are some who sincerely communicate with us in the
Faith in this Life, then we shall hereafter clearly know who were our
Fellow Members in that Communion; and as Faith it self shall be done away by
Evidence, so shall that Communion which is here by Faith, be hereafter
perfected by that Communion which shall be by Vision.

Besides, I may add, If the Soul may carry with it a sociable Inclination, then
may it for the Use and Exercise of this Desire be admitted to the Knowledge of
other Souls, and of those especially with whom it had sojourned on Earth, that
like Fellow-travellers, who have been equally afflicted with the Difficulties
of the way, they may thenceforth interchangeably communicate their Joys,
springing from their present Rest and Peace.

But the nearest Instance is his who best could give it, having been there
himself, Luke 13.28. distinctly ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and
all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out. Now if
the Damned can at sight know the Blessed, (as I afterward prove) can it be
supposed that Abraham, etc. cannot distinctly know each other? yea, from the
Highest to the lowest, from Abraham to Lazarus; and not only so, but of what
Country soever, as from the East, from the West, from the North, and from the
South, as the 29th. Verse As was mentioned before in Page 18.
intimates; and in Matthew. 25.32. it is said, All Nations shall be gathered as a
Shepherd who knows his Sheep; and Verse 40. they knew one another, because he
says, In as much as ye have relieved the least of these my Brethren, ye have
done it unto me; and the Damned shall be told they did not relieve any the
least of these as his Brethren, and shall therefore be thrust out.

Object. 1. But it may be said, that in our Union unto God shall be supplied
all imaginable Contents; and that the Souls of the Blessed shall be held in so
great Admiration, as that they cannot admit the mixture of any second or less
Joy.

Resp. Though this Opinion seems specious, and agreeable to Reason, yet we must
consider, that as in the Divine Nature we admit no useless Attributes, so
likewise in the Humane, we must either say it has no aptness Eternally to
desire or rejoice in the good of another, (which a sociable Nature inwardly
abhors) or else we must allow it an Object whereon to practice its endless
Love and Joy. This Love we conceive shall be the perfection of that Desire
which was begun on Earth, but always mixed with Fear and Jealousy, and this Joy
we believe shall succeed in the place of that Condolency and Compassion, which
on Earth we sustained one for another. This Love therefore, and this Joy, must
have such an Object, as was once the subject of our Fear and Compassion, which
cannot be either God or Angels, but a Creature only, of the same Nature and
Condition with us.

Object. 2. But it may be feared that our Knowledge of one another, and our
mutual delight in each other, may beget some Interruptions in our Union with
God.

Sol. This fear, I think, will vanish, so soon as we consider, that it is the
same Beauty which we behold in God, and love in the Creature, though of a
different splendour; and as the Stars, the Air, and Water, by their borrowed
Lights do raise us to behold the Sun, the Fountain of all that Light; so
wheresoever the Rays of Glory are cast (whether on Angels or Men) we cannot but
behold God shining on each Nature, and confess Him to be All in All. Moreover,
it is not a glance, but a fixing on the Creature (which in that state is not to
be feared) can endanger our Happiness, otherwise neither God nor Angels are
truly Blessed; for the Divinity of former Ages would persuade us, That God as
it were comes daily out of Himself to behold his own Image in the Angels, and
the Angels look upon the same Resemblance as cast from them, and reflected by
the Soul; but neither God, nor Angels are so ravished with those dimmer
Beauties, as to dwell upon them, but do suddenly return back to the Fountain,
God to Himself, and the Angels unto God.

Thus have I Answered two of the Objections, Against knowing our Friends in
Heaven, and have proved we shall know 'em if we get thither, since Heaven is a
Place where since nothing requisite to happiness can be wanting, we may well
suppose that we shall not want so great a satisfaction as that of being
knowingly happy in our other selves, our Friends, etc.

Object. 3. But how can it be, may some say, that the Saints can know their
Earthly Acquaintance again, after so great an alteration by the Resurrection,
and so great an addition of Luster and Beauty to what they had before, when
many times we can hardly know a man again here, after some Years absence; or
after the disfigurement of a Wound, or sharp Disease: Neither do I know one
Angel in He^ven, or the Spirits of any Just men that are gone thither, so that
when I come there I m^^ike ^o be a mere stranger to that Blessed As was hinted
at the beginning of this Essay.
Company.

To this I Answer, First, as to the Angels, -- What if thou know not one
Angel in all the Heavens? Is it not enough (says a late Writer) That many of
'em may know thee? -- But how shall I know that -- How? -- Thou have been their
special Charge ever since thou wast born to Jesus Christ -- Are they not all
Ministering Spirits to all them that are Heirs of Glory? -- How kindly did an
Angel Comfort Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, when they early came to visit
the Holy Sepulcher of our Lord? How well did he know their Persons and their
business, when he said, -- Fear not, I know that ye seek Jesus, which was
Crucified; he is not here, for he is Risen, as he said, come see the place
where the Lord lay, and go quickly and tell his Disciples that he is Risen from
the Dead, and behold he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him,
Mat. 28.5. So as I have told you -- what Discourse could be more kind,
friendly, and famliar.

So that the Ministration of Angels is certain, but the manner how, is the Knot
to be untied. 'Twas generally believed by the Ancient Philosophers, That not
only Kingdoms had their Tutelary Guardians, but that every Person had his
particular Genius or Good Angel to Protect and Admonish him by Dreams, Visions,
etc. We read that Origin, Hierome, Plato, and Empedocles in Plutarch, were also
of this Opinion; and the Jews themselves, as appears by that Instance of
Peter's Deliverance out of Prison; who retreating to his Friend's House, the
unexpectedness of his Escape made 'em believe it could not be Peter, but his
Angel. We are not without Examples of the Friendly Offices of Angels. Witness
Grinaeus, his Admonition and Escape from Spires: Vide Melancthon's Commentary
upon Daniel; Bodinus his Relation of his Friend's Calestial Monitor, with many
more, which would be too tedious to recount particularly.

We possitively affirm, (say the Athenians) that every Infant has his
particular Angel, Matthew. 18.10. and that it is a good Angel is deducible from
Matthew. 19.14. nor can we believe that good Angels cease to preside over Adult
Persons, the never so Vicious, Luke 15.10.

Now if God has commissioned his Angels to minister to his Saints, to defend
and keep them; to guard and shield them from Dangers and Mischiefs; and if
these glorious Harbingers bear so See Mr. Steven's Sermons on Dives and Lazarus.
great Love to Men, as has been plainly proved; doubtless they are very ready
to receive and carry the Souls of good Men into Heaven; one of the Fathers
calls the Angels (Evocatores Animarum) the Callers forth of Souls, and such as
show them (Paraturam Diversorii) the Preparations of those Mansions they are
going to, which supposes a very particular Knowledge of them. -- Hence we
observe (says the same Author) when good Men die, they are often in silent
Raptures, and express a kind of Impatience till they are dissolved, and why?
because they Spiritually see what they cannot utter, as did St. Paul, when he
was wrapped up into the third Heaven. There is a kind of a draught presented to
them by their Guardian Angels of those Transcendent Joys they are almost ready
to enter in Possession of; and therefore long and pine till they are conveyed
into that place of unspeakable Felicity; and these Heavenly Spirits (adds this
Author) succor and support them under their Pain and Sickness; and when their
Souls are stormed out of their Bodies, they encompass and embrace them, soaring
through the Regions of evil Angels, (as the Text speaks concerning Lazarus)
till they are carried into Abraham 's Bosom.

And as the Angels shall know us, so the Saints shall see and know the
innumerable Company of Angels, their Natures, each of their Persons in
particular. As the Angels know every Elect Person, because it is their work to
gather the Elect from all the Corners of the Earth, and to sepaparate them from
the wicked, Matthew. 13.41. so the Glorified Saints shall know the Holy Angels,
whom the Lord sent forth to minister for them, whom the Lord appointed for
their Guard while they were upon Earth, who encamped round about them while
they were encompassed with so many Dangers. Some Divines are of Opinion, that
the number of the Angels is so great, that they exceed without comparison all
Corporal and Material Things in the Earth.

Again, If every one of the Angels (yea, tho it be the least Angel among them
all) be more beautiful and goodly to behold than al^ this visible World; what a
Glorious Sight shall it then be to see and know such a number of beautiful
Angels, to see the Perfections and Offices that every one has in that high and
glorious City? There do the Angels go as it were in Embassages, are exercised
in their Ministry, there the Principalities and Thrones Triumph, there do the
Cherubims give Light, and the Seraphims burn with Fervent Love to God.

Who all like Stars have Brightness from his Rays,
And they Reflect it back again in Praise.
Mr. Foe. All the Angels and Saints of that Heavenly Court are perpetually
Singing Praises and Hallelujahs to God Almighty, and to the Lamb that sits on
the Throne, and are daily Embracing each other. For that there is such a thing
as Friendship among Angels I do not question, for Love each other undoubtedly
they must, and Love more intensely they may, such as have the most beautiful
Characters of the Divine Power and Goodness upon them. And that there is also a
Communication of Angels and Souls in Heaven, plainly appears from Rev. 7.9, 10,
11, 12. 1 Cor. 13.1. Dan. 8.13. But I conceive this Communication to be chiefly
in an ability of Insinuating their Thoughts to each other, by a mere Act of
their Wills, just as we now speak to God, or our selves, in our Hearts, when
our Lips don't move, or the least outward sign appear. Whether there is any
other Converse I shall enquire at the end of this Essay, but that there is
sufficient to know and be known, I am fully satisfied.

But tho this may suffice as to our knowing the Angels. --

Yet Secondly, As to the Saints, I shall never know them for certain; I did
know 'em on Earth it is true, but since they are gone to Heaven, they are so
hugely altered, I shall not know one of 'em, when I see 'em again. -- Nay Phil.
-- (and I cannot give an Instance will affect you more) you will scarce know Eliza
there. -- The Sea Dr. Sheldon, of Man's Last End.
Glory of her Soul will be seen through her Body in such a sort that they will
both shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of Heaven. -- Neither can you tell me
Philaret, what kind of Matter our Bodies shall have in the other Life. -- It Is
in the power of Microscopes to represent a Hair glittering and curious beyond
Expression; much more can a real Infinite Power effectively make it so: Matter
is all one to the Maker. We have some light of our Resurrection, by the first
Fruits of it, our Savior, who with that very same Body he was Crucified, rose
again, and ascended into Heaven; but was changed before he got there, it being
not a receptacle for Common Flesh and Blood I see no reason why Matter may not
be changed to something else, and only called so to our apprehension as well as
form of Matter. We have Instances of the different Forms our Savior appeared
in after his Resurrection, and once that with his Natural Body he appeared to
his Disciples when the doors were shut. The Appearance our Bodies will have in
Heaven will be shining and bright, as may be gathered by Moses his Face
shininig when he had seen the Glory of God, as also the manner of Moses, Enoch
and Elias their Appearance to our Savior in his Transfiguration; the
Description that St. John gives of our Savior in the Revelations, with many
more places in Sacred Writ: But to be express in my Definitions of this Matter,
it is impossible, since all revealed, are only such Terms as are adapted, to
express what ever appears most Glorious and Dazzling here, not being yet capable
to entertain greater manifestations, and such as we shall really be fitted for
hereafter. The Mystery lies here, when our Bodies shall be Immortalized at the
last day, we know not what Substance they will be of, but I am satisfied the
most refined Matter as it is now, will be nothing like 'em. All that can be
said of it is this, there will be new inexpressible somethings which will have
the same proportion to one another, as our place and Matter now have. The
Bodies of Christ, Enoch, and Elias, are certainly in Heaven, and the Sun, Moon
and Stars, are certainly in the Firmament, but what those bodies are, and the
Heaven they are in, as also what those Stars are, and the Firmament they are
in, I know not; for it does not yet appear what we shall be, that is, we can
give no full or exact account of the Future Condition either of our Bodies or
Souls; yet this in general we know, that as our Souls shall be impeccable, so
our Bodies shall be incorruptable -- that they shall be glorified, and
therefore must be Glorious and Luminous, like the Glorious Body of our Savior
at the Transfiguration. It Is also probable that the Matter whereof they are
composed shall be so refined in quality, and perhaps so diminished in quantity,
that we shall, as I mentioned before, be in that Sense (...) that our Bodies
shall be no longer Clogs to our Souls, but obey their Commands, and indue the
Nature of Spirits in their quick and imperceptible Motion from one Term to
another. However this is certain, Lessius de summo bono, l. 3. c. 5.
Our Bodies shall be fully possessed with Glory, and the Soul full of the Light
of Glory shall be diffused through the whole Body and all the parts of it. --
The Eyes, those Windows in the Vpper-Story, how lightsome shall they be? They
shall then be renewed and made more Bright and clear than the light of the Sun.
-- The very act of Seeing shall be most clear and perfect; the Eye shall be
able to bear the Brightest Splendour: -- We may conceive, that those that are in
this place of Blessedness, at one single aspect may perfectly see from one end
of the Heaven to the other, there being no defect in the Objects, Medium* or
Organ, or any thing to intercept the sight. The Objects being so Trasparent and
Glorious. -- What a pleasant sight is the out side of Heaven, bedect with the
Sun, Moon, and Stars? What then is the inside, where the Glory of a God is
displayed? (Not through a Glass darkly) but with Eyes enabled perfectly to
behold it. And as the -- EYES -- will be thus wonderfully altered from what
they were, -- so the -- EARS, -- the Nostrils, -- the Mouth, -- the Hands, --
the Lungs, -- the Marrow, -- the Bowels, -- and every particular Member of the
Body, will be cast into a new Mold. -- But it is the Opinion of a Learned See
Mr. Colliers Ser. concerning the difference between the present and Future
State of our Bodies.
Writer, That though the Senses of Seeing, Hearing, and possibly that of
Smelling too, will accompaning the Bodies of the Saints to Heaven, but for the
other two grosser Senses they are too course and insignificant to have much
Employment there. And therefore he Judges they will be changed into Two-New-Ones,
of a more Spiritualized and more Refined Nature: I may add to this, that the
Age wherein we shall Live again, will so transform us that we can never be
known in Heaven to our old Acquaintance; for that which refers to the Kingdom
of God in this World, may in this case be very properly applied to that in the
other: There shall hencefoth be no more an Old Man, neither an Infant of Days.
It seems not proper to say, we shall be raised at Any Age; I mean such a State
as we were in at such an Age, since undoubtedly we shall be endued with much
more Perfection, though it is probable, (as I hinted before) not Clothed with
so much matter as we now carry about with us. All Divines generally agree that
Infants, and Deformed Persons shall be perfect in Heaven, and rise about the
Age of Thirty, or our Saviors Age at his Resurrection, w^^ch was Thirty-Three.
Lazarus his Body shall be then Beautiful, Samson shall then have his Eyes which
the Philistines pulled out, Mephibosheth shall not be Lame, in Heaven there
shall be no imperfection in a Glorified Body. All which laid together, renders
our knowledge of each other in Heaven very unlikely. (Then by the by) Who'd be
afraid of Death, or quake tho his Grave were digging, seeing it is but Gods
Refining-Pot, wherein he shows his Power and Wisdom, in changing our
Vile-Bodies, and fashoning them like unto his Glorious-Body, Phil. 3.21. From
which it is plain* That as Iron, when it is heated in the Fire, it appears
nothing else but firey -- So in He^ven we shall not be able to see the Body for
the Glory thereof. Then (pray Philaret, as was said before) How can we
distinguish this Saint from that, or be able to know one Friend from another?

To this I Answer: That I cannot deny, but there are some Latent Faculties in
the Soul, that while we are under Confinement to Body, cannot operate, but will,
when we are fteed from this Body, exert themselves with full vigor; but the
new and extraordinary Actings of these Latent Faculties will be no obstacle to
our knowing our Friends again; for when we come to Heaven, all our Senses and
Faculties shall be enlarged, that we shall see God Himself, not in dark
shadows, but as He is, 1 John 3.2. -- and we shall see all things in Him, no
more by outward Appearances, but in their very Substances; our Bodies (as was
hinted in the Objection) shall be Transparent and Glorious, and then, as we
shall be like Angels in (almost) all things else, so like them too -- we shall
see into one another very Souls.

The Sight of Spirits is unprescrib'd by space;
What see they not, who see the Eternal Face?
See Mr. Foe's Charact. of Dr. Annesley.
Whether this Knowledge shall be by the glorified Eyes, discerning any
Lineaments, or property of Individuation remaining upon the glorified Bodies of
our Relations? Or whether it shall be by Immediate Revelation, as Adam knew his
Wife, or as Peter, James and John, knew Moses and Elias* in the Mount. As it is
difficult to determine, so it is needless to puzzle our selves about it. For
(as a worthy Mr. Flavel.
Divine observes) though the Saints should not be raised with the same Features
of Body as before they had, ^et being r^is'd with the same Per^ections of Mind,
(and the same Inclinations, though exalted to a much higher degree) that so
Charmed us on Earth, we should soon distinguish one Saint from another, and
with Infinite Pleasure renew the Remembrance of our Old Acquaintance.

Add to this, that we shall then enjoy the Spirit of God in so great a Measure,
that it will let us be ignorant of nothing, forgetful of nothing, the Knowledge
or Remembrance of which may contribute any thing to heighten, or increase our
Happiness: He is not unequal in his Dealings; He will not remind the Wicked of
their smallest ill Actions, most trivial idle Words, and of their Companions in
Sin, for the just Augmentation of their Torment, and suffer his Saints to lose
the Pleasure of knowing again, and remembering their old Friends and Companions
in Virtue, and in all the mutuul Delights of an endearing Conversation, No --
he will have our Joys augmented -- by all things -- Persons -- and
Circumstances -- that can possibly conduce thereto, and would not command and
encourage us so much to Commence a Virtuous Love with our -- Brother-Saints --
on Earth, unless he designed it should be renewed, continued, and rendered more
complete in Heaven -- Therefore though all Saints shall universally and dearly
Love one another, as common Friends to God, and one another, yet according to
the more particular intimacies we have had with any Persons on Earth, founded
on Piety, Virtue, and the Love of God himself -- The Renewal of our Converse
with them (as I have already, and shall afterward show) shall have, without
doubt, its particular grateful Relishes, above that which we shall entertain
with other Saints, to whom (as they enjoy the same Privileges themselves)
these peculiar Friendships shall give no manner of Jealousy or Distaste --

Thus (Ignotus) have I Answered the chief Objections against knowing our
Friends in Heaven, and also proved, That though we should not be raised with
the same Features we had on Earth, yet that there be many other ways by which
it is certain that in a glorified State we shall know one another, and that --
Virtuous Charmer -- who first gave us to one another, I call it so, seeing
there is a Marriage of Minds as well as Bodies, and thence it follows, that our
three Souls must needs seek the Enjoyment of each other in Heaven, and Love one
another here (as they will do hereafter) by a Secret Sympathy --

But to leave none unsatisfied in this Comfortable Doctrine of Knowing our
Friends in Heaven, I shall further add, That it is an undoubted Truth, that we
shall all be raised with the very same Bodies again we lived in here (bating
that Deformity and grossness of Matter which, as I have proved, shall be taken
away) and with all the same natural Features that are necessary to distinguish
them to be the same Bodies, for otherwise they cannot be the same in a proper
Sense, and in such a Sense that the Scriptures intend they should be understood
the same, and therefore, Ignotus, I do not much trouble my self about the
manner of my Burial, or to which of the Elements I shall commit my Carcass. I
Envy not the Funeral-State of great Men, neither do I covet the Embalming of
the Egyptians -- I wonder at the Fancy of those who desire to be Imprisoned in
Leaden-Coffins 'till the Resurrection, and to protract the Corruption of their
Flesh, out of which they shall be Generated de novo, as if they dreamt of
rising whole as they lay down, and carrying Flesh and Blood into the Kingdom of
Heaven without a Change -- The Natives of Ganges Ovington 's new Voyage to
Surat, p. 381.
when weary of Life by Sickness or old Age, committed their Bodies to be
devoured by the Dog-fish, as the safest Passage to their Future Felicity. But I
am not of their Opinion, but am contented to undergo the tedious Conversation
of Worms and Serpents, those greedy Tenants of the Grave, who will never be
satisfied 'till they have eat up the Ground-Landlord -- I do not puzzle my self
with projecting how my scattered Ashes shall be collected together (provided
they are mingled with Eliza's, it is all I desire) neither do I for that Reason
take Care for an Vrn to enclose them. -- I am satisfied that at the last Trump
I shall rise with the same Individual Body, I now carry about me, tho there may
not then be one of the same Individual Atoms to make it up, which are its
present Ingredients. For neither are they the same now as they were 20 Years
ago: Yet I may be properly said to have the same Individual Body at this Hour,
which my Mother brought forth into the World, tho it is manifest, that there is
so vast an Accession of other Particles since that time, as are enough to make
ten such Bodies as I had then -- which implys such a perpetual Flux of the
former, as 'twould be a Solaecism in Philosophy to think I have one of my
Infant Atoms now left about me, if after all this I may be still said to have
the same Individual Body as I had then, tho there be not one of the same
Individual Atoms, left in its Composition, why may we not assert the same of
the Bodies we shall have after the Resurrection? -- Matter is one and the same
in all Bodies, the Individuation of it, the Meum and Tuum, proceeds only from
the Infinitely different Forms which actuate it. -- Thus when my Soul at the
Resurrection, by the Power of God, and Assistance of Angels, shall be
Reinvested with a Body, it is proper to say it will be the same Individual Body
I have now, tho made up of Atoms, which never before were Ingredients of my
Composition, since not the Matter, but the Form, gives a Title to Individuation.

Moreover, That the same Bodies shall rise that died, Job plainly asserts, Job
19.26, 27. -- And tho after my Skin Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh
shall I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and
not another, tho my Reins be consumed within me.

The same Body (says a late Author) which was so pleasant a Spectacle to thee,
shall be restored again; Flavel.
yea, the same Numerically, as well as the same Specifically; so that it shall
not only be the -- what -- it was, but the -- who -- he was. -- These Eyes
shall behold him, and not another, Job 19.27. -- etc. So that if I get to
Heaven I shall only want that poor Contemptible Clod of Earth, that Body of
Clay; which although now Corruptible Mouldring in its Bed of Dust, yet I do
believe it shall rise a Glorious Body: And tho after my Skin Worms destroy this
Body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God; in this hope of seeing God, and meeting
my Friends, Ignotus, Cloris, and the scarce dearer Eliza; I willingly commit my
Body to the Dust.

It is a great Comfort See Mr. Mead's Sermon preached upon the Death of Mr.
Tim. Cruso.
under the loss of the Faithful Ministers of Christ, and of Godly Relations and
Friends; for they are not lost for ever; the Spirit of God has the Care of
them, and he will quicken them again, and therefore we may say with Martha, when
her Brother was dead, I Matthew. 11.14.
know that he shall rise again at the Resurrection; you shall see them again,
and enjoy them again, and that in a better manner than ever. -- Now (as this
Author adds) how would the Belief of this Truth relieve and comfort against
such Thoughts as these, If I die, Rev. 14.13. 1 These. 4.14.
I die in the Lord. Death is but a Sleep, and I sleep in Jesus too; when my
Body is laid in the Grave, it is laid into the Arms of the Spirit; if it does
rot in the Dust, it is Union to the Spirit cannot rot; and therefore, farewell my
Flesh, while I go into the immediate Blissful Presence of God, go thou to Bed
in the Dust; I commit thee into the Arms of the Spirit, and do willingly leave
thee in that Union till he sees good to raise thee, and bring us together
again. I beg of God therefore (with this Author) P. 29.
that whenever I die, I may die in this Faith, that my Soul shall immediately
enter into the full Fruition of God. And, that my Body shall lie down in the
Dust in an Everlasting Union to the Spirit of God, who will at last quicken 1 Thessalonians. 4.18.
it; because he dwells in it; for if the Spirit of him, that raised Jesus from
the Dead dwell in us, he that raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also
quicken our Mortal Bodies by his Spirits that dwells in us, wherefore comfort
ye one another with these Words. Such Thoughts as these will give (as this
Author calls his Sermon) Comfort in Death) and render the Horrors of the Grave
less Affrighting and Dreadful.

Then let us not look on our departed Friends as a lost Generation; think not
that Death has annihilated and utterly destroyed them. Oh! no they are not
dead, but only asleep. And if they sleep, they shall awake again; we don't use
to lament for our Wives and Children when we find them asleep upon their Beds.
Why Death (says a late Author) is but a longer sleep, Flavel.
out of which they shall as surely awake as ever they did in the Morning in
this World. It Is a Saying of the witty Overbury, No Man goes to Bed till he
dies, nor wakes till the Resurrection; and therefore good Night to you here,
and good morrow hereafter. The very same Body you laid, or are now to lay in
the Grave, shall be restored again; Thou shall find thy own Husband, Wife, or
Child, etc. again: I say, the self same, and not another. And as you shall see
-- the same Person -- that was so dear to you; so you shall know them to be --
the same -- that were once endeared to you on Earth in so near a Tie of
Relation. -- For that they shall rise with Features to be distinguished, is
evident (as is mentioned elsewhere) by the Appearance of Moses and Elias to the
Apostles, -- of Dives's knowing Lazarus and Abraham, and they knowing him
again. By the Example of those Saints that arose after Christ's Resurrection,
and went into the Hoy City, Matthew. 27.
and appeared to many there, who must needs know by their Shapes who they were,
else could not they have pronounced them to be Saints, and such who were known
to have slept, and have been before Dead and Buried -- And lastly (to leave no
room for doubting in this matter) it is evident to all that believe the Gospel
-- that our Savior the first Fruits from the Dead (and after the Image of whom
all the Bodies of the deceased Saints will be raised) was raised with the
self-same Body, and with the same Features he was crucified with. And
therefore, to question that ours shall be so too, is but a dangerous
Scrupulosity, since it deprives us of one of the Means, by which we may know
our Friends again, which I esteem one of the greatest Comforts (next to those
immediately resulting from the Vision of God himself) we can meet with in
Heaven, and which is mentioned by St. Paul, (as I hinted before) as one of the
best Remedies against Immoderate Sorrow for the Death of Friends. 1 Thessalonians.
4.13, 14, 18.
-- I would not have you (says he) to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them
which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope; for if
we believe that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in
Jesus will God bring with him, wherefore comfort ye one another with these
Words.

Now if our Friends were to rise in such a disguised manner, as not to be known
again by us, this kind of Consolation would be Impertinent and Vain; -- Neither
let the many Cavils (my dear Ignotus) which Atheistical Scoffers oppose against
the Resurrection of the Dead with the same Bodies, startle us, -- since besides
the Divine and Rational Proofs I have urged for it, there are more Natural
Arguments against, than for these Opposers, for (to omit other Allegations) --
it must needs be very Absurd in 'em -- to grant that God first took a Parsel of
Matter, and molded it into the Body of such and such a particular Man,
fashioning it with such and such Features, as might distinguish it from the
Bodies of other Men, -- and yet not be willing to own he can tell how to take
up and collect together the same Individual Parts of Matter again, and make
them up again into the same Fabric, with the same Features, since Nature it
self, assisted by a little Art, is daily found to effect something very
approaching that Divine Operation, it being a very usual thing with expert
Chemists, by their Skill and Conduct, to make the dispersed Particles of a
calcined Flower or Plant, to fly up, and assemble together again in the perfect
Shape, and with the lively Color of the Flower or Plant, to which they
belonged -- but slighting these Men's trifling Objections -- let us (Ignotus)
keep fast to that Infalible Word, that promises Eternity to our new Friendship,
and that all the Innocent Joys it gives us here, shall be remembered, and
continued in Heaven.

Thus have I largely proved, by Arguments, drawn from Scripture -- Reason --
and the best Writers, -- that if we get to Heaven we shall know one another
there by Face, Stature, Voice, and the Relation we had to each other on Earth
-- And not only so, but that we shall know the general Assembly and Church of
the First Born, whose Names are now written in Heaven; the Heb. 12.23.
Patriarcks, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and People of God, that have lived in
all Ages and Nations, from the beginning of the World, to the end of it.

Object. But may some say, -- if we shall know me another in Heaven -- I Would be
further informed what wi l be the subject Matter of our Discourse there -- And
in what Language shall we then talk? Nay, good Sir, excuse me here; for who has
ever mounted to the highest Scale of Heavenly Bliss? Ler him come down and tell
as what is the Pious Conference, and Language in Heaven? -- Let him come down
and tell us the Mysteries wrapped up in Clouds, the Secrets hid within the Veil
of Inaccessible Light! Let him describe the Wonders of the Beatifick Vision,
and say how deep the Rivers of Pleasure are, which run by Gods Right Hand, for
evermore; -- for my part, I must confess I Am lost in that Abyss of Wonders, and
therefore should, modestly withdraw my Pen, to Subjects within my Reach. --
However, something I Will guess at, (tho that is all) to Answer these Curious
Inquirers, -- but hold, says another, before you go any further, I would also
know, (strange! How far will some men's Curiosity lead them) -- That if we shall
know one another in Heaven -- By Face, Stature, Voice, etc. Whether we shall not
alse know one another,

By difference of Sex?

Answ. Yes, doubtless we shall, and because this Question has something of
Novelty in it, (for it opposes the general received Opinion, particularly Mr.
Baxters, who says the Saints shall know one another in Heaven, but adds he, --
I think not by Sex,) -- I Will prove this in the First Place -- And then tell you
(as far as I can) what will be the Discourse and Language of that Blessed
Acquaintance that get to Heaven, and with that Conclude this tedious Letter.

And here seeing Novelties make an impression on the Mind, before I Handle this
Nice-Point, I Will First Premise, that it is charity to lend a Crutch to a lame
Conceit. However, if I am asked for my Authorities, I Answer, what appears
reasonable wants no other Recommendation than being so; and as to what appears
over strange, let Ignotus consider, that Philosophy had never been improved had
it not been for New-Opinions, which afterward were rectified by abler Pens,
and so the First Notions were lost and nameless, under new Superstructures, but
such a Fate (to use the Words of a late Author) is too Agreeable for my
Judgment to repine at, or my Vanity to hope for. But -- that there is a --
difference of Sex in Souls, and will be Male and Female in Heaven, (tho the
Notion's new) yet I never doubted it, and hope to make it plain before we part,

Object. But you will say, when the Holy Spirit speaks of separated Souls that are
gathered up into Heaven, he does not speak -- of Male or Female, but only of
Souls without distinguishing either kind, or Sex, -- And further, that it is
said there is no Marrying in Heaven, Mark. 12.25. And that in Jesus Christ
there is neither Male nor Female, Gal. 3.28. Which it directly contrary to the
distinction of Sex in Souls. -- For if Sex be only for the sake of Marriage,
where there is no Marriage, there is no need of Distinct-Sex, Then why that in
Heaven which there is no need of? All that is of the Essence of a Man will
undoubtedly he there, and that is a Rational Soul united to an Organized Body;
but what Organs will be necessary then, we cannot tell, however these cannot.
Besides, this difference is only Accidental, Man and Woman being in Essence the
same. But in a State of Bl ss and Perfection, all that is Imperfect or
Accidental shall be removed, and accordingly one would think Sexes should. I
will not add for another Reason what, as I remember, one of the Fathers has said
-- That were there any Woman in Heaven, the Angels could not stand long, but
would certainly be seduced from their Innocence, and fall as Adam did. But one
would think that if Souls were to Marry it ought to be in Heaven, which is the
Element of Spirits, after the Bodies had been united in Marriage upon Earth,
the Seat of material things. Perhaps you will also Object the Words of St. Austin,
who says, -- The Soul is not distinguished into Sexes. And that of St. Cyril,
who lived before him, who also says, -- The Souls of Men and Women are
absolutely alike* nor is there any parts of their Bodies, wherein there is any
difference to be observed.

To this I Answer, -- That Souls may be distinguished into Male and Female,
(notwithstanding these Objections) since it is a Common saying -- The Soul of a
Man, and the Soul of a Woman. -- And moreover, because it is generally
believed, and no less sensibly acknowledged, that they have each their
particular Character, -- the Soul (and consequently the Understanding) of the
one is Resolute and Constant, that of the other Light, Wavering and Changable,
( Eliza, Cloris, Daphne, Sapho, Anonyma, Ariadne, your Dear Dorinda, and my
SHE-Angel, are all the exceptions I know of from this Rule) -- The Soul of one
takes a pride in being Grave, and speaking little; the other talks much, and
cannot forbear twatling upon every thing -- and which is yet more to the
purpose, does not Moses say, -- That the Sons of God (whom several of the
Fathers of the Church have Expounded to be Angels) Fell in Love with the
Daughters of Men? And if there be a Sex marked out for Love in Angels, we need
not scruple to go a little farther, and say that there is also a Sex in Souls.
To this we may likewise add certain Experssions of those great Men, who are
frequently Cited by Tertullian in his Writings, -- I mean Homer, who gives the
Greeks the Appellation of -- She Achaeans, and Virgil who calls the Trojans --
She-Phrygians; -- and Cicero, who Reports that Hortensius was treated at Rome
with the Title of Madam, -- whence could proceed this Custom of giving Men the
Epithites of Women, but only because, that 'tho they had the Bodies of Men they
had the Souls -- of -- Women: -- And I might mention the Apparitions of Men and
Women, in the same Shape and Sex, they formerly lived, is in no contemplible
proof of this Assertion. But you will say perhaps -- Souls are not furnished with
Organs that make this distinction between 'em, and that a Spirit cannot become
Visible.

To this I Answer, I own a Spirit cannot become Visible; it is not an Object for
a material Eye, being it self not Matter, but what appears to us in the Shape
and Sex of Male and Female, is something that a Spirit, assumes as Condenced
Air, or the like, neither does the Souls not being furnished with Organs, hinder
the Distinction of Sex; it is true I acknowledge, that Souls are simple Beings,
which admit of no composition of parts, and so they cannot have that
Distinction, which appears in the Corporeal Sex; -- But can there not be found
a Spiritual Distinction, seeing that we meet with a As was hinted before in the
Friendship between Ignotus and Philaret.
Marriage of Minds as well as Bodies? Whence it comes to pass, that two Minds
seek the Enjoyment of one another, and Love each other by a Secret-Simpathy.

It Is Objected, that this Union never Produces other Souls: -- But do all
Bodies of different Sexes Produce other Bodies? There are Insects that are
Produced the same in likeness every way, without the Assistance of Sexs, --
There are perfect Creatures which have different Sexes, which never Procr^ate,
such are Mules, and Moyles, -- This then can be no convincing Argument, that
there is no difference of Sex in Souls, because their Union does not Produce
another Soul: Which is a thing that no Body neither can certainly determine; for
in regard we know not the Nature of Spirits, neither can we have a perfect
knowledge of their Faculties till we come to Heaven. -- And Tertullia as was
said before, does affirm, That they ^e able to Pro-create their like, seeing
that the ^ons of God became enamored of the Daughters of Men -- and that those
Sons of God were Angels -- But that there is -- a difference of Sex in Souls --
is further evident, if you consider that the Soul is so far from assuming the
Disposition of the Body, that it is the Body which conforms to the Disposition
of the Soul; for this Disposition proceeds only from the Substantial Form; The
Body cannot give it to it self; it is indifferent of it self; but the Form is
the Understanding, which determines it to be such as it is -- It should be then
from the Soul that this distinction of Organs should proceed; It should be she
that should determine the Sex, and consequently the Soul it self that should be
Male and Female -- For as no Body can give that which it has not, of necessity
the Soul must be furnished with Sex before it can bequeath it to the Body --

Thus having Answered some of the Arguments denying There Is a Sex in Souls -- I
shall next consider the Scripture Passages brought against this Opinion, and
shall first begin with that of Saint Paul's saying of Christ, that He is
neither Male nor Female -- I shall next consider that other Text which says, --
There is no Marrying in Heaven -- These Texts being brought as the main
Arguments to prove -- There Is no difference of Sex in Souls, and that we shall not
be known in Heaven by that distinction.

First, as to St. Paul's saying -- That Christ is neither Male nor Female -- To
this I Answer, he speaks of the whole Jesus Christ, or only of his Body, -- or
only of his Soul -- He does not speak of his Body, for certain it is -- That as
to his Body He was of the Masculine Sex -- If he speaks of his Soul, that makes
for my Opinion: For in saying that of the Soul of Christ, St. Paul intended to
say something extraordinary of Him, which was not common to Him with the rest
of Men -- and to the end that that should be, it is requisite that the Souls of
all other Men should be -- individually Male and Female -- else it had been of
no Importance to say what he says of Christ -- The Apostle had told us nothing
of Novelty in that particular -- But to give you a better Interpretation of the
thing, it is the Opinion of a Learned Man, that St. Paul meant the whole Jesus
Christ -- That is to say, that his Person Composed of two Natures -- Divine and
Humane -- is Singular, and has nothing of Similitude with other Bodies, except
some Organs that make the distinction of Sex, so as to be inclined to the
Production of others of the same double Nature and Order -- So that this makes
nothing against my Opinion, but much for it.

And as to that other Text, which says -- That in Heaven there is neither
Marrying, nor giving in Marriage -- it directly proves my Assertion -- For
Virginity and Celibacy are so far from denying Sex, that they suppose it --
Thus Christ did not intend to say -- That there would be no Distinction of
Sexes in Heaven -- And if he does not Assert this, we are left at liberty to
believe there will, for the Reasons I have here given, which plainly prove,
that glorified Bodies shall be admitted into Heaven, the Bodies of Male and
Female Saints, and (that) at present, there are no other than Male and Female
Souls in that blessed Place, except it be the Body of Jesus Christ. I might
next consider the Words of St. Austin and Cyril, who say, all Souls are alike,
but their Opinion being mere Conjecture, without any further Proof, I shall
pass it by in Silence.

Thus having largely proved, That there is a difference of Sex in Souls -- and
consequently -- That we shall know one another in Heaven, by the distinction of
Male and Female -- And it is supposed by some that we shall know one another by
Voice; which brings me in the last place, to Treat of the Discourse and
Language of the Saints in Heaven.

And First, as to what the Discourse will be in Heaven, I will not tell ye, for
indeed I cannot, but will give some imperfect Guesses at it. Doubtless, we shall
then Discourse over the whole Business of our Redemption, of the Wisdom,
Patience and Mercy of God, in sending Christ to Save us -- We have some little
Glimpse of this in Christ's Transfiguration, when the Scripture tells us when
the Saints were sent from Heaven to Discourse with Christ, there talked with
him Moses and Elias, who appeared to Him in Glory, then they spoke of the Death
of Christ, what a Price He was to pay to Divine Justice for Man's Sins, Luke
9.30, 31. As Christ's Transfiguration gives us some little Glimpse of our
Transfiguration in Glory, so their Discourse shows something what we shall have
in Glory -- The Apostle Paul heard wordless Words, Words in Heaven that could
not be spoke over again upon Earth -- In the Revelations we have mention of the
Blessed, Rev. 5.9. They sung a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the
Book, etc. -- We have frequent accounts of the Saints Glorifying God by their
Speech, Rev. 7.9. I beheld a great Multitude, that no Man could number, crying
Salvation, Honor and Power unto God, and to the Lamb, for ever and ever. And
11th. Rev. The Twenty Four Elders that sat before God, fell on theit Faces and
worshipped God. 12th. Rev. 10. I heard a great Voice in Heaven, saying, Now is
come Salvation, Strength, and the power of God -- It Is true, variety of Tongues
shall then cease, 1 Cor. 13. The Apostle reckons that amongst the things that
shall then cease, because variety of Languages had their Original from Sin at
Babel -- Now it is a Question amongst some, what Language shall be spoke in
Heaven -- It Is the general Opinion of Learned Men, that Hebrew shall be the
Language, because there are some Hebrew Words the same in all Languages, as
Amen and Hallelujah, tho others interpret that place, 1 Cor. 13. that all
Tongues shall then cease that had been used upon Earth. -- The Apostle Paul
heard Words that were peculiar to Heaven; and Zephan. 3.9. -- God promises,
I Will turn to a people of a pure Language, a singular kind of Language. And the
Apostle speaks of the Tongue 1 Cor. 13.1.
of Angels, as if there were a Language spoke peculiarly there. But whatever
their Language is in Heaven, sure I am we shall know our Friends that get
thither.

But Methinks I hear some Disconsolate Widower saying, I am now fully satisfied
we shall know our Friends in Heaven; but having lately lost an extraordinary
Wife ('it is my own Case) I desire to know if I get to Heaven, whether I shall
have a greater Love to her than to the rest of the Glorified Saints,
notwithstanding all Carnal Love shall be quite banished in that State; you know
Phil. (quoth this Querist) that the Relation 'tween Man and Wife is nearer than
any other, even so near, that the Apostle Paul says, He that loves his Wife,
loves himself, Ephesians. 5. v. 28, 31. and that of two they are one Flesh. So that
I think this Question deserves a particular Answer, than Philaret, I hope
you will prove (for my present Support, that as I shall know my Wife if I get to
Heaven, so I shall love her more than other Saints.

For if the Condition of Man be changed by Death into a better, how can it be,
he being perfect, that he should have less Love, and Conjugal Charity in him,
than he had while he lived in the World? And if Memory be a Faculty of the
Soul, (as has been proved) and Charity be also one of the notablest Virtues
that be in Man's Soul, the Soul being gone out of the Body, and more perfect
than it was while it abode here below, shall it be thought to be altered in the
Faculty of her Memory? Or else shall we imagine her to be void of her Virtue of
Charity? which the Scriptures reports to be in this Respect greater than
Faith and Hope, 1 Cor. 13.13. Forasmuch as those two continue only for a time,
until we enjoy those things we hope for; but this only abides for ever, and
flourishes in Heaven, while we enjoy there that Immortal Glory? And, being
united with God, who is perfect Charity, can we forget that Party whom we had
loved in him; yea, according to his Commandment and most Holy Ordinances?

To this I answer, There Is a Notion, which seems to prove, that if Man and Wife
meet in Heaven, that they shall have more Love to each other, than to the rest
of the Glorified Saints, and the Notion is embraced by Persons of very good
Sense and Learning, and which, I think, but few deny, namely, That such good
Works of good Men as survive 'em here, for instance, Books of Devotion, and in
a Sense good Examples, etc. When they have an effect on such as they leave
behind, shall thereby advance their actual Glory and Felicity in the other
World. And is it not then highly probable, that such as are advantaged by 'em,
nay, directed to that happy place, should, when they once arrive there, both
know and acknowledge their Benefactors? -- And here may be room for Philaret to
please himself with not impossible Hopes; for if any of those pieces of Service
he did. Eliza while she lived, were such as made her really more Religious
here, and more Happy above; nay, if he imitates her Piety and Virtue, wherein
he thinks she as far exceeded others, as in her Generosity and Love, then they
may probably not only Know, but Love each other better than others in a better
World. But then must have a Care to Regulate my Extravagant Passion for her
Memory here, or else I only flatter my self when I hope to get thither, and
must expect to exchange this long Separation for what will be Eternal.

But how can I talk of a Separation (having told you in the Dedication) that my
Love has nothing of parting in it, 'twill (if possible) follow her in the same
Tract to Heaven, where I hope to find and know her hereafter, and to respect
her above others; for why may not Husband and Wife, that helped forward each
others Salvation, whose Souls were mutually dear, and who went to Heaven as it
were Hand in Hand? there meet

In a more than ordinary eudearing Manner?
And return each other Thanks for those Christian Offices? Holy David cheared
up his Thought after the Death of his Beloved Child, with the Meditation, I
shall go to him, but he shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12.23. which had been
little Comfort if he had thought never to have know him there, and loved him
(too) more than other^ and certainly 'twill be no small Augmentation (...)
Happiness to Eliza and Philaret to find that si^cere Friendship, which (for 15
Years) they had be^^ Contracting here below translated to the Mansions ^bove,
when I shall see and know her again, wi^ whom I had lived so well, and slept so
long in t^ Dust -- I say in the Dust; for I desire in my WILL to be buried with
her, that so as our Souls she know each other when they leave the Bodies, our
Bodies also may rise together after the l^ Night of Death, and you find Eliza
As you n^ find in the I^dication to (...) Essay.
of this Opinion, where she says, Dear Phil, whilst on Earth we may lawfully
please our selves with Hopes of meeting hereafter, and in lying in the same
Grave, where we shall be happy together, if a s^less Happiness can be called so.

Further (in answer to the Question, whether I and Wife shall love one another
above other Sai^ Let us remember rightly that Instruction our Savior Jesus
Christ, who teaches us, how the Fruits of Marriage ought to stretch, and what
Distinction we are to make between our Habitation and Being in this World, and
our Rest in Heaven; between that Angelical Nature, and this which is Corrupt
and Humane; for in Heaven, the Fruits, Reasons, and Respects of Marriage do
cease; the only Divine and Angelical Nature brings forth her Effects in
Spiritual Virtues, and not in Humane Passions; which having had their Course in
this Crasie Life, could never pass into Heaven.

The Husband and Wife shall die: I mean the Bodies of Husband and Wife, but not
the Gift of God, which shines in the Faculty of the Soul, and in such Virtues
as are inseparable from her. Over all which, Death and the Grave has no Power,
as it has over the Body, and Sensual Affections. See a Treatise, called, The
Treasure of a Christian Soul.
The Corporal Conjunction between the Husband and the Wife shall cease, but the
Memory in the Soul shall remain, not of Bodily Things, and of contrary Nature
unto that Heavenly Glory; but of such things as are agreeable unto a Spiritual
Being. Likewise also Bodily, Temporal, and Sensual Love shall remain in the
Grave; but Charity, which desires to see her in Glory, and Immortality shall
fly into Heaven, and there from Day to Day will inflame it self in such wife,
as that the Soul of the Departed Husband, being in Heaven, will there Love and
Know her, whom he loved in this World, yet then, not as being his, but as being
the Spouse of Christ; not as having been one Flesh Corruptible and Mortal in
times past, but as being to be in time to come, both of them together, as also
with all the Holy Ones, Bones of the Bones of Christ, and Flesh of his Flesh.
So that if Philaret gets to Heaven, he will there not only Know, but Love his
Eliza, with a Remembrance becoming a Spiritual Nature, freed from Fear, void of
Care, alienate from all Mortal Desire; so that he, who in the World remembered
her whom then he possessed in Condition of a Wife, and for a use both Carnal
and Corruptible, shall Remember her in Heaven, in condition as being a Member
of Christ, for the Society of the same Glory, and for a use Dedicated to God
only, to Celebrate Eternally his Praises, and Immortal Glory. Now that this
Desire, or Remembrance, and Charity, is in those Blessed Souls, not of a
quality imperfect or infirm, as here in the World; but suitable, and becoming
unto that their Estate of Perfection, appears by that meeting and Conference,
of Moses and Elias, with our Savior Jesus Christ, Luke 9.30. In the Mount
whereon he was Transfigured, upon the Subject of his Death and Passion. As also
by the desire of those Souls which rest in Heaven, under the Golden Altar, and
that their desire, and remembrance, was of such things as had passed and were
done in this World, is apparent in this complaint, Rev. 6.9. How long Lord,
Holy and True, do thou not Judge, and Avenge our Blood on them that dwell on
the Earth?

But is it so, may some say, that we shall know (and so particularly) Love, our
Wives, and Friends again in Heaven? Then pray tell us, will this Friendship be
lasting, or shall we be placed according to our Love to God, in different
Spheres, and so get New-Friends. -- My Answer is, I believe we shall. For, God
is an Infinite Object, -- that which is Finite, tho never so refined and
advanced in its Nature, cannot know God altogether, nay, can never know him
all; I think it therefore fair arguing that our knowledge of him there must be
successive, our Capacity still augmenting with our Knowledge, as our Happiness
with both. -- Take another not improbable Argument for the same Head: -- In
Heaven we shall be (...), -- like the Angels: -- Their Knowledge is gradual,
for they look into the Church, to learn the Mysteries thereof, even though in
Heaven: And why then may not ours be so too, if e're we are so happy by Gods
Grace to get thither?

But if it be so, that the Sain^s in Heaven not only know their former
Acquaintance, but are further contracting of new Friendships; then I would
know, (says another Inquirer,) Whether they have any knowledge of, or ever
concern themselves, with the affairs of their Friends in this Life, and what is
to be thought of the Apparitions of the Dead.

To this I Answer, (as formerly,) that the Platonists have made many bold
Assertions, both concerning the State of the Soul before it came into the Body,
as also after; but their Reasons are as strange as their Assertions. What
Privileges some Souls may enjoy in their separate State above others, is yet a
Riddle, but there are some Instances of this Nature unaccountable. To mention
one; Caesar Baronius in his Annals, mentions an entire Friendship betwixt one
Michael Mercatus, and Marsilius Ficinus, and this Friendship was the stronger
betwixt them, by reason of a mutual Agreement in their Studies, and an
addictedness to the Doctrines of Plato. It fell out that these two Discoursing
together (as they used) of the State of Man after Death, according to Plato's
Opinions, (there is Extant a Learned Epistle of Marsilius, to Michael Mercatus
upon the same Subject,) but when their Disputation and Discourse was drawn out
something long, they shut it up with this firm Agreement, that whichsoever of
them two should first depart out of this Life, (if it might be) should
ascertain the Survivor, of the State of the other Life, and whether the Soul be
Immortal or not: this Agreement being made, and mutualy sworn unto, they
departed. In a short time, it fell out, that while Michael Mercatus was one
Morning early at his Study, upon the sudden he heard the noise of an Horse upon
the Gallop, then stopping at his Door, withal he heard the Voice of Marsilius
his Friend, crying to him, Oh Michael, Oh Michael, those things are true, they
are true; Michael wondering to hear his Frien^s Voice, rose up, and opening the
Casement, he saw the backside of him whom he had heard, in White, and
Galloping away upon a white Horse; he called after him, Marsilius, Marsilius,
and followed him with his Eye, but he soon vanished out of sight. He amazed at
this extraordinary Accident, very solicitously enquired if any thing had
happened to Marsilius, who then lived at Florence, where he had breathed his
last, and he found, upon strict Enquiry, that he died at that very time wherein
he was thus heard and seen by him.

And Sophronius, Bishop of Prat. Spir. c. 195. Referente Baroni^ ad An. 411.
Jerusalem, delivers this Passage to Posterity, as a most certain thing, That
Leontius Apamiensis, a most Faithful Religious Man, that had lived many Years
at Cyrene, assured them, that Synesius (who of a Philosopher became a Bishop)
found at Cyrene one Evagrius, a Philosopher, who had been his old Acquaintance,
Fellow-Student, and intimate Friend, but an obstinate Heathen; and Synesius was
earnest with him to become a Christian, but all in vain; yet did he still
follow him with those Arguments that might satisfy him of the Christian
Verity; and at last the Philosopher told him, That to him it seemed but a mere
Fable and Deceit, that the Christian Religion teaches Men, that this World
shall have an end, and that all Men shall rise again in these Bodies, and their
Flesh be made Immortal and Incorruptible, and that they shall so Live for ever,
and receive the Reward of all that they have done in the Body, and that he that
has pity on the Poor, lends to the Lord, and he that gives to the Poor and
Needy, shall have Treasures in Heaven, and shall receive an hundred fold from
Christ, together with Eternal Life; these things he derided. Synesius, by many
Arguments, assured him, that all these things were certainly true; and at last
the Philosopher and his Children were Baptized -- A while after he comes to
Synesius, and brings him three hundred Pound of Gold for the Poor, and bid him
take it, but give him a Bill under his Hand, that Christ should re-pay it him
in another World. Synesius took the Money for the Poor, and gave him, under his
hand, such a Bill as he desired -- Not long after the Philosopher, being near
to Death, commanded his Sons, that when they buried him, they should put
Synesius Bill in his Hand in the Grave, which they did. And the third Day
after, the Philosopher seemed to appear to Synesius in the Night, and said to
him, Come to my Sepulcher where I lie, and take thy Bill, for I have Received
the Debt, and am satisfied, which for thy Assurance I have Subscribed with my
own Hand. The Bishop knew not that the Bill was buried with him, but sent to
his Sons, who told him all, and taking them, and the chief Men of the City, he
went to the Grave, and found the Paper in the hands of the Corpse thus
Subscribed:

[I Evagrius the Philosopher, to thee most Holy Sir, Bishop Synesius, greeting.
I have received the Debt which in this Paper is written with thy hands, and I
am satisfied, and I have no Law (or Action) against thee, for the Gold which I
gave to thee; and by thee to Christ our Lord and Savior.]

They that saw the thing, admired, and glorified God that gave such wonderful
Evidence of his Promises to his Servants -- And, says Leontius, this Bill
Subscribed thus by the Philosopher, is kept at Cyrene most carefully, in the
Church to this Day, to be seen of such as do desire it.

As to these Apparitions of the Dead -- Although it cannot be denied, but in
some grand and extraordinary Cases, as the Resurrection of those dead which
appeared upon our Savior's Crucifixion, and the Apparition of Moses and Elias
at the Transfiguration: And in some other Cases, as many Instances might be
reckoned up: The Departed may Converse with us, or appear, but perhaps
ordinarily, Apparitions are not the Souls of the Dead, but of other Spirits,
and mostly of evil ones. Augustine was of this Opinion, and said, if 'twas a
common thing, he was sure his Mother Monica would have appeared to him, whose
Love was so extraordinary great whilst living. Neither had Dear Eliza a lesser
Concern for my Souls welfare than Monica had for her Son Augustine, and could
She come again, I Am sure She would, to tell me (what she She Would often say in her
Sickness, Well, 'twont be long now, ever I shall know what is the Future State.
learnt by dying) and to assist me in all my Distresses. These, with some other
credible Instances, which have occurred, argue, that either some departed Souls,
have particular Commissions in this Case, or that all of them have a Cognizance
of our Affairs, agreeable to the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, and that of the
Angels in Heaven, rejoicing at the Conversion of a Sinner. And it must be a
Truth, if departed Souls and Angels come under the same Predicament as to their
Essence; and I don't yet know in what they differ.

But have the Saints in Heaven such a general Knowledge of their Friends that
arrive there, and of those they left behind them in the State of Mortality?
then I Would further know, says another Querist, Whether they see and know the
wicked in Hell, and whether the Damned particularly know those that are in
Heaven, who in this Life they scorned and abused (and possibly were Instruments
by some violent Means, of hastening them thither) and also whether they know
one another in Hell, or their Companions in Sin, which they left on Earth?

To this I Answer, this presupposes another Question; viz. In what state or
condition the Bodies of the Just and Unjust shall arise at the Day of Judgment?
The Consequence of which Answer will Resolve the Question; In order to which I
affirm, That they shall both arise alike, equally Immortal, and equally
qualified for an Eternity of Duration, diversified in nothing but their last
Sentence. Neither State shall so much as change a Thought, but think of all
things together, which will be actually present to the Intellect of both: We
shall then see not by receiving the visible Species into the narrow glass of an
Organized Eye; we shall then hear without the distinct and curious Contexture
of the Ear. The Body shall then be all Eye, all Ear, all Sense in the whole,
and every Sense in every part. In a word, it shall be all over a common
Sensorium, and being made of the purest Ether, without the mixture of any
lower or grosser Element; the Soul shall by one undivided Act, at once Perceive
all that variety of Objects which now cannot without several distinct Organs,
and successive Actions or Passions, reach our Sense. Every Sense shall be
Perfect, the Ear shall hear every thing at once throughout the spacious Limits
both of Heaven and Hell, with a Perfect Distinction, and without Confounding
that Anthem with this Blasphemy; the Eye shall find no Matter or Substance to
fix it; and so of the other Senses, the Reason of this is plain and convincing,
for if both, (I mean the Bodies of the Just and Unjust,) were not thus
qualified, they could not be proper Subjects for the Exercise of an Eternity,
but would consume and be liable to Dissolution or new changes. Hence (I assert
as formerly) that every Individual Person in Heaven and Hell, shall hear and
see all that passes in either As Was mentioned in P. 8.
State, these to a more exquisite aggravation of their Tortures, by the loss of
what the other enjoy, and those to a greater increase of their Bliss, in
escaping what the other suffer. -- For a further proof of this, See the Parable
of Dives and Lazarus, for you there find, That as The Saints know o^e another
in the Kingdom of Heaven, so the wicked in Hell, know those, and their vile
Companions they left on Earth. -- For if Abraham knew Dives in Torments,
saying, that he had received good things in this Life. It Is as certain that the
Wicked kn^w one another, as is plain by the Rich Man knowing his Brethren, tho
absent, why therefore should not those which are present know one other, as
those which are absent, pray one for another; for this is plainly shown in that
the Good know the Bad, and on the contrary the Bad the Good; for Dives is known
by Abraham, and Abraham also known to him, seeing he prays to him, saying, Send
Lazarus, that he may touch and refresh my Tongue with cold Water. In which, the
Returns of Gratitude are not only seen, but the Good have this further to
rejoice in, that they shall see whom they love; but the Wicked shall be
tormented not only in their own, but in the Punishment of those they love. As
to that part of the Question, Whether the Damned particularly know those in
Heaven, who in this Life they Scorned and Abused, and perhaps Murdered.

To this I answer, That in the Day of Judgment, when every Man's Actions shall
be disclosed, the Damned shall particularly See and Know those whom they
Oppressed, or Reviled, or Murdered, and the Saints shall be Witnesses against
them. Our-Saviour speaks, in allusion to this, Mat. 12.41, 42. The Men of
Nineveh shall rise up in Judgment with this Generation, and condemn it; they
shall appear as so many Witnesses against the Scribes and Pharisees, and the
other Unbelieving Jews of this Age, and shall be Instruments as to that
Condemnation, which God shall at that day pronounce against them, because they
repented not at the Preaching of Jonah; but these would not at the Preaching of
Christ. Then shall appear Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, against a wicked
Nebuchadnezzar, who caused them to be bound Hand and Foot, and cast into a
Fiery Furnace for their Love and Loyalty to their God; the Martyrs against
their Executioners, and shall be visibly Condemned and Haled into their
Residences of Misery, in the Presence of the Saints. But could the Rays of
Bliss See Mr. Steven's Sermons on Dives and Lazarus.
glance through some Cranny into that Dungeon of Darkness; this would administer
some Comfort; but this must never be expected.

But further, Shall the Saints know one another in Heaven, as also those
Friends they left on Earth? And do they likewise see and know the Damned in
Hell? and on the other Hand shall the Damned see and know those Saints in
Heaven they Scorned, Abused, and Murdered; and also know their vile Companions
they left behind 'em? If all this be so, as has been largely proved, it is then
proper to ask in the next place, Whether it be lawful for Friends solemnly to
engage, if one dies first, to appear to the other, and inform them of the
Condition of the Soul in another World, whether it be in Heaven or Hell?

To this I answer, The Earl of Rochester did make this Contract with one of his
Friends, that he that died first should come again to his Surviving Friend, to
tell him what he knew of the other World. But my Lord Rochester's Friend dying
first, and never appearing to him afterward, he owns it hardened him in his
Atheism, and that he heartily repented of this foolish Contract; so that the
least that can be said of such a Contract, is, that 'twould be,

1. Fruitless, since Truth it self tells us -- If they will not hear Moses and
the Prophets, neither will they believe, tho one rose from the Dead: For if the
common Methods of God's Providence will not convince an Atheist, neither is he
to expect any new way of Satisfaction; nor if he had his Desire, would he be
without some Evasion or other still to continue his Infidelity.

2. 'Twould be dangerous -- on more Accounts than one: If no such Appearance,
which unless we were better acquainted with the Economy of the World of
Spirits, we have little Reason to expect, this might incline a weak Man to
doubt yet more of the Truth of those things which we are clearly taught both by
Natural and Revealed Religion. If any Appearance, how should the Person to whom
'twas made, certainly know whether it is really the Spirit of his departed
Friend, or some illusive Demon, which may either tell him a Falsehood instead
of a Truth, or mingle Truth and Falsehood together, the more cunningly to
deceive him. But (says a Learned See Mr. Steven's Sermons on Dives and Lazarus.
Author) suppose God should condescend to gratify a Wicked Man's vain
Curiosity, by causing one to rise from the Dead, and to testify unto him, that
the Course he takes, without speedy Amendment, will be the Eternal Ruin of
him, and that the Preparations in Hell are very terrible and insupportable; yet
he will invent Arguments, and propound Reasons, to fortify himself, that he
may not be affected with, and influenced by such an Apparition, and frightful
Relation; as heretofore he did, to withstand the prevalent Motives of Religion.
It is not to be disputed, but that if a Spectrum or Ghost should appear to a
very wicked Man, suppose it to be an Aerial Representation of his Companion;
who, with a hollow Voice, dreadful Visage, and lamentable Utterance, tells him,
That there is a God, both just and powerful, and that there is an eternally
Happy, and miserable State; and that it is his Misfortune to be doomed to the
latter, which, in his Lifetime, he used all the Means he could to banish from
his Thoughts; and that if he does not speedily amend his Life, and heartily
repent of the many Wickednesses he has wilfully, and presumptuously committed,
as they were formerly Companions in Sin, so they would be unhappy
Fellow Sufferers, in a lamentable Eternity. -- I say, I question not, but if a
Ghost should appear to any of us after this manner, it would make some
Impression upon us. But then, whether or no this Miracle wrought, would so
prevail with a Man who has habituated himself to Wickedness, as to work a
Reformation in him? It is supposed, No: For after the Surprise is over, those
Heats allayed, which were at first stirred up in him, he will quickly invent
Excuses and Arguments, why he should not effect that Reformation he has so much
Aversion from. -- For First, Tho he was deeply touched at first, and all his
Powers in such a Consternation, that he was scarce himself, yet being recovered
from the Fright, the Inclination he has to Sin will put him upon Doubt and
Scrutiny, and to question the Reality of the thing. He knows not but the Vision
was only the Effect of Melancholy, and a Drooping Mind, or the Imagination of a
distempered Brain. He knows, that when Persons lie under the Extremity of a
Fever, their Fancies are very whimsical, and suppose they see frightful Shapes,
and a Company of Fiends about their Beds, or that they see Hell open, and
abundance of Souls tormenting there. That some who are naturally frightful,
suppose an Apparition instead of their Shadow, and will scarce be beaten out of
that strong Illusion; and thus the World comes to be filled with Relations of
Ghosts and Apparitions. He knows that some, by strength of Fancy, will imagine
a cluster of Clouds to be an Army of Men, engaged in a pitched Battle; and why
may not the Vision, which he saw, be only an imaginative Shape, nothing real,
but a thing framed in his disordered Mind? It is easy for a Man, who is
willing not to believe any thing of this Nature, to bring himself to such an
Opinion, to evade and shift off the Thoughts of it, that they might not disturb
and trouble him in his Wickednesses. But then he is much more encouraged, when
he tells his idle and wanton Companions the Relation, who, upon hearing it,
will not forbear jesting him out of the Conceit; nor will they want Arguments
to convince him, that he was either in a Dream, or was pensively musing, or was
employing his Thoughts about Stories, which tell of Ghosts and Spirits, and so
giving way to them, foolishly conjectured that his melancholy Fancy
metamorphos'd it self into Form and Shape. But he must banish all such
whimsical Notions, and never credit any thing of that Kind, or otherwise he
must forsake their Society, and not din their Ears with such Nonsense, but
those who are easy, too credulous Persons, who spend their time in carrying
such ridiculous Relations up and down the World. -- But Secondly, Supposing,
that notwithstanding all this, he cannot easily baffle the Credit of his
Senses; for tho he has hitherto used all the Means he could, to banish the
Belief of the Vision, yet he cannot be fully persuaded, but that there was
somewhat in it. My Blood, says he, would not so suddenly, without some
extraordinary cause, fly in my Face, nor would my Powers ruffle together in
such Confusion, if something preter-natural had not made toward me. I was
neither asleep, nor musing, but perfectly in my Senses, when I saw the
Apparition; and therefore I cannot deny Matter of Fact. But still the great
Love he bears to Sin, will put him upon framing another Argument. It is true, I
was amazed at a Vision, but how do I know that it was one risen from the Dead?
It might, peradventure, be a Humane Body, dressed up in grave Clothes,
imitating the Walk and Gesture of a Ghost, who intended, by this Religious
Fraud, to scare me from my Sins; but it so confounded him, that he could not
distinguish truly between the Imposture, or the Reality. But supposing it is no
Fraud, but indeed a Spirit, yet he knows not whether it be his Friend; if he
was convinced of this, he would credit his Relation, and immediately change
upon it. But, for ought he knows, it may be one of those evil Spirits in the
Air, who disturb and fluster Men, and possess them with strange whimsies,
fancies, and frightful Imaginations; and therefore, till further Conviction to
the contrary, he will not be influenced, and wrought upon by any Spirit of that
Order, since I know, and have heard, that they are maliciously bent against us,
and would do us much more Mifchief than they do, if they were not limited and
restrained by a Superior Power. -- But Thirdly, As it is not to be doubted,
that such a Man as I am now speaking of, will create and raise many Arguments,
to withstand the Force and Influence of such a Miracle wrought in order to his
Conversion, so there is one more yet remaining, which he may probably urge, to
fortify himself against Conviction and Conversion: And that is, the
unusualness of such kind of Means, as a Spirit or Apparition, to bring Men to
Repentance. It is true, he has been haunted; but why he above the rest of
Mankind? The singularity of the thing will increase his Doubt. It the
Neighborhood where he lives were thus disturbed, or if any of his near
Acquaintance should come and tell him, that at such a time they were surprised
by a Ghost, who told them, That if they continued in that course of Life they
so vigorously prosecuted, they would be as miserable as himself, who suffers
Eternal Torments, for committing the very same Sins they now live in; this
Relation would indeed alarm him, and make him suspect his present
Circumstances, and leave those Vices he is diswaded from. But since none that
he knows of are thus handled, he has no reason to credit the Relation of the
Spirit. If such means of Conviction were rational and powerful, doubtless
others would be afforded them as well as he; but since he hears nor knows of
none, he shall not take things upon trust, but continue unperswaded as he is.
Thus we see how Men, who withstand the Motives of Christianity, refuse to be
reformed by Moses and the Prophets, by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, will also
find out shifts and ways to evade the Force and Argument of a Spirit, should
one be sent on purpose to convert them. And that such Methods used for our
Conversion as an Apparition or Ghost, will not persuade us to Repentance. And
thus is Abraham's Answer made good to the Rich Man, who importunately desired
him to send Lazarus from the Dead, to testify to his Brethren, for that they
could not withstand the force of such a Miracle wrought for their Reformation.
No, says Abraham, If they will not believe Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be per^waded, tho one came from the Dead. But I have been too large in
this Second Head, so shall be shorter in the Third; I therefore add, that
besides the Uncertainty and the Danger there would be in such a Practice, which
way soever it terminates, I think 'twould be also --

3. Irreligious; since it too plainly implies a distrust of the Truth of God;
nay more, that those who use it, would believe humane Testimony, and perhaps
Diabolical, rather than Divine -- No, say they, it is rather to confirm the
Truth of such Testimony as is said to be Divine -- But is there any want of all
reasonable Confirmation? Have not we stronger Evidence that the Scriptures were
written by Inspired Men, or at least that the Matter therein contained is true,
than that there was ever such a Man as Alexander or Caesar, because one of
these has all the Moral Demonstrations of Truth the other has, namely,
universal, or unanswerable Humane Testimony, both of Friends and Enemies, and
yet more, to wit, Miracles, which are the Testimony of Heaven. Now this
Scripture gives us undeniable Evidence of the Existence of Souls after Death,
and therefore whatever God may think fit to order or permit in extraordinary
Cases, as revealing Injustice, Murder, etc. It appears both fruitless,
dangerous and irreligious, to expect any such thing ordinarily to happen, since
the Course of Nature is not to be altered without the highest Necessity and
Reason. So that you see it is fruitless, dangerous and irreligious, to expect
our Friends that are gone to Heaven or Hell, (though they still know and love
us never so well) should come from that Happy or Miserable Place, to tell us
what passes there. But if this be granted, perhaps 'twill be asked in the last
place, Then pray tell us what is Death, seeing that, (though nothing else can
do it) will open the Door to the other World, and give us the Knowledge of
those Friends departed, with whom we earnestly wish to be?

To this I Answer, That Death is no more than a soft and easy Nothing. Should
you ask me then what is Life? I Would Answer with Crates, who being asked this
Question, said nothing, but turn d him round, and vanished; and 'twas judged a
proper Answer. But whatever it is to live, sure I am (if you Credit Seneca) it is
no more to Die than to (be Born; we felt no Pain coming into the World, nor
shall we in the Act of leaving it. Death is but a ceasing to be what we were
before we were. We are kindled and put out, to cease to be, and not to begin to
be, is the same thing. But you will say, perhaps, what do I mean by the same
thing, and that you are still as much in the dark as ever. Why truly so am I,
(as I told Eliza, in the last Letter I sent her) It Is true, there have been Men
that have tried, even in Death it self, to relish and taste it, and who have
bent their utmost Faculties of Mind to discover what this Passage is, but there
are none of them come back to tell us the News.

-- No one was ever known to wake,
Who once in Death's cold Arms a Nap did take.
Lucul. Lib. 3. Canius Julius being Condemned by that Beast Caligula, as he was
going to receive the stroke of the Executioner, was asked by a Philosopher,
Well, Canius, (said he) where about is your Soul now, what is she doing? what
are you thinking of. I was thinking, replied Canius, to keep my self ready, and
the Faculties of my Mind settled and fixed, to try if in this short and quick
Instant of Death, I could perceive the Motion of the Soul, when she starts from
the Body, and whether she has any Resentment of the Separation, that I may
afterward come again to acquaint my Friends with it. So that I fancy there is
a certain way by which some Men make Trial what DEATH is; but for my own part I
could never yet find it out; but let Death be what it will, it is certain it is
less troublesome than Sleep; for in Sleep I may have dsquieting Pains or
Dreams, and yet I fear not going to Bed. If you wonder I Am able to give no
better Account what DEATH is, my Answer is, That it often falls out, that the
more common a thing is, the more difficult it is to speak well of it, as in
many sensible Objects.

Nothing is more easy than to discriminate Life and Death, and yet to
explicate the Nature of both, is a severe task, because the Union or Disunion
of a most perfect form with 'its matter, is inextricable; however, I shall
offer those things that have given me the greatest satisfaction in my
Enquities. -- Death (or a Cessation of doing or suffering) is generally agreed
to be the greatest Evil in Nature, because it is a destruction of Nature it
self; but why it should be represented so terrible is as great a Riddle to me,
as a certain knowledge of what Death really is. -- This is the common Plea of
Mortals, Here we know and are known, and all the Enterprises we take in hand we
have the satisfaction of reflection and a review when they are past, but Dying
deprives us of knowing what we are doing, or what other State we are
Commencing. It Is a leap in the Dark, not knowing where we shall light, as a
late Hobbs
Naturalist (to say no worse of him,) told his inquisitive Friend when he was
going to die. But this is a weakness, which as it makes Men anticipate their
Misery, so it inlarges it too. We look upon Nature with our Eyes, not with our
Reason, or we should find a certain sweetness in Mortality, for that can be no
loss, which can never be mist or desired again. -- As Caligula passed by an Old
Man requested him that he might be put to Death? Why, says Caesar, are you not
dead already? -- There is something in Death (sometimes at least) that is
desirable by Wise Men, who know it is one of the Duties of Life to Dye, and
that Life would be a Slavery if the power of Death were taken away. -- I had
the Curiosity to visit two certain Persons, one had been Hanged, and the other
drowned, and both of 'em very miraculously brought to Life again; -- I asked
what Thoughts they had, and what Pains they were sensible of? The Person that
was hanged said, He expected some sort of a strange Change, but knew not what,
but the Pangs of Death were not so intolerable as some sharp Diseases; nay, he
could not be positive whether he felt any other Pain than what his Fears
created: He added, That he grew senseless by little and little, and at the
first his Eyes represented a brisk, shining, red sort of Fire, which grew paler
and paler, till at length it turned into a black; after which he thought no
more, but insensibly acted the part of one that falls asleep, not knowing how
or when. The other gave me almost the same Account, and both were dead
(apparently) for a considerable time. These Instances are very Satisfory in
Cases of violent Death, and for a natural Death, I cannot but think it yet much
easier. Diseases make a Conquest of Life by little and little, therefore the
Strife must be less where the Inequality of Power is greater.

I have met with Epicurus in Gassend. Synt.
one, arguing thus. Death, which is accounted the most dreadful of all Evils,
is nothing to us, (says he) because while we are in Being, Death is not yet
present; so that it neither concerns us, as Living nor Dead; for while we are
alive it has not touched us, when we are dead we are not -- Moreover, (says
he) The exquisite Knowledge of this, that Death belongs not to us, makes us
enjoy this Mortal Life with Comfort. Neither need they fear the Consequence of
Death, who have lived a Godly Life; it is true, Conscience makes Cowards of us
all. Lewis II. King of France, when he was sick, forbid any Man to speak of
DEATH in his Court; but there is nothing in Death it self that can affright us,
it is only Fancy gives Death those hideous Shapes we think him in. It Is the
Saying of one, I fear not to be dead, yet am afraid to die; there is no
Ponyards in Death it self, like those in the way, or Prologue to it; and who
would not be content to be a kind of Nothing for a moment, to be within one
Instant of a Spirit, and soaring through Regions he never saw, and yet is curious
to behold.

Thus far we may venture to speak of the Language and State of the Blessed --
of our knowing (...) Friends in Heaven, and the Damned in Hell -- (...) our
Passage to the other World, and of Death that sets us ashore. But further I
dare not wade, ^or by venturing beyond our Depth, we are liable to all the
Dangers that are out of Ken, It Is enough that I have scaled the Mountains,
scrabbled above the Clouds, and opened a little the Curtains that hid and
separated the Secrets of Heaven from common View, and this I have done, as
thinking it proper to ascend Pisgah by Degrees, when we get to the Top, our
Desire will be to take a Prospect of the whole Hemisphere, to leave the Stars,
while we make Inquiry after all the Invisible Host, in which Glorious Assembly
I hope (shortly) to find my Dear Ignotus, whose TRVE FRIENDSHIP has been so
useful to me in my way thither; and indeed all Friendship is no further
valuable than as it is founded on Love to Virtue, and some way or other
promotes our Eternal Happiness.

If I have advanced any thing in this Essay that is not agreeable to sound
Doctrine, it is your Province (Ignotus) to find it out; and tho your good Nature
is as ready to forgive Faults as your Wit is able to find them, yet pray, Sir,
tell me my Errors, Mistakes, and Omissions, not with the Tongue of a Courtier,
but with the Severity of a true Friend. But I must think my Errors the more
excusable as the Death of Eliza To whose Memory this Essay is Dedicated.
has Distracted every Faculty, and as the Subject was never handled before,
which heightens my Presumption to venture at it, and in some part excuses it;
for all Ages (as if Athens) had been the Original, have been curious in their
Inquiries, Curiosity it self being so much a part of Nature, that there is no
laying it aside till the whole Frame is dissolved.

We all are seized with the Athenian Itch,
News and new Things do the World bewitch.
Dr. Wild. Then no wonder that Phil. is aiming at new Discoveries, when he does
it in Obedience to your Commands, to divert himself in the Second Place, and
lastly, to comfort those who have lost any near Relation, tho by an ill
Management I fear I have lost my End, yet as ill as the Subject's handled, I
judge he that has buried a Wife, Child, or Friend, etc. will be pleased to hear
(tho weakly prove d) that he shall know them again in Heaven. I own it is a great
Vanity to quote my self, (except I was one, whose Life and Actions might serve
for Examples) yet it is not amiss to say that the chief Assistance I had was
from Answers I formerly published from Letters of my own writing, sent to
Printed in Mr. Turner's History of Remarkable Providence, Page 146.
Eliza, Cloris, and your Dear Self, etc.) which I here insert, to show I can
never forget the Ladies concerned, especially the Ingenious W -- ch, to whose
generous Favor, in bringing Cloris to a Stand, [whether to take or refuse]
makes me her Eternal Debtor, and shall never be forgot whilst Virtue, Wit, and
God Nature, -- have any Esteem in the World; I would serve this Lady through all
Difficulties, and write her Particular Character, but that to praise her is to
lose her Friendship, yet I often quote her in this Essay, by a Name she can
never know, and as often put one Name for another, as in P. -- Valeria is put
for the Spouse I expected; and in P. -- Sapho is put for Cloris; and in P --
Cloris is put for Eliza, etc.

The unknown Ariadne is also quoted, whose ready Wit is always producing of new
Charms -- Neither is Leander forgot for (tho Beauty in a Man is a Jest yet)
Honor joined to Love comprises all that a Maid can wish for.

And this Hint leads me to Lincoln, to the Honorable, etc. -- who, tho dead
and gone, I here kiss her Name, as the nearest way to her Soul -- neither do I
forget HONEY-MOON, now the Music of Fiddlers is over.

I might also mention the Learned Anonyma, and that Mistress of TRVE SENSE, the
Ingenious A near Relation of the Dear Eliza.
KATE: But I Will stop here; for should I proceed to the other Ladies, mentioned
in this Essay) you would think me a mere Rambler; but if I am, it is excusable in
me, seeing when at any time I go out of my way, it is rather upon the Account of
License than Oversight; for I take a Pleasure in suffering the least sudden
Thought, or Extravagant Fancy, to lead me Ten, Twenty; nay, sometimes an
Hundred Pages out of my way, as you find in P. 8. Where at one Jump I leap from
Heaven to Cloris; and in P. 10. from Cloris to Heaven again; I have seen two
parts of the World, and find there is something in Traveling, that makes a
Man's Thoughts reel, and that leads his Pen to wander as much as his Person
does -- I have here made an odd Composition (especially where I prove, There Is
a Sex in Souls) but let it go ramble if it will into the World, as it rises;
for I have a mind to represent the Progress of my Humor, that every one may
see every piece as it came from the Forge, I love a Poetical March by Leaps and
Skips; there are pieces in Plutarch, (as well as in Philaret) where he forgets
his Theme, yet how beautiful are his Variations and Digressions, and then most
of all when they seem to be fortuitous, and introduced for want of Heed? It Is
the indiligent Reader that looses my Subject, and not I; there will always be
found some Words or other in a Corner, to make good my Title Page, tho they lie
very close; Constancy is not so absolutely necessary in Authors as in Husbands;
and for my own part, when I have my Pen in my Hand, and Subject in my Head, I
look upon my self as mounted my Horse to ride a Journey, where although I design
to reach such a Town by Night, yet will I not deny my self the Satisfaction of
going a Mile or Two out of the way, to gratify my Senses with some New and
Diverting Prospect. Now he that is of this Rambling Humor will certainly be
pleased with my Frequent Digressions, however in this I have the Honor to
imitate the great Montaigne, whose Umbrage is sufficient to protect me against
any one Age of Critics. But if his Authority will not suffice, I must cast the
Fault in to the great heap of Humane Error; for seeing we digress in all the
ways of our Lives; yea, seeing the Life of Man is nothing else but Digression,
I may the better be excused. But so much for quoting my Self, and Friends, and
way of Writing, etc.

A Word now of the Graver Authors, and then farewell, till I meet You and Cloris
in Heaven, or else at that BLESSED VILLAGE, where Angels Sit, and Listen to her
Song -- All Musicks Nothing to this Nightingale -- Oh the As I told Cloris in
Answer to Numb. 23.
Joys I fell at this Harmonious Name! --

The Dying Swan advanced with Silver Wings,
So in the Sedges of Meander Sings!
-- When she lays Her Hands to the Spinnet, or Charms with Her Heavenly Tongue,
Phil. could turn Camelion, and live for ever on this Air.

BLESSED AGFORD!

A Garden in a Paradise would be,
But a too mean Periphrasis of thee.
I could scarce die till I had seen this New Parnassus -- I call it so, as it is
the present Residence of Madam LAVREAT -- 'Twas to this Place, and to this
Lady, that my Reverend Friend -- But Presto be gone, for I Am now in London
again, and in the Arms of the Dear Valeria, -- But whether do I ramble from the
Graver Authors? --

As to these Learned Gentlemen, tho I have great Assistance from them, yet I
have endeavored to digest the same into such a Method, Style, and Form, as was
most pleasing to my Self, adding thereunto my own Remarks, tho after all, the
Knowing our Friends in Heaven is so Copious a Theme, that I am very sensible
Your Learned Pen will find out more and better Arguments than I here produce;
and pray let me have 'em with all speed; for as soon as you give this Subject
its Finishing Stroke, we'll fall to discourse on the Visible Frame of Things,
and of Matters more Domestic -- It Is proper to consider this World a little,
through which we must pass to that Heavenly Country, where we shall have the
perfect Knowledge of one another, and of that Virtuous Nymph, ( yes, Cloris, I
will meet thee there:) who was the first Occasion of our Correspondence. --
This, with a Thousand Loves to H -- len, and a Boon Voyage to Madam Whose
Character you will find in my New Parnassus, or Gentleman's Library, which has
taken up my Leisure Hours for several Years, and will scarce be finished till
Sh -- te returns from the East Indies.
Sh -- te, is all at present from

Your Eternally Devoted Friend, Philaret.

FINIS.

