MOTIONS TO THIS PRESENT PARLIAMENT, FOR REFORMING THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

Most taken out of Jrenaeus Philadelphus.

Printed in the Year 1641.

MOTIONS FOR REFORMING the Church of England, in this present Parliament.
I. THat since the first Reformation in King Edwards days, was rather of the
Doctrine, then of the Discipline, and of the Rites that were palpably gross,
which yet were retained, with a purpose they should be removed afterward, and
for to unlose by degrees, the fast holds to the Romish Church: now since every
Protestant is well informed of the change made in Religion, that whatsoever in
Religion is Popish, or tending to the disturbing of the peace of the Church,
and maintaining of Heretical doctrines, be redressed.

II. That in that great work of Reformation which is of moment and
consequence, far beyond the settling of civil affairs, there be appointed by
both the Houses, a Committee or convocation and meeting of 40. or 50. English
Divines, men that were not of the late Convocation, and such as be unpartiall,
learned, and incorrupt in their lives and Doctrine, such as Dr. Usher Arch. B.
of Armach, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Twisse, and the like, with 10. Scots Divines, to
which be called 8. Foreign Divines of the most Learned and famous; such as
Rivetus, Primrose, Moulin, and the like, who may treat and agree upon a settled
platform of Church Government, suitable to the Monarchy of great Britain which
ought to be ratified, and enacted by Parliament.

III. That the Churches Discipline being established, a National Synod be
convocated, that may frame a Confession of faith, and reform, if need be, the
English Liturgy, that without exceptions it be received all over the Kings
Dominions, to which Synod may be called a competent number of Foreign Divines.
However, since so many have been so earnest of late, to be in charity with the
Roman Church, that they have been uncharitable to the Reformed Churches: Let
Canons be made in the Synod, and an Act of Parliament for union with other
Protestant Churches in matter of Doctrine: and all the firebrarnds of these
late innovations in the Church, that have made us a laughing stock to the
neighbor Churches, be sharply censured, if not cut off as banes of the Church,
especially the first raisers of Altars, such as Heylin, Pocklington, and the
like.

IIII. That the pleasure of our late Sovereign King James of blessed Memory,
be executed, who sent his Divines to the Synod of Dort, that the Church of
England afterward should be bound by the decisions made there, and that
Canons be made conformable to the determination of our Divines in that Synod.

V. That if Bishops be retained, as it is to be feared, there be no more such
distance between a Bishop and an ordinary Minister; and that Bishops be no more
c^lled Lords, and that they be enjoined to preach diligently, as is the duty of
their place and office.

VI. That if some of them sit in Parliament, it be upon Wool-S^cks, and have no
more privileges by their office and places then the Judges, the Lord Keeper
and Treasurer: And that a certain number of Depu^ies from the National Synod,
whether Bishops o^ other, be assisting both in the higher House and lower
House, for delivering their advices upon any clauses of Acts, that may entrench
upon the Churches privileges, or are contrary to Doctrine or good manners.

VII. That the principal defect of our Discipline, and the spring of all
errors in Doctrine and practice, which is the want of Synods, be mended, and
hereafter all Visitations of Bishops be Synods, as by right they ought to be,
and according to the ancient Constitution, as it appears by the Synodalls which
Ministers pay in every Visitation, and that at Synods all Parish Ministers be
sitting and covered, and have their voice in the discussing of the affairs of
the Diocese, and making orders which may not afterward be altered by the
Bishop, but only by the National or Metropoliticall Synod, which for the
public Union, is to be kept once every two years, neither was ever the Church
of late without Synods, but in England.

VIII. That the Bishop be censurable by the Synod, whether it be Provincial of
National.

IX. That another course be taken for maintaining Ministers and Bishops, then
that of Tithes, which still cause suits between the Minister and the
Parishioners, the Patron and incumbent, keep the Minister from his Church,
wh^le he follows suits in London, and bring the ^oly Ministry in to obloquy
and contempt. Put an honorable competent proportion be appointed for the
maintenance of each Parishes Ministers by the Parishioners, and rated by the
Parliament or Synod, and that the distinction of Deane, Archdeacon, Parson,
Curat, Vicar, and Reader be taken away, but let them be coequalls, and more or
less in number in one Parish, according to the greatness or wealth of the
Parish.

X. That as Bishops in height of Jurisdiction and place, by act are to be
shortened, so an act be made that from henceforth, all ordinary Ministers,
which are too much vilified, shall have more respect and honor then heretofore
was given unto them, and that the Ministers sons be preferred to the
fellowships of Colleges.

XI. That the power of the Ecclesiastical Keys, such as belongs to Bishops
and Ministers, be restored unto them, according to the ancient constitutions of
the Primitive Churches; and that there be no censure past upon the Clergy or
people from Synod, Bishop or Presbytery, but such as is Spiritual, and that
the usual penalties of imprisonment and fine be rendered again to the right
owner viz. to the civil Magistrate, and the abuse of excommunication, and the
Oath Ex officio abolished.

XII. That the Clergy of the Diocese shall choose their own Bishops, or
present to the Kings Majesty two, who may choose of them whom he pleases: and
that every Parish be Patron of its Parish, and have the presentation of as many
Ministers, as the Flock requires, to the Synod or Bishop.

XIII. That instead of Chancellors, Officers, Apparitours, Registers, and such
like Grasshoppers, there be some Lay Elders, that may sit in Provincial Synods,
and have their voice in matters of Discipline and Church-governement, and that
in National Synods, there be some Laymen likewise appointed by the Parliament.

XIV. That a better course be taken for providing for the poor, and that both
Ministers and Chief of the Parish shall over-see, how Church, Wardens do
dispose of the Church-Treasury, and that they be not permitted under crime of
Sacrilege to spend it upon themselves, and that every month they give an
account of whatsoever is received and laid out.

XV. That the griping of Church-duties and buriall-costs, exacted oftener more
rigorously of the poor then the rich, be restrained, and that the Minister be
content with his yearly Salary, performing all the branches of his calling, as
baptizing, burying, visiting the sick without any further recompense, but such
at is tendered to him.

XVI. That hereafter none becited by the Synod, Presbitery, or Spiritual court
without the knowledge of the Parish-Minister, who ought to present the
delinquent, and have his voice in the censure.

XVII. That it be no more in the power of Bishops to impose what they please
upon the Clergy with such rigorous penalties, as they have lately used for the
oath of the sixth Canon.

XVIII. That the Fountains of Learning, Cambridge and Oxford, be purged from
superstitious Rites and Popish doctrines, and Orthodoxe Readers be provided.

FINIS.

