THE EARL OF ESSEX HIS DESIRES TO THE Parliament.

ALSO A Catalogue of those Tradesmen Volunteers, with the number of them in
each trade.

AND The true Copy of a Speech made to them by Captain Floyd.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parl. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for T. Thomson. 1642. August 15.

THE EARL OF ESSEX'S DESIRES OF THE PARLIAMENT.
ALSO A catalogue of those Tradesmen Volunteers, with the number of them in
each Trade.
AND The true copy of a speech made to them by Captain Llhoyd.
THe well-grounded causes of our eagle-eyed Assemblies of Parliament, the two
careful watch-houses of this slubbered commonwealth, have dropped down effects,
preventing the hasty wishes of Militia-minded Denizons; with such issues those
happy Twins court our Kingdom; which has so long lien bedabled in sinks of
misery. Thus successefully have those choice Engineers countermined the
vain-drawn plots of leering cavilling Antagonists. Those top-Gallants have
already read their Cross Row, and have given their squandring thoughts warning
to list themselves in a narrower circuit: York fathered their designs at their
birth, but cast them off before they came to age; else might they have butchered
their moher: they have sowed for lives, but reaped loss: Hull makes their
words with sorrow to rebound on their hearts, and has wrote such letters on
their bodies as they sealed with their blood. Now would they undermine it, but
the very weak water freezado'd on them, and would have purified their infected
pitchy carcasses, had not they winged themselves with flight. Now would they
have surprised the town by night; but being belighted by the dayspring of
detection, they bought their enterprise at a bodily rate. Sometimes was the Lord
Brook a rub in their way and turned their bias, delivering them up to their
creditour, earth. The Militia every where either strangleth their proceedings
in the womb, or sowseth them with let-in terrors of these busy senses, Sight
and Feeling. Still has our blessed Parliaments actions ingraved so firm a
stamp of loyalty in the Citizens breasts, that they have been crowned with
success: and we may suck the pure air of comfort, in that each Citizens face
portends a mischief to opposers, whose hearts, as new-raised bulwarks, not
only eiaculate magnanimous words, but are ready to vivifie action. So
unanimously each beats a march in his thoughts, as ready to stifle the
doubtful acts of our rich-fac'd enemies, whose heads periwig'd with malicious
pride, strive to dead our newborn enterprises. Each day and night their active
hands itch to be fencing in a real combat, whose quotidian exercise do plainly
depaint what the adversary may expect, and not be frustrate of: Their purse is
as free as their heart, which they most willingly part with.

The Earl of Essex that renowned piece of chivalry, as virtuous as honorable,
vowing glory but a byword, and his Coat worthy of naught but to be
disheraulded, if this Island, with the fame of it, being almost out of breath,
be not re-involved with Royalty, to yield him a double crest of added dignity.
Wherefore as voluntary as his warlike succeeding champions, he budded forth of
this city, impoverishing it, by the luster of his presence. And now having
given a full response to the Parliaments desires, he has vented his, which are
as follows. 1. That the hopeful Parliament would not suffer their thoughts
concerning him or his affairs to be adulterated with suspicious conceits and
side-interpretation: such comments be far from being tabled on his virtuous
texts. 2. That they would not bear a strjct hand in reviving his army; but that
coin may in due time be levied, for it is a soldiers best lining. 3. That they
would furrow the seas with shipping, that the adversary might not gain an
overcoming invective power against Hull or adjacent places.

And lastly, that they would make up the breaches of his army, as necessity
gives the word of command, when he shall urge it, not yet start from their
resolution, whereon both their safety dwells. These were subjects of his
indirement: who not only approves, but is approved of for his intentions.
Affections chained as well to his person as actions, prove the sequel of the
major: And thousands attracted by the loadstone of either, would rather draw
cuts in, then for his society; our spiritfull apprentices forsook their mistress
Venus, and would now traffic with Mars. What do ye lack, which before percht
upon their tongues, is clothed with an Ad Arma, Ad Arma; precise purity is
converted into martial policy, the language of shop to shoot, of wares to
wars: every one now would rather see an enemy then a customer. Me thought I
was all air when I eyed obedience and alacrity well mer. There might ye see a
rank of Diers, who would fain learn to die their swords in blood, and
themselves rather in the duskie bands of Mars, then in a rigrid workhouse:
these were in number 71. Then a troup of Butchers, who would rather sacrifice
men then beasts for the pacification of our bruised State: these amounted to
88. Here were weavers contracted, who, maintaining the comparison of man's life
to a shuttle, will make it good upon the adversary: and as iourney-men to the
fatal sisters, will help to weave out the short thread of their troublesome
lives: and these were upon the score 186. A knot of tailors to stitch up the
army were congested, threatening to cut out several suits for death, the list of
these is 157. Shoomakers amongst the rest vampt in, vowing to to underlay them
in the earth, these made up the number of one hundred twenty four. Brokers
hurried in amongst them and determined to make a new Long-lane with the enemies
garments, whose Account is fourscore and eight. Sadlers thronged in amongst
them, swearing they would make them place the saddle of government on the right
horse, and these streacht to Forty nine; Smiths would hammer them, Cutlers
slash them, and a promiscuous Number of many trades (prefering their Countries
service before their Masters) protested ruin. Indeed I am taken up by fawning
wonder that their virtue shines no brighter in so darke^ a mist, since
opposition has spoke them glorious; but since audacity buried in the ashes may
be rackt up, and inflamed by a silver Speech, I shall discover an Oration
voic'd to them by Captain Llhoyd.

Magnanimous spirits, if any relics of your Ancestors blood sport through
your veins, if their matchless Acts, indebted to immortality reign in your
memory, elevat your benumed spirits to such a ayry pitch that may entitle you
not only heirs of their fortunes but unparalled virtue. We are not ignorant how
our times are overcast, by a rout as careless of their families, as like
slaves to fortune, beholden only to war for what they have, Roaring boys, who
seem only loyal, because Royal, allowing respect more to the person then
cause. These mount against us, or somewhat like them, whom either fear arrests
or favor presses for the service, such Collogues are such Colleagues. Let us
therefore whose cause the effieient approves, the Parliaments ascertaines Just,
and our own consciences Legal, make modesty veil to courage, fear lay down
its feeble Arms to Audacity, and fight against the enemy; force these cashiered
feathered foul vanities to make wings of their plume^ for flight, the
Parliaments Privileges, Parents, lives, lands, are Rhetoric to instigation;
Let Apprentises in the April now of years try a Mraster piece, either we must
overcome well or live ill. Let us on my hearts: freedom strechteth out her
hands to all.

Ordered, that Sir John Girlington, Sir George Middleton, and Sir Edward Fitton
be sent for as delinquents.

Ioh. Brown Cleric. Parliament. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.


FINIS.

