A LIST OF THEIR NAMES Who by their Adventures are Capable of being Chosen
COMMITTEES for the Year 1675.
A
Sir Joseph Ash Knight. and Bar. Sir Matthew Andrews Knight. William Allington Esquire;.
Joseph Alstone Esquire;. William Atwood Esquire;. Francis Archer Esquire;. George Arnold
Esquire;. William Allen Thomas Adrian
B
The Right Honorable George Lord Berkley Sir Sam. Barnardiston Knight. and Bar.
Sir John Brownloe Knight. and Bar. Sir John Banks Knight. and Bar. Sir Francis Burdet
Bar. Sir Thomas Blud worth Knight. John Bathurst Esquire;. Robert Burdet Esquire;. Richard
Booth Esquire;. Edward Bolle Esquire;. Benjamin Barron Esquire;. Richard Beckford Esquire;.
Heary Barnard Esquire;. James Burkin Esquire;. James Burton Esquire;. Matthew Bateman Jacob
Bonnell Christopher Boon Captain Robert Brown Captain John Broeckhoven John
Bull William Bulkley Edward Bovery Thomas Bretton Moses Bathurst Richard
Bagnall Edward Bringhurst
C
Sir Richard Chiverton Knight. Sir Francis Clark Knight. Sir Thomas Chambers Knight. Sir
William Coventry Knight. Sir Thomas Cullum Knight. James Clitherow Esquire;. Thomas Chown
Esquire;. Josiah Child Esquire;. John Cook Charles Chamberlan Robert Childcot Mr.
Joseph Collier Benjamin Collier Nathaniel Collier Benjamin Coals Thomas Canham
Joseph Chamberlayn Doctor Joseph Colstone John Cholmley William Clarke John
Culling
D
Michael Davison Esquire;. Benjamin Dethick Esquire;. William Daniel Esquire;. John Doget
Esquire;. Joseph Dawson Esquire;. Peter Daniel Alvaro Dacosta Abraham Dolins Andrew
Duncan Edmond Detnick William Delawood Robert Deluna Thomas Davall Isaac
Delillers
E
Sir James Edwards Knight. Humph. Edwin
F
Sir Thomas Foot Knight. and Bar. Edward Franklyn Christopher Foster Thomas
Frampton Abraham Fothergill Thomas Farrington
G
John Gould Esquire;. John Godscall John Goodier Thomas Green John Gardner John
Gunstone Henry Griffith Philip Graves Edward Grace
H
Sir Nathaniel Herne Knight. Sir Matthew Holworthy Knight. John Hobby Esquire;. Richard
Hutchinson Esquire;. James Houblon junior Esquire;. John Harris Walter Hampton Edward
Hopegood Thomas Hawks John Holworthy Humphrey Holcomb Joseph Herne Richard
Hutchinson junior
I
Sir Arthur Ingram Knight. John Jollife Esquire;. Henry Johnson Esquire;. Edward Jackson
s^^^or William Jarret (...)
K
Sir Jonathan Keat Knight. and Bar. George Keat Esquire;. Francis Knight Esquire;. Robert
Knightly Randal Knipe
L
Philip Lord Viscount Lisle Sir John Lethieullier Knight. Sir Kingsmill Lucy Bar.
Sir John Lawrence Knight. Sir Peter Leare Knight. Peter de Lanoy Esquire;. John Lane Esquire;.
Richard Lant Esquire;. Tho. Lenthall Esquire;. James Leaver Godfry Lee junior Nathaniel
Letton Simon Lewis Rob. Lightfoot
M
Sir John Moore Knight. Samuel Moyer Esquire;. William Meggs Esquire;. Nicholas Morris
Esquire;. William Moses Esquire;. Richard Mounteney Esquire;. Jasper Mauditt James Maurois
Colonel John Mews John Morden John Mascall Samuel Moyer junior Humphrey
Morris Thomas Murthwaite Captain Lawrence Moyer John Christopher Mayerne
Lawrence Martell
N
William Northey Esquire;. Humphrey Nicholson Jeremy Norrice Hugh Norris
O
John O^en Esquire;. Justus Otgher Peter Otgher Abraham Otgher junior
P
Sir William Peake Knight. Charles Pitfield Esquire;. George Perrier Esquire;. Thomas
Papillon Esquire;. John Paige Richard Poulter Joseph Prickman Peter Proby Samuel
Philpe William Potter Edward Pearce Paul Priaulx William Parker
R
Sir John Robinson Knight. and Bar. Robert Read Esquire;. Edward Rudge Esquire;. Daniel
Rawlinson Edward Rudge John Richards
S
Henry Spurstow Esquire;. William Sherrington Esquire;. William Salmon Esquire;. John
Sweeting senior George Snell William Sedgwick Daniel Sheldon John Stock Thomas
Shatterden James Southerby Robert Styles Benjamin Shute Ephraim Skinner
T
Sir William Thomson Knight. Sir William Turner Knight. Sir Henry Tulce Knight. Maurice
Thomson Esquire;. Robert Thomson Esquire;. Thomas Tomlins Esquire;. Samuel Thomson Esquire;.
Charles Thorrold Esquire;. Jeffery Thomas Esquire;. Colonel George Thomson Giles
Travers Stephen Thornely John Turner Robert Thirkettle Richard Turner Thomas
Tyte Christopher Tomlinson Francis Tyssen Doctor Joseph Tailor John Talbott
Benjamin Thorowgood
V
William Vanham Esquire;. John Upton Esquire;. Gilbert Upton
W
Sir Stephen White Knight. Sir Edward Winter Knight. Christopher Willoughby Esquire;.
Rowland Wynn Esquire;. Francis Warner Esquire;. Thomas Winter Esquire;. Roger Whitley Esquire;.
John Wood Thomas Wood Andrew West William Wildigoes Thomas Wilson James Ward
Robert Whittingham George Willoughby
The Names of the Governor, Deputy, and 24 Committees elected in April 1674,
together with their respective Appearances, there being 116 Courts to the First
of April 1675.
Sir Nathaniel Herne Governor, Present 107 Major Robert Thomson Deputy 109
R. Hon. George Ld. Berkeley Present 68 Sir John Banks Baronet 101 Sir Sam.
Barnardiston Bar. 73 John Bathurst Esquire;. 81 Mr. Christopher Boon 107 Capt.
John Broeckhoven 112 Sir Francis Clarke Knight. 102 Josia Child Esquire;. 102 Michael
Davison Esquire;. 110 John Doget Esquire;. 110 John Hobby Esquire;. 97 Richard Hutchinson
Esquire;. 113 John Jollife Esquire;. 106 Sir John Moore Knight. 105 Samuel Moyer Esquire;. 116
Mr. John Morden 96 Mr. John Paige 108 Mr. Edward Rudge 114 Mr. Daniel Sheldon
87 Sir William Thomson Knight. 81 Maurice Thomson Esquire;. 77 Charles Thorold Esquire;. 97
Sir Steven White Knight. 77 Rowland Wynn Esquire;. 100
A LIST OF THE NAMES OF ALL THE ADVENTURERS In the STOCK of the Honorable the
East-India-Company, the 12th, day of April, 1684. Whereof those Marked with a *
are not capable (by their Adventure) to be chosen Committees.
A.
Sir Joseph Ash Knt and Baronet Sir Matthew Andrews Knt Richard Aley Esquire;
George Arnold Esquire; William Allen Esquire; William Allington Esquire; Deceased. Thomas
Austin Esquire; Mr William Atwood Mr. Edward Adams Mrs. Grace Andrews * Sir Stephen
Anderson Baronet * Mr. Francis Ammonet Deceased * Dr. William Aglionby * Mr.
Edward Anthony * Mr. Francis Archer * Mrs. Susan Archer * Mrs. Elizabeth Allen
B.
His Grace the Duke of Beauford The Right Honorable George Earl of Berkley Sir
John Banks Baronet Sir Benj. Bathurst Knt and Alderm. Honorable Charles Berty
Esquire; Sir Thomas Bludworth Deceased. Sir John Brownlow Knt and Bar. Sir John
Buckworth Knt Sir Theophilus Biddulph Deceased Sir Francis Burdet John Bence
Esquire; James Burkin Esquire; Deceased. James Butler Esquire; Edward Bovery Esquire; Caleb
Banks Esquire; Mr. Christopher Boon Mr. Roger Braddyl Mr. Thomas Brown Mr. Thomas
Bostock Mr. Peter Bulkley Mr. Thomas Boon Mr. Robert Boddington Mr. John
Barksdale Mrs. Mary Bonfoy * The Honorable the Lady Henrieta Berkley * The
Honorable Rob. Boil Esquire; * Sir William Barkham Barronet * Sir Thomas Bide Knt
* Sir Francis Bridgeman Knt * James Barron Esquire; * Tho. Bromefield Esquire;
Deceased. * Edward Boscowen Esquire; * Thomas Brown Esquire; * John Bultecle Esquire; *
Dr. Gilbert Burnet * Mr. John Bull * Mr. Joas Bateman * Mr. Robert Blackborn *
Mr. Leonard Bates * Capt. Arthur Bailey Deceased * Mr. William Brown * Mr.
Thomas Boteler * Mr. John Bear * Mr. William Berman * Mr. Thomas Barret * Mr.
William Blackmore * Mr. Abraham Babbington * Mr. William Beeke Deceased * Mr.
William Beak Deceased * Mr. Robert Brimley * Mr. William Brain * Mr. Edward
Bringhurst * Mr. Robert Brittan * Mr. Richard Brown * Mr. Edmond Bury * Mr.
John Bocket * Mr. James Burkin Jun. * Mr. John Borret * Mr. John Bradley * Mr.
Edward Byrcke * Mr. John Bernard * Mr. Nicholas Builley * Mr. John Baker * Mr.
John Bridger * Mr. Henry Boon * Mrs. Mary Boon * Mrs. Ann Borrodale * Mrs.
Elizabeth Blackman
C.
Sir Josia Child Baronet Sir Job Charlton Knt Ditto in trust for Sir Francis
Willoughby Ditto in trust for Tho. Willoughby, Esquire Sir Thomas Chambers Sir
William Coventrie, Knt. Sir Joseph Colstone, Knt. Sir John Chardin, Knt. Thomas
Chowne, Esquire; John Creed, Esquire; Thomas Crispe, Esquire; Col. John Clerk Mr. Thomas
Canham Mr. Charles Chambrelan Mr. John Cook Mr. Thomas Cook Merchant Mr.
Thomas Cook Goldsmith Mr. John Cudworth Mr. John Carter Mr. William Cranmer
Mr. Joseph Chamberlain Mr. John Culling Mr. Benjamin Collier Mr. Nathaniel
Collier Mr. Joseph Collier Mrs. Elizabeth Coals Mr. Thomas Cole * Sir Nicholas
Carew* Knt * Mrs. Esther Chambrelan * Mrs. Susanna Critchlow * Mrs. Margaret
Child * Mrs. Ann Clarke * Mr. David Clarke * Mrs. Mary Clarke * Mr. John Clarke
* Mr. John Carter, Grocer. * Mr. Richard Creed * Mr. John Clissald, Deceased.
* Mr. John Child * Mr. Robert Coke * Mr. Norton Curtis * Mr. Samuel Crispe *
Mr. Edward Cox * John Cudworth Esquire; Deceased * Dr. Ralph Cudworth * Mr. Thomas
Cudworth * Mr. Samuel Cudworth * Mr. Charles Coney * Mr. Thomas Crawley * Mr.
John Chambers * Mr. Jacob Cox * Mr. James Cumber
D.
Sir Thomas Daval Knt. Sir Robert Duckenfield Knt. Peter Daniel Esquire; Alderman
Samuel Dashwood Esquire; Alderman Francis Dashwood Esquire; John Duboice Esquire; Charles
Duncomb Esquire; Mr. Robert Deluna Mr. William Delawood Mr. Edmond Dethick Mr.
Benjamin Dethick Mr. Andrew Duncan Mr. Abraham Dolins Mr. Alvaro Dacosta Mr.
Francis D'Liz Mrs. Alice Doggett Mrs. Ann Delanoy Mrs. Judith Davison * Right
Hon. Charles L. Dursley * Dame Ann Dethick * Sir Anthony Deane Knt. * Sir
Theodore De Vaux * William Daniel Esquire; * Joseph Dawson Esquire; * John Dowel Esquire; *
John Danvers Esquire; * Mr. Josia Dewey * Mr. Edmond Doughty * Mr. Daniel Dover *
Mr. James Dover * Mr. John Drigue * ^ * Mrs. Ann Daval * Mrs. Mary Da^iel *
Mrs. Hannah Davy
E.
Sir James Edwards Mr Humphrey Edwin * Giles Evre Esquire; * Mr. William Edwards *
Mr. John Elwick
F.
Sir John Frederick Knt Sir Thomas Foot Knt Thomas Frederick Esquire; Mr. William
Finch Deceased Mr. Christopher Foster Mr. Abraham Fothergil Mr. William Fashion
* John Foster Esquire; * Richard Freeman Esquire; * Smith Fleetwood Esquire; * Mr. Tho.
Frampton Deceased * Mr. Andrew Franklyn * Mr. Edward Fenwick * Mr. John Fisher
* Mr. Robert Fellows * Mr. William Friar * Mrs. Sarah Flexney * Mr. Joseph
Finch
G.
Sir Gilbert Gerrard Knt. Sir William Goulston Knt. Sir William Godolphin Knt.
John Goodier Esquire; Mr. Francis Gosfright Mr. Thomas Gray Mr. Philip Grave
Deceased Mr. Richard Goodal Mr. John Gunston Mr. Edward Grace. Mrs. Susan
Green Mrs. Judith Gould * William George Gent. * Richard Graham Esquire; * Henry
Gray Esquire; Deceased * Dr. Charles Goodall * Mr. Henry Godolphin * Mr. George
Gossright * Mr. Jacob Garrard * Mr. John Gardner * Mr. John Godscal * Mr.
Michael Godfrey * Mr. Henry Griffith * Mr. Thomas Glover * Mr. Theophilus Gale
* Mr. George Gifford * Mr. Henry Gregory * Mr. Edward Gould * Mr. George Grove
* Mr. John Green. * Mr. Robert Green * Mr. Anthony Gomesserra * Mr. Jaques
Gonsales * Mrs. Ann Grave * Mrs. Mary Good
H.
Sir Matthew Holworthy Knt. Dec. Sir Nathaniel Herne Knt. Dec. Sir Roger Hill
Knt. Richard Hutchinson Esquire; John Herbert Esquire; John Howland Esquire; Edward
Hopegood Esquire; Deceased. Mr. Joseph Herne Mr. John Holworthy Mr. John Hall Mr.
Robert Huckle John Huniades Gent. Mr. Peter Henriques ^ * Peter Hasbert Esquire; *
Henry Hall Esquire; * William Hooker Esquire; * Thomas Henshaw Esquire; * Dr. Baldwin Hamey
* Mr. Isaac Houblon * Mr. Nathaniel Hunter * Mr. Thomas Hobson * Dr. Francis
Hungerford * Mr. Claude Haies * Mr. John Hall Deceased * Mr. Thomas Hancox *
Mr. Nathaniel Hawes * Mr. Peter Hasbert * Mr. Thomas Hatton * Mr. Henry Hampson
* Mr. Richard Humphries * Mr. Nicholas Hayward * Mr. Francis Hacker * Mr.
Thomas Hall * Mr. John Hill * Mr. Henry Hickford Deceased. * Mr. Nathan
Heckford * Mr. Samuel Harris * Dame Elizabeth Hook * Mrs. Marry Hobby * Mrs.
Angel Hampton * Mrs. Alice Hawks * Mrs. Margaret Harris * Mrs. Elizabeth
Hitchcott * Mrs. Helena Heycock * Mrs. Sarah Hickford * Mr. James Hudson
I.
Sir Henry Johnson Deceased Henry Johnson Esquire; John Jolliffe Esquire; Deceased. Mr.
William Jarret Mr. Abraham Jacob Mr. Jeffery Jefferies Dame Ann Ingram * Mr.
Roger Jackson * Mr. Peter Jackson * Mr. Richard Jackson * Mr. Edward Ingram
K.
Sir Robert Knightly George Keate Esquire; Deceased Mr. Randal Knipe * Samuel
Kerridge Esquire; * Mrs. Mary King * Mr. Edward Keling
L.
The Right Honorable Philip Earl of Leicester Sir John Lethieulier Sir John
and Sam. Lethieulier Sir Peter Leare Mr. Sam. Lethieulier Mr. Nathaniel Letton
Dec. Mr. John Letton Mr. James Leaver Mr. Thomas Langham Mrs. Ann Lant * Sir
John Lawrence * Sir Richard Loyd * Dame Susanna Leare * Sir Thomas Littleton *
Mr. Adam Lyle * Mr. Joseph Lindsey * Mr. Garrard Loyd Deceased * Mr. Francis
Lidstone * Mrs. Sarah Letton * Mr. Josiah Lawton * Mr. Thomas Lane * Mrs. Mary
Lewis * Mrs. Elizabeth Lane
M.
Sir John Moore Knt. and Alderman Sir Richard Mason Samuel Moyer Esquire; Deceased.
Nicholas Morris Esquire; Ralph Marshal Esquire; Mr. Robert Marshal Capt. Lawrence
Moyer Mr. John Morden Mr. Rich. Mountney Jun. Mrs. Mary Murthwaite Mr. Nathan.
Mountney Mrs. Ann Martell Mr. Samuel Moyer Jun. * The Hon. Charlotte Mordaunt *
The Hon. Baptist May * Sir Thomas Middleton * Dr. John Moore * William Moses
Esquire; * Thomas Martin Esquire; * Thomas Methwold Esquire; * George Moyce Esquire; * Mrs.
Mary Mead * Mr. John Miller * Mr. John Morley Jun. * Mr. William Moyer * Mr.
Charles Mounteney * Mr. Rob. Masters * Mr. John Marshal * Mr. Sam. Marshall *
Mrs. Margaret Massingbird * Mr. John Vander Marsh Dec. * Mrs. Rebecca Marsh
N.
Sir Humph. Nicholson Knt Dec. Robert Nelson Esquire; Mr. Richard Norton, Jun. Mr.
Hugh Norris Mr. Jeremy Norris * William Northey Esquire; Dec. * Mr. Thomas
Nicholson * Mr. Michael Newnam * Mr. Richard Nelthrope * Mr. Anthony Nourse *
Mr. Richard Normansel * Mrs. Rachel Newman * Mr. Erasmus Norwich and Sarah his
Wife
O.
Right Hon. John Lord Osulstone Mr. Justus Otgher Mr. Peter Otgher Mr. Abraham
Otgher * Sir James Oxinden * Lieutenant Colonel Oglethorpe * Mr. Philip Opde
Beak * Mr. Robert Oldsworth Dec. * Mr. Thankful Owen Dec.
P.
Peter Paravicine Esquire; and Ald. Thomas Papillon Esquire;. Mr. John Paige Dr. John
Panton Mr. Anthony Philp Deceased. Mr. James Pickering Mr. Henry Powel Deceased
Mr. Samuel Powel Mr. Peter Proby Mr. Will. Potter deceased Mr. George Pappillon
Mr. James Paul * Sir Charles Pitfield deceased * Edward Progers Esquire; * Jervis
Price Esquire; * Mr. Francis Pargitter * Mr. John Pack * Mr. Edward Palmer * Mr.
Sam. Phelp deceased. * Mr. Paul Priaulx * Mr. Tho. Pinfold deceased. * Mr.
Adrian Vander Post dec. * Mr. John Patrick * Mr. Thomas Pain * Doctor Thomas
Paget * Mr. Thomas Perkins * Mr. Will. Pearce * Mrs. Record Peacock * Mr. Char.
Penrodock deceased. * Mr. Edward Pearce * Mr. John Pargitter
R.
Sir James Rushout Knt. Edward Rudge Esquire; Edward Rudge of Essex Esquire; Robert
Read Esquire; Thomas Rider Esquire; Mr. Thomas Rawlinson Mr. Nicholas Reynardson Dame
Susanna Riccard Mr. James Rudge Mr. Alphonso Rodrigues * Mr. Anthony Rawlins *
Mr. Arthur Riccard * Mr. John Roy * Mr. Edward Richardson * Mr. John Reyner
deceased. * Mr. Gerrard Russel * Mr. John Riches * Mrs. Margaret Robinson * Mr.
Francis Rainsford * Mr. Leonard Robinson
S.
Sir Jeremy Sambrook Knt. Sir Joseph Sheldon, etc. in trust for the Children of
Sir John Robinson Sir James Smith Knt and Ald. Henry Stafford Esquire; Henry Serle
Esquire; John Serle Esquire; Richard Stern Esquire; Henry Spurstow Mr. Will. Sedgwick Mr.
George Snell Mr. John Stock Mr. Nath. Scottow Mr. James Smith Deceased. Mr.
John Smith Mincing lanc Mr. John Sewel * Sir Jeremy Snow * Dr. Edward
Stillingfleet * John Stafford Esquire; * James Smith Esquire; * Mr. James Smith Farrier
* Mr. George Smith * Mr. John Smith Scrivener * Mr. John Smith Leather seller *
Mr. Nath. Smith * Mr. Edw. Smith * Dame Jane Smith * Mr. Samuel Swinnock * Mr.
Samuel Smalley * Mr. Ralph Standish * Mr. Isaac Sawbridge * Mr. Will. Samborne
* Mr. Thomas Shellbury * Mr. John Sweeting * Mr. John Sheffeild * Mr. Frederick
Steward * Mr. Matthew Sheppard * Mr. Joseph Sheafe * Mr. Richard Spire * Mr.
William Spire * Mr. James Southbey * Mr. John Stripe * Mr. John Short Sen. *
Mr. Robert Snow * Mr. Henry Southcot * Mrs. Alice Stamford * Mrs. Elizabeth
Serle
T.
The Right Honorable Sir Henry Tulse Knt and Lord Mayor Sir Will. Turner Knt
and Ald. Robert Thompson Esquire; Ditto as Exec. of Sir Tho. Hook Charles Thorold
Esquire; Nathaniel Tench Esquire; Thomas Townsend Esquire; Mr. John Turner Jun. Mr. Francis
Tyssen Mr. Giles Travers Mr Joseph Thompson Mr. John Taulbot Mr. Christopher
Thomlinson Mrs. Martha Tomlinson * Benj. Thorowgood Esquire; and Ald. * Sigismund
Trafford Esquire; * John Tailor Esquire; * Mr. John Tailor * Mr. Richard Tailor * Mrs.
Ann Tailor * Mr. William Trinder * Mr. Anthony Twine * Mr. Isaac Tillard * Mr.
Will. Thompson Deceased. * Mr. Anthony Tourney * Mr. Daniel Thomas * Mr,
Francis Thompson * Mr. Francis Towle Deceased. * Mr. Thomas Turner * Mr.
Matthew Turner Deceased.
V.
William Vanham Esquire; John Upton Esquire; Constantine Vernattie Esquire; * Mr. Peter
Vinck. * Mr. Thomas Vernon. * Mr George Underwood.
W.
The Right Honorable Charles Earl of Worcester Sir Joseph Williamson Sir James
Ward Sir Edward Waldoe Sir Edmond Wiseman Roger Whitley Esquire; Thomas Winter Esquire;
Deceased. George Willoughby Esquire; Mr. Thomas Wood Mr. Robert Woolley Mr. James
Wallis Mr. John Willaw Mr. James Wancourt Mr. Stephen White Deceased. Mrs. Ann
Wheat * Francis Warner Esquire; * Henry Whistler Esquire; * Thomas Wardel Esquire; * Dr.
John Wallis * Mr. Samuel Waldoe * Mr. George Wade * Mr. Hammond Ward * Mr.
Edward West * Mr. Robert Whittingham * Mr. Richard White * Mr. William Wildey *
Mr. Roger Whitley * Mr. James Whitchurch * Mr. Robert Winnington * Mr. James
Windus * Mr. Thomas Woodcock * Mrs. Ann Walter * Mrs. Mary West * Mrs. Izabella
Wheat * Mrs Frances Wheat * Mrs. Ann Whittingham
Y.
* Mr. Christopher Yates
Memorandum, 500 l. Adventure has but one Vote, and no less then 1000 l.
renders any person capable of being chosen of the Committees.

The Adventurers are personally to bring in their Votes and not to send them by
any other hand, and are desired ^


The Names of the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Twenty-four Committees.
Elected in 1683. Together with their respective Appearances, there being 125
Courts to the 11th. of April, 1684. Inclusive.
Sir John Banks Govenour Present. 113 Sir Jeremy Sambrooke Deputy 125
R. Hon. Charles E. of Worcester Present. 5 R. Hon. George E. of Berkely 85 Sir
Joseph Ash 59 Caleb Banks Esquire; 93 Mr. Christophher Boon 110 Sir. Josia Child
82 John Creed Esquire; 96 Mr. Thomas Canham 119 Mr. Thomas Cook 111 Sir Thomas
Daval 120 Mr. Sheriff Daniel 65 John du Bois Esquire; 124 Sir James Edwards 106
Richard Hutchinson Esquire; 116 Mr. Joseph Herne 121 Sir Henry Johnson 18 Mr.
William Jarret 124 Sir John Moore 115 Mr. John Paige 110 Edward Rudge Esquire; 121
Henry Serle Esquire; 82 Mr. William Sedgwick 119 Mr. Francis Tyssen 119 Sir James
Ward 122
Some Considerations concerning the Prejudice which the Scotch Act Establishing
a COMPANY to Trade to the East and West Indies, (with large Privileges, and on
easy Terms) may bring to the English Sugar Plantations, and the Manufactury of
Refining Sugar in England, and some means to prevent the same from Scotland and
other Nations.
THE present Parliament, both Lords and Commons, having been pleased to take
into their Consideration, as matter of great moment, the Business of Trade in
general, and particularly what Inconveniences and Mischiefs the late Scotch
Act may bring to the English East and West East India Trade; no doubt, the
Persons concerned in the several parts of those Trades, will severally lay open
the Damage which England will suffer, by the Scotch and any other Nations
Trading to those Parts, (or in the Commodities produced there) on easier and
more advantageous Terms than this Kingdom does; and amongst the rest the Trade
of Sugar, which is become so large and beneficial to England, deserves not the
least Regard: For, whereas we were formerly supplied with that Commodity from
Portugal, which drew an Overbalance of Money from hence; now, and of late we
produce enough, not only to serve our own Consumption, but to export a great
overplus of raw or unpurged Sugar to Holland, Hambro, and before the War to
France; and had gained a great Trade in Exporting our White (...) the
inequality of the Duty, and the advantages given to the Dutch and other
Nations, to Refine our own raw Sugars, and to Export the Sugars which come
White from the Plantations rendered it unprofitable, whereby the Manufacture
here has been discouraged; and will be more so by the Scotch Act and Agents, if
not prevented; for already the Scotch are seeking to bribe and entice away our
Master-Workmen, and had actually hired one, to whom the Master was forced to
advance his Wages 10 l. per Annum to keep him.

There needs no Argument to evince the great benefit which the Trade of Sugar
has been to this Kingdom; not only by the Riches it has brought in, and the
Employment of many Ships and Seamen, but by a Manufacture it has Established
here at Home, which employs Thousands of People, who are Fed and Clothed by
our own Product, and before used to come from abroad: and which, if due
Encouragement were given, would be Exported in great Quantities, to the further
Enriching this Nation, and producing many other Advantages.

It is agreed on all hands, That it is an advantage to any Nation to abound
with People, especially such as are Laborious and Industrious, they help to
consume our own Product, their Labor produces what turns into Money at home or
abroad; and the more populous any Nation is, the stronger and better able it is
to defend it self against any Foreign Power.

It is also agreed, that the means to promote and increase any Manufacture in
England, is to render those employed therein as easy as may be; and especially
to take care, if possible, that other Nations have not any Advantage of us; and
this has continually been the care of the Crown and the Parliament, as any new
Manufacture has been set up here. We have gained upon other Nations in the
Manufacture of Silk, etc. which are the Product of other Countries; What then
should hinder us from out-doing all others in the Manufacture of our Sugar
which is our own Product, and wherein we have in our Power the advantage of all
other People? the only reason I think, which can be assigned is, that as yet
this matter has not met with the favorable occasion to be duly Considered in
Parliament; for want whereof, other Nations have beaten us out of the Trade of
Exporting our Refined Sugar; and if the Scotch settle in any Plantation, and
produce Sugar, it may become past Remedy, or by a quicker Method by enticing
away our Workmen, they will at once Disable us from carrying it on. It is
therefore to be seen how the Case stands.

s. d. Raw or Unpurged Sugar from the Plantations pays Custom for a Hundred
Weight, 1 6 Purged or Clay'd Sugar from the Plantations under the degree of
White, the same Custom, for a Hundred Weight 1 6 White Sugar from the
Plantations; for a Hundred Weight 5 0

Muscovado Sugar, is computed to make One hundred Weight of White Sugar.

On Exportation of these Sugars half the Duty is paid back.

On Exportation of White Sugar made in England, a Duty is paid for 100 Weight 6
d.

Whereby it appears, that other Nations have our raw or unpurged Sugar 9 d. per
100 weight cheaper than the English Refiners, which in 100 weight of White
Sugar makes 2 s. 3 d. per 100 weight difference; and the White Sugar from the
Plantations, paying Inwards 5 s. per 100 weight, and drawing back half on
Exportation, pays but 2s. 6d per 100 weight; whereas, if our Refiners Export
White Sugar, it stands them in 5 s. per 100 weight Duty; viz. 1 s. 6d. per 100
weight on the raw Sugar Imported, whereof 300 going to make 100 weight of White
makes 4s. 6d. and 6d. per 100 weight paid on Exportation, makes 5 s. per 100
weight: So that on all hands, the English Refiner is under great disadvantage
and discouragement, which is further considerably increased by the high Duty of
about 18 l. per Ton on Spirits drawn from English made Melasses. And hence it
comes to pass, that Foreigners work up our raw Sugars, and furnish with White
Loaf Sugar, those Markets which England might, and would highly be our
advantage to supply. And it is in some degree as if we should send our Wool
abroad to be Manufactured, and thence to be dispersed to Foreign Markets: For
it is plain in fact, that now none of our White Load Sugar (...) difficulties
which the Refining Trade in England labors under, for the removing which in
some measure it is humbly proposed.

5 s. per 100 weight may be laid upon all Melasses Imported from the
Plantations, to be Repaid on Exportation; which will not hurt the Plantations,
it being better for the Planters that no Melasses were Exported from thence.

2s. 6d. per 100 weight may be drawn back upon White Sugar made in England, as
is upon White Sugar Imported from the Plantations, whereby the Crown will
receive no prejudice; for that the more English Refined Sugar is Exported, the
greater quantity of White Sugar from the Plantations will be Expended in
England, on which the King has the Duty of 5 s. per 100 weight.



1s. 6d. per 100 weight as raw unpurged Sugars; the said Sugars may pay 1 s. 6
d. per 100 only more, which will then make an indifferent equality; and then
the Duties will be thus, viz.

On White Sugars 5 s. per C. weight. On Clay'd Sugars under the degree of White
3 s. per C. weight. On Raw or Muscovado Sugars 1 s. 6 d. per C. weight.

This will encourage the Refining in England, and increase the King's Revenue
in all probability near 10000 l. per Annum, and without prejudice to any but
the Scotch and Foreigners.

FINIS.
Eleven Queries Humbly tendered, Relating to the Bill for Prohibiting the
Wearing of East India Silks, and Printed and Dyed Calicoes.
I. WHY Should East India Silks and Bengals be prohibited, which to the Nation
are three times as cheap as Dutch, French and Italian Silks?

II. Why East India Silks, Bengals and Printed Calicoes, that pay Five times
the Freight, and Twenty per Cent. more Custom, than Dutch and Italian Silks?

III. Why Persia Silks purchased with English Cloth and Stuffs, more than
Dutch, French and Italian Silks bought with our Money?

IV. Why should Painted Calicoes, from India be prohibited, when we must in
their Room Print Dutch, French, Scotch or German Linnens, which will cost the
Nation three times the price?

V. Why should we enrich our Neighbors by Prohibiting East India Silks, and
wearing of theirs, when at one time or other, they may employ the costs of
those Silks against us?

VI. Why should we interrupt that Trade, which not only affords us the cheapest
Commodities in the World, but likewise encourages the Buidling large Ships,
which in cases of necessity may be useful for the defense of this Kingdom?

VII. What advantage will it be to England, that her Manufactures (whether at
low or high price) are consumed within it self, the Nation being thereby never
the Richer?

VIII. Why should we Raise up some Artists to oppress others? For if Spinning
and Weaving be English Manufactures, so is Dyeing, Calendring, Stiffning,
Glazeing and Printing?

IX. Why should we prohibit the wearing East India Manufactures, which are so
cheap, to encourage the wearing our own which are much dearer, and yet give
liberty to Export them into other Countries, where they will have the same
effect upon ours there?

X. What encouragement will it be to bring hither those far setch'd
Commodities, when we have no vent for them at Home, but must send them to be
blown upon in a Foreign Market?

XI. Why should we Cut off this profitable Trade from the English, and let the
Dutch, French, Sweeds and Scotch run away with it? For Trade like the Sea,
never loses Ground in any one place, but she gains it in another, and if
checked or restrained takes it flight and carries its Blessiings to more
Hospitable Countries.

Eleven Queries Relating to the Bill, for Prohibiting East India Silks, and
Printed Callicoes.

AN ANSWER TO THE Eleven QUERIES
Humbly tendered, Relating to the BILL for prohibiting the Wearing of
East India Silks, and Printed and Dyed Callicoes.
QUERIES. ANSWERS. I. WHY should East India Silks and Bengalls be prohibited,
which to the Nation are three times as cheap as Dutch, French, and Italian
Silks? I. THE Cheaper they are, the more damage they do to our own Growth and
Manufactures, and therefore the more necessary and reasonable to be prohibited.
II. Why East India Silks, Bengalls and Printed Callicoes, that pay five times
the Freight, and Twenty per Cent. more Custom, than Dutch and Italian Silks?
II. The difference in Custom is not true in Fact; and their great Freight will
not recompense the Damage the Nation receives by wearing them instead of its
own Manufactures. III. Why Persia Silks purchased with English Cloth and
Stuffs, more then Dutch, French, and Italian Silks bought with our Money? III.
Persia Silks (so called) are made in the Bay of Bengall, and bought with Money:
Dutch, French and Italians are almost all beat out by our own Silks. IV. Why
should painted Callicoes from India be prohibited, when we must in their Room
print Dutch, French, Scotch, or German Linnens, which will cost the Nation
three times the price? IV. Because Floured, Stripped and Printed Worstead and
half-Silk Stuffs are now worn, (and with English or Irish Linen may be worn)
and supply all the uses of Callicoes, and not Dutch Linnens, etc. V. Why should
we enrich our Neighbors by Prohibiting East India Silks, and wearing of
theirs, when at one time or other, they may employ the Costs of those Silks
against us? V. This Kingdom (and not our Neighbors) will receive great
Advantage, and be inricht thereby, and by that means the better able to support
and defend our selves, both at home and abroad. VI. Why should we interrupt
that Trade, which not only affords us the cheapest Commodities in the World,
but likewise encourages the building large Ships, which in Cases of Necessity
may be useful for the defense of this Kingdom? VI. The first part is answered
already in the Answer to the first Query; and as to the Shipping, it may in a
great measure be employed in bringing over Raw Silk and other Commodities which
may be Manufactured here, and turn to good account to the Nation. VII. What
advantage will it be to England, that her Manufactures (whether at low or high
price) are consumed within it self, the Nation being thereby never the Richer?
VII. This Nation will be the richer by consuming its own Manufactures, then it
will be by consuming Foreign, purchased with our Money, though at very cheap
rates. VIII. Why should we Raise up some Artists to oppress others? For if
Spinning and Weaving be English Manufactures, so is Dying, Calendring,
Stiffning, Glazing and Printing? VIII. That the Printers, etc. are very
inconsiderable in number to the Spinsters and Weavers, and some of them now
are, and the rest may as well be employed in printing our own, as India
Manufactures. IX. Why should we prohibit the wearing East India Manufactures,
which are so cheap, to encourage the wearing our own which are much dearer, and
yet give liberty to Export them into other Countries, where they will have the
same effect upon ours there? IX. Our own Manufactures are cheaper to the Nation
than East India Manufactures are or can be; and as to the damage they will do
us in other Countries, we are sensible of it, but cannot prevent it; (for if we
will not carry them thither, other Nations will); and therefore the more need
to hinder it at home. X. What encouragement will it be to bring hither those
far fetched Commodities, when we have no vent for them at Home, but must send
them to be blown upon in a Foreign Market? X. As much as formerly; when that
Trade was in a flourishing Condition, Then three parts in four was Exported, as
appears by their printed Books; the Bill takes away but part of the home
Consumption, which may be supplied by Raw Silks, etc. XI. Why should we Cut off
this profitable Trade from the English, and let the Dutch, French, Sweeds and
Scotch run away with it? For Trade like the Sea, never loses ground in any one
place, but she gains it in another, and if checked or restrained, take its
flight, and carries its Blessings to more Hospitable Countries. XI. If this
Trade be profitable, it is only so to some private Persons, and not to the
Nation; so better lost than kept. But by this, neither Dutch, French, Swedes or
Scotch can be benefitted; so that the Trade loosing Ground, it will be no more
than thus, the East India Company will lose some part of their Trade in
Manufactured Goods, and the Nation be great Gainers thereby.

An ANSWER TO THE QUERIES Relating to the BILL for Restraining East India
wrougt Silks, etc. in England.

REASONS Humbly Offered For Restraining the Wearing of Wrought Silks, Bengals,
and Dyed, Printed, and Stained Callicoes, of the Product and Manufacture of
Persia and the East Indies,, in England and our Plantations.
THE Goods Imported from the East Indies, for several Years after the
East India Company were first Established, were Drugs, Spices, Saltpeter, etc.
and some Course Callico's, which were most Exported again: The Members of that
Company being then afraid to adventure on other Manufactured Goods, because
they well knew it would prejudice our own, and raise a Storm against the
Company, as they oftentimes declared.

That the Charter of the East India Company was Confirmed by King Charles II.
in the Thirteenth Year of his Reign: and the Law for permitting Bullion to be
Exported, was made soon after, at the Solicitation of that Company; and till
then, little Silver or Gold was Exported. After that Law was made, begun the
great Exportation of Bullion to India.

That, in Anno 72, or 73 several Artificers, were sent over by the Company,
with great quantity of English Patterns, to teach the Indians how to
Manufacture Goods to make them Vendible in England, and the rest of the
European Markets. After which began the great Trade in Manufactured Goods from
the Indies.

That this was complained of, and proved before several Lords appointed by King
Charles II. in Anno 1680, or 81. Whereupon the Company received some
Discouragement; but finding great Gain by Wrought Silks, Bengals and Callico's,
would not desist Trading in them: upon which great Complaints were made in
Parliament, against the growth of the East India Trade.

That about 500000 l. in Bullion, and but small quantities of our Manufactures
have been Yearly Exported; and vast quantities of Manufactured Goods Imported,
for several Years before the War.

That a great part of the India Manufactured Goods were spent in England, and
our Plantations, in the room of our own Manufactures, viz. their Wrought Silks,
Bengall's, Painted and Dyed Callico's, in the room of our Silks, Half Silks,
Worsted Stuffs, Says, Perpetuano's, and diverse other Commodities, not only for
Vestments for both Sexes, but for Hanging of Rooms, Beds, etc.

That the India Trade was increased, before the War, to a very great height,
and their Manufactures in so great request, that they (from being a Scandal to
be worn a few years before) soon after became the general Wear of almost all
sorts and degrees of Persons; by which means our own Manufactures were
neglected, and our Manufacturers thereby under great discouragement, being not
able to carry on their Trades, many were forced to give over, whereby the Poor
wanted Employment, the Price of Wool reduced very low, and great quantities of
Wool could not be Manufactured: Whereupon the Parliament thought it necessary
to make a Law for Burying in Woollen, thereby to consume some of the Wool that
lay heavy upon the Growers Hand.

That the Indians have Provisions and Materials very cheap, and Wages at three
Halfpence or two pence a Day; which disables us, and the rest of the European
Traders, to contend with them; and for this reason, their Trade did increase
apace, until this War; and unless restrained, will most certainly increase, to
the ruining of our best Fabrics, and the vast number of People that have their
Livelihood and Dependence thereupon.

That since this War, the India Company have labored under some
Discouragements, and but small quantities of their Manufactured Goods, in
proportion to what they formerly brought in, have been Imported; by reason
thereof, great Encouragement has been given to the Manufactures of Silk, Half
Silk, and Worsted, which have been very much improved in a great variety of
Figured, Stripped, and other sort of Stuffs, which have been made not only in
London, Norwich and Canterbury, in much greater quantities than ever; but this
Manufacture has now spread it self to Bristol, Newbury, and diverse other Parts
of the Kingdom; and will yet increase, if due Encouragement be given thereto.

That since our Trade has increased, greater numbers of Poor have been
employed, and greater quantities of English Wool consumed; so that the Price of
the Wool is advanced, and the Labor and Wages of the Poor increased; which
enables them to live comfortably, and consume the Product of the Land, to
support themselves and Families; which is of great Advantage to the Landlords
and Tenants, and the Benefit of the whole Nation.

That in case the East India Stock should be enlarged, and that Trade settled
by Act of Parliament, it will be in the power of that Company to ruin our
Woollen and Silk Manufactures, and bring down the Price of Wool, and Work-mens
Labor and Wages, as low, if not lower, than ever, unless the Wearing of the
said Manufactured Goods be prohibited in England, and the Plantations.

That such Prohibition would not only encourage our own Manufactures, upon
which the Value of Lands, and the Employment of our Poor depends, but prevents
the Exportation of much of our Coin, which at this time can be very ill spared;
and also prevent many of the Inconveniences feared from the Scotch East India
Company.

That since there is a Trade found out to the Indies, no Objection can well be
made against their Trade in Spices, Drugs, Saltpeter, etc. nor against the
Manufactured Goods that are brought in, and again exported to Foreign Markets;
because it will be carried on by others, if we should neglect it: But certainly
it must be accounted very ill Husbandry, and will be of fatal and ruinous
consequence, to despise our own Manufactures, and send our Gold and Silver to
the Indies, from whence it will never return, to purchase Manufactur'd Goods to
be consumed at Home, when our Money may be kept here to circulate among our
selves; and is so necessary to our Commerce, and payments of our Fleets and
Armies, without which, we can neither be rich or safe.

That the great Argument that is used in favor of the East India Company, is,
That although they Export great Quantities of Bullion, yet they bring in much
more for the Goods they sell in Foreign Markets. Supposing their Assertion to
be true, this can be no Argument against the prohibiting their Manufactures to
be worn in England, and our Plantations, but rather an Argument for it; for
what is consumed at Home, brings in no Bullion; and if none be consumed at
Home, more may be sent Abroad: for it will make the Company more industrious to
find out either New Commodities to deal in, or Markets for the vending thereof,
whereby they may make their Trade more Profitable to the Nation.

It is also alleged, in favor of the East India Trade, That there have of
late years been great Quantities of English Cloth Exported by the Company. To
which this Answer is to be given, That the Cloth by them Exported more than
formerly, is not consumed in India, but sent thence to Persia; which hinders
the Turkey Merchants, who formerly used to supply those Markets. So that the
East India Company sending away our Cloth, proves no Advantage to us, and is
only done to gain a good Opinion, and make the Nation believe that their Trade
is not so prejudicial to us as has been represented, or as in reality it is.

That the sending our Money to the East Indies, to purchase Goods perfectly
Manufactured there, may Advance Lands, Enrich the People, Employ the Poor in
India: But such as are spent here, in the room of our own Manufactures, must
have the quite contrary effect with us.

Whether it be for the Interest of England, to Settle the East India Trade,
without Restrictions, is humbly submitted to the Consideration of the
Parliament.

REASONS Against Wearing of India Wrought Sikls, Bengals, and Callicoes, In
England, and the Plantations.

The WEAVERS of London do humbly offer to the serious Consideration of both
Houses of Parliament;
That this Kingdom of England will sustain great Evils and Damage by enjoining
the Wear of Woollen Manufactures and Leather, both by Men, Women, and Children,
by a Law; and so consequently restraining the Wear of Silks and Hair Stuffs
manufactured in England; And that great benefit may ensue to the English
Nation, by prohibiting the Use and Wear of Silks and Stuffs Foreign
manufactur'd, appears by these following Particulars, viz.

THE Restraint of wearing Silks, and Stuffs made of Mohair Yarn manufactured in
England, will necessarily impoverish and depopulate the Nation, there being no
Trades in England that employ so many People as those relating to the
Manufacturing of Silk and Hair; for upon the most modest computation they are
judged to be above Three hundred thousand Souls Weavers, Throwsters, Windsters;
Dyers, and other Dependents thereupon, that do subsist thereby, and that have
no other way of Livelihood; and a great part of these have served seven years
Apprentiship to their several Trades, according to the Laws of this Nation,
(which makes their Trades a Freehold and Inheritance) and have Families depend
upon them. Now if by Law there should be any Restraint of wearing English made
Silks and Hair Stuffs for any part of the Year, they would be deprived of their
said Freehold and Inheritance, and must of necessity not only be impoverished,
but want bread in one year, nay the greatest part of them in one Months time,
they having nothing but from hand to mouth, and what they get by their daily
Labor to supply their daily Wants; and consequently the greatest part of them
must be necessitated in a short time either to take rude and desperate courses,
or transport themselves into Foreign Parts to get their Bread; there being no
other Employment (either Handicraft or others) that can receive one fourth part
of so great a Number, considering that the Old and Young are hereby employed,
and cannot otherwise, but be chargable to the places of their Abode.

If it be objected, that this Restraint is intended but for five Months in the
Year, and therefore cannot have such dismal Effects as are before mentioned:
For Answer it is said, That these five Months Restraint of wearing them will
take off the Employment of the Manufacturers thereof eight Months in the Year,
and in little time amount to little less than a total Prohibition of them; for
that the persons that wear English made Silks and Hair Stuffs are generally of
the best Quality, and all of them either Leaders or Followers of the newest
Modes and Fashions, and therefore it cannot be supposed that they will buy Silk
Garments to lay by them all the Winter to wear in Spring, for that then newer
Modes and Fashions will come in, and there cannot be allowed less (one with
another) than three or four Months for them to wear out a Silk Garment: So that
take the five Months in the Year wherein they are not to be worn at all, and
the three or four Months before, which must be allowed for the wearing of those
they have already bought, there will not remain above three or four Months at
most for the Manufacturers to sell their Silks and Stuffs; which amounts to
little less than a total Prohibition, for this reason, for that the Merchants
either cannot, or at least will not, give credit to the Weaver or Throwster the
Year round; and if they should, yet is there not one Weaver or Throwster in a
thousand, that is able to supply their Workmen and Windsters with Money so long
time, without Returns of Money for their Commodities, So that it is manifest
notwithstanding this Objection, the forementioned mischiefs of Poverty and
Depopulation must ensue upon it.

And if it be objected, That it is not intended to restrain the wear of Stuffs
made of Mohair Yarn, commonly called Chamlets, or other Stuffs, whereof the
Woof or Warp shall be of Mohair Yarn; This must be acknowledged to be so, but
withal, these Chamlets and Stuffs are limited to be used for Cloaks and Coats
for Men only, which do not work up the fourth Part of the Mohair Yarns
imported, nor do they employ one sixth Part of the Hands that Mohair Yarns
would employ; for it is to be noted, that the several Commodities hereafter
named, viz.

Barratines Prunella's Crispiana's Tamaleta's Calamantoes Mohairs Farrendines
Morella's
and diverse other Stuffs are made up of three Parts of Mohair Yarn, and but one
Part of Silk; and these are chiefly for the use of Women and Children in the
Winter season who are not allowed to wear the same.

That as this will impoverish the Manufacturers of Silk and Hair Stuffs, so it
will also diminish the consumption of Wool, and impoverish the Manufacturers
thereof, and consequently cause yet a greater Depopulation of the Nation.

Because the greatest part of our Cloths and Stuffs made here of English Wool
are transported beyond the Seas, and chiefly to Turkey; in exchange whereof the
Merchants bring raw Silks and Mohair Yarn, which sets so many thousand people
to work again; and if the Consumption of Silk and Hair be abated in England, as
it must needs be by the Restraint of the Wear thereof, the Exportation of Cloth
must needs abate proportionably thereunto, for that there is little other
Commodities proper for England to be had there in exchange for our Cloths; so
that whereas the Turkey Company in particular have of late exported twenty five
or thirty thousand Cloths in a Year, they may be reduced to ten or twelve
thousand, and by degrees to little or nothing; and consequently there will be
eighteen or twenty thousand Cloths lie on the Clothiers hands in one Year more
than they can vend; and that there will be such an Abatement in the Exportation
of English Cloths, if English made Silks and Hair Stuffs be not allowed to be
worn five Months in the Year, will appear not only from the former Argument,
that there are little other Commodities to exchange in Turkey for them but Silk
and Hair; but also because the Winter Season, wherein these Silks and Stuffs
are prohibited to be worn, is the chief time for the Consumption of Silk and
Hair Stuffs, for that the richest Silks and Stuffs are worn in that season, and
is the principal time for the Consumption of them. And if this be true, (as
most certain it is) that this will cause so great an Abatement in the
Exportation of our Cloths made of English Wool, what miserable Poverty and
Desolation will it bring upon the Manufacturers of the Staple Commodity of this
Nation, and in little time force them also to transport themselves to Foreign
Parts, to the great Depopulation, Dishonor, and Danger of the Nation; for
hereby there will not be People sufficient to eat up the Corn, nor strength to
defend the Nation.

If it be objected, That the enjoining the wearing of Woollen Manufacture five
Months in the Year, will answer the Consumption of Wool that is abated in the
Exportations: It is answered, That it had need exceed it three times over; for
that the making 60000 Cloths in a Year more than now is, will not set so many
people at work, as the other will throw out of work; and if it could be
supposed that there would be vent for so many more, it is presumed there would
not be found Wool enough to make them, it being now somewhat a scarce
Commodity, and raised in price a third part to what it was some years past. So
that indeed at this time there is no just cause to complain of the want of
Consumption of Wool, it being a good scarce and ready money Commodity; but
that the Restraint of Silk and Hair Stuffs, and the enjoining the Wear of
Woollen, will neither increase the Consumption of it to such a degree, nor yet
answerable to the Abatement of the Exportation of it by 15 or 20000 Clothes per
annum, is proved thus; because the Nobility, Gentry, and better sort of
Tradesmen, will not wear our course Cloths made of English Wool only, but
fine Dutch Cloth, and Cloth made of Spanish Wool, which in some of the finest
Cloths have not above five or six pounds of English Wool in a whole Cloth, as
the Makers of fine Cloths will acknowledge; so that little English Wool will
be consumed by them that use to wear Silks and Stuffs, and on the other hand
the poor Manufacturers both of Woollen, Silk, and Hair, they generally wear our
course Cloths and Stuffs made all of English Wool, and these being either
impoverished hereby that they cannot cloth themselves but with Rags, or be
forced beyond the Seas, must necessarily cause a far less Consumption of our
English Wool. For it cannot be supposed that the expense of English Wool in
fine Cloths, can answer to the loss of that expense which is now worn by these
poor Creatures. So that indeed the expense of English Wool will by this means
be abated in England not only so much, but much more than what the Abatements
of the Exportations of our Woollen Manufactures amount unto, by means of such a
Restraint of the one, and enjoining the other.

That by Restraint of the Wear of any part of Silk, the Consumption of Wool
must needs be lessened, for that the several Stuffs hereafter mentioned, viz.

Bombazines Anthorines Silk Says Crape Silk Masquerades Stripped Cheneys Virgins
Beauty Drafts of all sorts Druggets of all sorts Silk Calamantoes Silk
Gloriosa's of all sorts Silk Shades Worsted Barratines Glassamines Katherina's
Tameenes Estameenes Effegenes
and all or most of Norwich Stuffs, with great numbers of other Stuffs, too
many to be here inserted, having but one part of Silk in them, and nine parts
of Worsted, which is our English Sheeps Wool, which through the Ingenuity of
the Weavers and others concerned therein, are made very acceptable for the use
and wearing of diverse persons in the Winter Season; yet because of that little
part of Silk in them, cannot then be worn in Apparel, to the lessening the
Consumption of Wool, and to the taking away the chief part of the Trade and
Employment of many thousand persons.

This Injunction of the one, and Restraint of the other, will much depress the
Protestant, and advance the Papal Interest, not only in England, but throughout
Europe; and were it not but that by the unanimous Votes of this present
Protestant Parliament, wherein (to the chearing of English Hearts) they have
manifested so much zeal for the Protestant Interest and the Rights and
Privileges of Englishmen, it would cause great suspicion of ill designs; for
there is nothing more conducing to the destruction of the Protestant Religion,
and the advancement of Popery, than the disuniting of the Hearts and Affections
of the English people, who are generally Protestants, and the best sort of
Protestants. And this the Jesuits have not been wanting by all means to effect,
and there is nothing more proper thereunto, than to bring off the Affections of
the People from the Love of Parliaments by any means whatsoever, which they
know are the greatest Anticipation and Obstruction of their damnable designs;
but through the mercy of God they have in a great measure been hitherto
prevented, and it is hoped yet will, by a timely prospect of those things that
may cause it. And though it cannot be thought, that any true Englishman would
knowingly countenance, but detest such designs; yet it is feared if such an Act
should pass, it would not only alienate the Affections of many thousand
Protestants, by exposing them to Want and Penury, and to beg their Bread, and
seek it in other Countries; but also would make this great and populous Nation,
(which at present under God is the Fortress of the Protestant Religion)
indefensible against the Papal designs, by scattering up and down in other
parts of the World, those that are ready at all times, and best adapted to
defend it, and put them upon a temptation by their necessities and dwelling
amongst them to turn Papists. And this also in a short time will carry away the
Trade of the Nation (which is now increasing and flourishing) to other parts of
the World that are generally our Enemies; to the utter ruin of the whole
Nation, both in Trade and Navigation, and the sacred Religion thereof. And of
what evil consequence this will be to the Nobility and Gentry, by bringing down
the price of their Lands, may easily be conceived by an ordinary Capacity.

Again, If this Injunction of the one, and Restraint of the other, do pass into
a Law, it will not only destroy the most chief and principal Manufacture of the
Nation, whereby so many Thousand Native Protestants get their livelihood and
subsistence, but (which is considerable) it may truly be called the Protestant
Trade, for it sets to work and employs most of the Strangers and Foreign
Protestants that fly from the tyrannical Persecutions of the Papist (...) other
Countries, and They must be forced also to return again; for it is judged
th(...) Parts of ten of the Protestant Strangers that comes over into England,
are employ(...) Trade of Silk and Hair, to their great comfort both of Soul and
Body: And the (...) London do freely receive them, and that in so great
numbers, that a very great (...) Silk and Hair-weaving Trade is managed by them
and their Dependants. And (...) Silk and Hair Trade encouraged, as it is hoped
it will by this Parliament, there might y(...) received 100000 more into the
Trade, so beneficial is it to England, and so considerable to the strength of
the Protestant Interest.

But now if it shall please the Parliament instead of restraining the wear of
our own Manufactures, to prohibit the wearing of Silks and Stuffs Manufactured
in Foreign Parts, this would certainly enrich and people the Nation, and cause
a greater Consumption of Wool, as also advance and strengthen the Interest of
the Protestant Religion.

It will enrich and people the Nation, for that a great deal of the Money that
is sent out of the Nation to purchase the Silks and Stuffs Foreign
Manufactured, will be kept among us; as also all that Money that is paid to
Workmen abroad for the Manufucturing of these Silks and Stuffs, will be earned
by the Natives and Strangers in England, and so make way for the Employment of
many Thousands more than is in the Nation.

It will also increase the Consumption of English Wool abundantly, for that
there being more expense of Silk, because of the Manufacturing of those Silks
here that use to come from other Parts, there will be also far greater
quantities of Cloths made of English Wool exported in exchange for Silk; and
besides the expense of English Wool will not only be increased by the
exportation of more Cloths, but a great deal more than is will be worn in
England, and the Plantations belonging thereunto, by this means; for that
Foreign Silks that come ready wrought from other Parts, especially from
Holland, France, and East India, with their painted Calicoes, are generally
slight and very cheap, and set up the meaner sort of People (as Maidservants,
and others) in the garbs of Gentry, which otherwise would wear the decent,
useful, and profitable wear of Cloth, Kersies, and other Stuffs made of Wool,
as they would also do in the Plantations, for that our English Silks being
generally rich and well made Silks, they cannot so well go to the price of
them, and that this prohibition of Foreign-wrought Silks will certainly promote
the Consumption of Wool, is manifest by Experience; for since the late good Act
was made for the prohibiting of French Silks, (which it is hoped this Parliament
will renew) there has been greater quantities of raw Silk imported, as also
greater quantities of Woollen Cloths exported, than was in former years;
besides, greater numbers of People employed, both Native and Foreign
Protestants, to the great benefit of the Nation; which expense of English Wool
has been chiefly occasioned from this cause, that more Silks has been made here
in that time than before; which is an undeniable Argument to prove, that the
more Silks are worn in England if Manufactured here, the greater is the
Consumption of English Wool, for such person as wears a Silk Garment, does
certainly expend more English Wool (that being the return of Woollen Cloth)
than twenty Gentlemen that wears Cloth made of Spanish Wool, and fine Dutch
Cloths: And in all probability, if Silks Manufactured here were encouraged, and
Silks Foreign made prohibited to be worn, it would reduce and bring back the
whole Trade of the Woollen Manufacture into England in a little time, by
preventing the exportation of Wool, for if Wool yield as good or better price
here than it does in other Parts, as it will do if there be more occasion for
it, it will not be transported as now it is to France and Holland, by which
means they gain a considerable share of our Woollen Trade, to their great
benefit both at home and abroad and to our great loss and detriment.

This must needs corroborate and strengthen the Interest of the Protestant
Religion, for that this Nation being the chief of all the Protestant Countries,
the Riches and Populousness of it must needs strengthen it, as well as the
Unity of them one unto the other, and this will certainly cause the Nation to
flourish both in Riches and People, and through the Mercy and Blessing of God,
make us yet more formidable and strong against our implacable Enemies, by
enabling of us not only to defend our selves against them, but to root Popery
out of this Nation, and the rest of His Majesty's Dominions.

For these Reasons, and many others that may be given, it is humbly prayed,
That the Parliament would be pleased to lay aside that Bill which would
restrain the wearing of Silks, and Stuffs Manufactured in England, which are so
beneficial, and instead thereof, order a Bill to be brought in for the
prohibiting the importation and wearing of Silks and Stuffs Manufactured in
Foreign Parts, which are so plainly detrimental to the Interest of England: And
the English Artists shall continue to pray, That as this Parliament have begun,
so God would honor them so far, as to finish the deliverance of this Nation
from Popery, and Slavery the effect of it.

FINIS.
Weavers of LONDON.

An ANSWER to the most Material Objections against the Bill for Restraining the
East India Wrought Silks, etc. Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Lords.
Obj. THAT Trade is in its Nature free, finds its own Channel, and best directs
its own Course.

Ans. All trading Nations have, and do at this Day put a restraint upon Trade
according as their Circumstances require: The French have many Years since, by
extraordinary Impositions, prohibited all our Woollen Manufactures, and by that
means have set them up in their own Country, to their great Advantage. The
Dutch, who are little more than Carriers of Goods from one Country to another,
yet do often prohibit, and for Instance, have by great Impositions prohibited
our Dyed Woollen Manufactures, by which means they have gained that profitable
Employment. The Venetians have prohibited our Cloth: The Sweeds and Danes the
like. The French have by severe Edicts prohibited all Indian Silks, Bengalls,
and Painted Calicoes; and a Multitude of Instances might be given of this
Nature. Our own Statute-Books are full of them; the Act of Navigation, and the
Act for Preventing the Exportation of Wool have been, and are of infinite
Benefit to this Kingdom.

Obj. That the East India Trade is greatly beneficial to England.

Ans. If what the Writers for the East India Company have asserted be true,
That Three Parts of Four of the whole imported have been again exported to
Foreign Parts, or if what the late Author of the Essay on the East India Trade
asserts be true, That one half has been exported and has brought in 600000 l.
more than the prime Cost in India, then this Trade, in that Respect, may well
be accounted a profitable Trade to this Nation: But this, though often
asserted, has not been made appear in such manner as a Business of so great a
concern to the East India Company ought, or might have been; and we have great
Reason to believe that no such Quantities are, or ever were exported; But
supposing that great Quantities were exported, this Bill does not extend to
hinder that Trade.

Obj. That it must be granted that the East-India-Trade in General is
prejudicial to Europe, and if all by common Consent would agree to deal no more
with them, it would save the Expense of a great Treasure; but since that cannot
be done, it would be Egregious Folly in us to quit it.

Ans. The Reason why the East India Trade is prejudicial, is, because we draw
from thence nothing of solid use, Materials to support Luxury, Perishable
Commodities, and send thither Gold and Silver, which is there buried and never
returns, and the Burden of this bears hard only on the Countries which consume
them, as the Author of the Essay has very well observed, and from thence
inferred, That the French did wisely to prohibit. Now if this be true, as
undoubtedly it is, there cannot be greater or more cogent Arguments for the
passing this Bill, which is not to destroy the whole Trade, but only part of
that which their own Advocate acknowledge is very hard upon us, who are the
Consumers.

Obj. The Bill now proposed will be absolutely destructive to the East India
Trade, and should we quit the Hold we have in India, the Dutch will undoubtedly
ingrose the whole, which will be of dangerous Consequence.

Ans. That what by this Bill is to be restrained cannot be computed to above
one half of the home Consumption, and the whole is accounted, by the Author of
the Essay, but one half of the Trade; so that at most it will be lessened but
one Fourth Part, which by the Addition that may be made by bringing home
Raw-Silks, Cotton Yarn, etc. may in a great measure be made good; And why Three
Parts and more should not be carried on without the remainder, is very hard for
us to imagine. The French have prohibited all Wrought Silks, Bengalls and
Printed Callicoes; and yet they carry on their East India Trade: and in case
the East India Company, either through Poverty or any other Reasons, should not
be able or willing to carry it on, there are Merchants enough in England to
take it up: But if we cannot trade there without the Consent of the Dutch, who
are now very powerful and can bring together 40 strong Frigates (as the Author
of the Essay tells us) which is much more than we are able or can pretend to
do, they may as easily beat us out of the whole as of what will be still left.
Therefore the best way as we humbly conceive to secure us from those Fears, is,
to keep our Treasure to employ our own people, and increase our strength at
home.

Obj. The Company send great quantities of our Manufactures, and have in return
Wrought Silks.

Ans. The Company are obliged to send 100000 l. worth of our Manufactures, but
have not done it; for by Accounts taken out of the Custom house Books, there
cannot be found 100000 l. worth in Two years last past, and not 20000 l. worth
last year, and how much of this has been really Exported and sent to India we
know not, but have great reason to believe that great Quantities were either
not shipped off, or not sent thither, but to Spain or other Parts where they take
in Bullion; for this is most certain that the Indians wear none, or so little
of our Manufactures as is not worth mentioning: It Is true that since the
Company have been obliged they have sent some Cloth; which they have sold in
the Gulf of Persia, and brought in returns Raw Silk, which have been wrought
up by the Indians in the Bay of Bengall into silks commonly called Persian
Taffeties, and the like, and from thence brought to England, whereas formerly
the Turkey Merchants used to supply the Persians with cloth, and brought in
Return Raw Silk, and might do so again if the Trade were turned into its old
Channel.

Obj. That no Country Manufactures are made so dear as the English, and if we
would have a Trade we must make our Manufactures cheaper.

Ans. To this we think we cannot give a better Answer than what Sir Jos. Child
gave in the like Case, which we find in the Preface of his Book called A
Discourse on Trade, his Words are these, I affirm and can prove be's mistaken
in Fact; for the Dutch, with whom we principally contend in Trade, give
generally more Wages for all their Manufactures, by at least Two Pence in the
Shilling, than the English. And adds farther, That wheresoever Wages are high
universally throughout the whole World, it is an infallible Evidence of the
Riches of that Country: and wherever Wages for Labor runs low, its a Proof of
the Poverty of that Place. That it is multitude of People and good Laws, such
as cause an increase of People, that principally enrich any Country: And if we
retrench (by Law) the Labor of our People, we drive them from us to other
Countries that give better Rates, and so the Dutch have dreined us of our
Seamen and Woollen Manufactures: And we the the French of their Artificers and
Silk Manufacturers. And in Page 175. discoursing of the ways of enlarging our
Trade, among many others, he gives this Advice, That it is our Interest by
Example, and otherwise not distastful, above all kinds of Commodities to
prevent as much as may be the Importation of Foreign Manufactures, and to
encourage those Trades most that vend most of our Manufactures, and supply us
with Materials to be further Manufactured.

Obj. That we want Hands, not Manufactures in England, and Laws to compel the
Poor to work and therefore want more an Act to set up public Workhouses to
force them that are not willing.

Answ. as the Case now stands, we have Hands more than sufficient to carry on
the Manufactures which the East India Trade leaves us; but if this Bill pass we
have great Reason to believe that in a very shortime, Employment will be found
for a great number of those now out of work, and for some of the 1200000 which
the Author of the Essay says, he thinks there are now receiving Alms in this
Kingdom. It were to be wished that there were Public Workhouses for the
Employment of the unwilling Poor; but before they can be employed in such
Places it will be necessary to know how the Manufactures can be disposed: And
with Submission, we humbly conceive there can be no better way found for their
vent than by restraining the Expense of these Foreign Commodities, and that
this will be greatly for the Interest of this Kingdom. To confirm us in this
Opinion, we have the Judgment of Sir Jos. Child, that great Champion for the
India Cause, who in the Preface of his Book of Trade says, That the Expense of
Foreign Commodities, especially Foreign Manufactures, is the worst Expense a
Nation can be inclinable to, and therefore ought to be prevented as much as
possible.

Obj. That it is the Interest of this Nation to have our own Wool cheap, and
cheaply manufactured, whereby we may be enabled to under-sell all Nations, and
discourage all People to set it up.

Ans. To do this we must bring down the Price of Wool and Workmanship
considerably, and then Provisions must fall in Proportion to answer the Wages,
or else the Poor cannot purchase them; and if so, Rents must abate, when this
is done, other Nations who contend with us in our Manufactures must do
likewise, and after all this, the Indian that works for a Penny a Day, will be
able to undersell us all; so that after all our reducing, we are not like to
undersell all Nations, unless we should send our Wool to India to be
manufactur'd.

Obj. That the home Consumption is no Advantage to the Nation.

Ans. If a Penny saved be the surest Penny got, then the saving our Pence by
the Home Consumption of our own, instead of expending them for Foreign
Manufactures, must certainly be greatly for the Advantage of this Kingdom.

Obj. It Is the Interest of this Nation to wear East India Goods', which are
very Cheap, and to Export our own which are much dearer.

Answ. If we could find a Foreign Market for our own Manufactures, this
Objection would be of force, but (with submission we say) that this is
impossible; for it is very well known, that all Foreign Markets have been
plentifully supplied with as much of our Woollen Manufactures as could be
vended, and generally over-stocked; and yet notwithstanding our Exporters do
not carry off above one third part, (as the Persons concerned in the Aulnage,
who best know how much is made, have oft-times asserted) and in case a stop be
not put to the East India Trade, our Export must be less; for by reason of the
great ware of Muslings and Callicoes, we have already lost the greatest part of
our Trade for Woollen Clothes, etc. to Germany, Silesia, etc. from whence we had
formetly great quantities of Linnens, but when we could no longer take their
Linnens, they were forced to set up a Manufacture of Woollen, by which we have
almost wholly lost that profitable Trade. We have now a Trade with Spain,
Italy, and Turkey, from whence we Import great quantities of Wool, Raw Silk, and
Grogern-yarn, but if we must wear East India Manufactures, we cannot use their
Silk; and if so, it is reasonable to conclude, that they must shortly follow the
example of the Germans. As to our Plantations and Ireland, to which we send
great quantities of our Manufactures, if the East India Silks, etc. are the
Mode here, they will be so there, the orders that are sent from thence, being
to send over such Manufactures, as are most Fashionable in England; so that
instead of a greater Exportation, we shall almost wholly lose what we now have.
But in case it were possible to vend more, we could make much greater
quantities, as we did last year, when there was a considerable demand for them.

Obj. That if we do not use these India Goods, they will be carried to other
places, where we now send our Manufactures, and be there used instead of them.

Answ. If this be true, then the East India Trade will not receive so great
Prejudice as is pretended; but this is fallacious, for the Exporters always
send to furnish all foreign Markets with what they want; and we are very
sensible, that they have and will be sufficiently supplied with these India
Manufactures, which will very much obstruct our Trade, and therefore we humbly
conceive its highly Reasonable this Bill should pass, that seeing the Mischief
they will do us in foreign Markets cannot be prevented, we may in some measure
be helped, by preventing our falling into the same Mischief at home.

Obj. That these India Manufactures do not much hinder the Consumption of our
own Manufactures, but chiefly those of Italy, France, and Holland.

Answ. They do directly hinder the Consumption of vast Quantities of our own
Manufactures, as the Norwich, London, Canterbury Antherines, and other sorts of
Stuffs; as also the Manufactures made in Bristol, Ketering, Sudbury,
Stowmarket, Kendal, and diverse other places in this Kingdom; and they do and
will in a great Measure, destroy all our Silk Manufactures, which of late are
brought to such perfection, as better Silks are not made in any part of the
World, and are cheaper to us than any can come from the forementioned
Countries, and have almost wholly beat them out of use. So that of late Years
there has been no considerable Quantities Imported, except black Lutestrings,
Alamodes, and Velvets, for which Use the India Silks will not serve; so that
the India Manufactures are directly opposite and destructive to our own.

Obj. That Silk is a Manufacture of foreign Extract, and if the Wearing of Silk
could be Abolished, it would be Beneficial to the Kingdom.

Answ. That the Abolishing of all foreign wrought Silks, that are the Returns
of our Money, would undoubtedly be Beneficial to the Kingdom; and it is that we
now only Contend for. But we do assert, and plainly demonstrate, That the
wearing of Silks, which are Manufactured here of such Raw Silk as are the
Returns of our Woollen, and other Manufactures Exported (as the Italian and
Turkey Silks are) is much more Beneficial to this Kingdom, then if we wear them
not, for by this means we employ double the number of People we should do, if
we were Clad in our own Manufactures.

Obj. That if we take not these Goods, the Indians will let us have no
Saltpeter, Muslins, White Calicoes, Pepper, Drugs, Raw Silks, and other Goods
we want.

Answ. This is such an Objection as scarce ever was made before by Mankind;
it is just as if we should say, we will not let the Venetians and other Nations
we Trade with, have our Lead, Tynn, etc. because they will not take our Cloth.
The French have Prohibited all their Silks and Painted Calicoes above ten Years
past, yet have ever since Traded with the Indians for these Commodities, and we
believe never yet wanted Saltpeter, etc. and why they should refuse us these
Goods is hard to imagine.

Obj. If this Bill pass, it will be to the Advantage of the Scotch and Dutch,
who will bring in these India Goods among us at a much dearer Rate.

Answ. One would think in common Reason, there cannot be a more effectual
Course taken to hinder that, than by Prohibiting the wearing of them: For if
they may be freely worn, the Scotch and Dutch will have a great Advantage,
because they pay little or no Duty to what our East India Merchants must pay;
and the very hopes, that the Persons who were concerned in promoting the Scotch
Company, had of vending the Wrought Manufactures in England, was, as we have
good Reasons to believe, one great cause for the setting up that Trade. For
this is certain, that some of the most zealous Promoters of that Company, are
the greatest Sticklers against this Bill.

Obj. That the Passing this Bill will discourage Navigation.

Answ. This is a very strange Objection, For one Ship of 500 Tons Freighted
with these Goods will bring in above 1,000,000, l. worth, at but 20s. per
pound, which is a moderate Value; many of these Silks being worth 3 and 4 l.
per pound, so that if this single Freight were worn here, it will ruin above
twenty times as much Shipping, which is employed in the Coasting Trade, to
furnish the English Manufacturers, and their dependence with Coals, Corn,
Butter, Cheese, and other Necessaries, as is easy to be more fully
demonstrated.

Obj. If there be a multitude of Hands want Work, the Herring Fishery would
employ them.

Answ. The Men, Women, and Children, that are employed in the Woollen and Silk
Manufactures, are very unfit to catch Fish: But since it is objected, That if
this Bill pass it will discourage Navigation, here is a proper Salvo for that
Sore, let the Merchants employ their Stock, and the Seamen their time, to catch
these Herrings, and then we are very sure they would be much better employed
for the Advantage of the Nation than they now are.

Obj. That if the East India Manufactures did greatly prejudice our own, it is
not advisable they should be Prohibited in this time of War, because of the
Companies great Losses and Misfortunes, and their want of Money.

Answ. That the Company have met with great Losses must needs be granted, and
that so great a Treasure fell into the Enemies hands, has been of very Ill
Consequence to the Nation, and none knows but such Misfortunes may again attend
them, and therefore the less Trade of this kind in so dangerous a time, the
better for the Nation; If they want Money so do the English Manufacturers, and
whether the Money we now have to Trade with shall be sent out to purchase Goods
fully Manufactured for our own Consumption, which may fall into the Enemies
Hands, or employed to carry on our own Manufactures, we think, with humble
Submission, is no hard question to be resolved; for nothing is more visible,
than that the East India Manufactures that have been lately Imported, takes
away great quantities of our Money, which would otherwise be employed in the
purchasing of our own Silks and Stuffs, and thereby give Employment and
Encouragement to many Thousand Families, who are now in a starving condition.

Obj. The Clause in the Bill which lays the Proof on the Retailers is very
unreasonable.

Answ. Without this the whole Bill will be rendered ineffectual, and therefore
the like Clauses has been incerted in all Acts of this Nature (as in our
Prohibition of French Silks, etc.)

Obj. That if this Bill pass, it will destroy the Credit of the Nation, and
greatly Injure those who have lent Money upon the Customs of the East India
Goods.

Answ. The Customs that are given for the Security of Moneys lent by the
persons complaining (which for the most part are Linen Drapers and East India
men) consists not only of East India Goods, but also of Wines, Vinegar, Brandy,
Tobacco, all Linnens, Wood, Iron, Oil, Flax, Hemp, Paper, and abundance of
other Commodities, too numerous to be here incerted; and the whole East India
Trade has hitherto raised but a very inconsiderable part of the said Customs,
yet the Security has been well answered. Now in case the Customs should be
increased by a greater quantity of East India wrought Silks, which must be worn
here, they will destroy our own Manufactures, and thereby Impoverish not only
our Manufacturers, and their dependants, but the Nation in general, by which
means they will be disabled from consuming the Wines, Brandy, Tobacco, and
other Merchandise, which will, (as we have great reason to believe) much more
weaken the same Security, then this Bill can do; And not only so, but much
lessen the Excise of Beer and Ale, and other the Revenues and Taxes which are
given to support a Just and Necessary War, for the preservation of our Lives,
Liberties, and Properties.

AN ANSWER to the most Material Objections against the BILL For Restraining
East India Wrought Silk, etc.

New East India Companies REASONS, Offered Anno School. Contradictory. To their
REASONS Offered Anno 1699.

Prince Bulter's Tale: REPRESENTING The State of the Wooll-Case, or the
East India Case truly Stated.
The Argument. Part 1.
Shows why in Dogrel Verse this Tale
Was first begun o'r Pot of Ale;
Shows Rise, and Progress of the Trade
To India drove, and Who 'twas made
The first steps to our Wool Trades ruin,
And how it proved to Folks undoing;
What done to stop its further growth,
And how those Measures came to naught;
How Golden Fleece lay very dead;
How Act for Burying it was made;
And how, if we were truly Wise,
We should their Trangums all despise;
Our Money save, Employ our Poor,
From starving keep, and from our Door;
Who then could drink, Some Ale, Some Sherry,
And Laugh, and Quaff, and all be merry.
PROLOGUE.
IN place, one day, as I was standing,
Where folks were printed Papers handing
To those that would, or read, or buy 'em,
These Remarks made, as I stood nigh 'em:
I saw, a mighty, zealous Crew,
Some for Old Stock, and some for New,
Were Pro and Conning their hard Cases,
By the chief Dons of several Classes,
Amongst which Grandces I sometimes fell in,
And heard most dismal Stories telling;
The one, the other, much Arraigned,
And credit of their Causes stained.
Thus having heard each side complain,
Methoughts, amongst both, were K -- s in grain:
And that when such, fall out and scold,
An Injured Case might then be told:
And on the Old Proverb made me think,
The more they stir, the more they stink;
And did conclude from all these Hearings,
There Is neither Barrel better Herrings.
I saw a Case, concerning Wool,
With Reasons stuffed, both clear and full;
Which plainly showed our certain ruin,
These mighty Talkers were pursuing,
Yet saw, that many, at first sight on it,
There were, that made but very light on it,
And found there were but few attend it,
But very few that would defend it;
Amazed I stood, and much dejected,
So great a Cause should be neglected.
Soon after that, I saw, with vigor,
Verses caught up, 'bout fight of Tiger,
By Old and Young, by Fools and Witty,
And by the great Dons of the City.
Thought I, this Case, if I should write,
In such a manner, Folks would buy't,
And read, for sake of Dogrel Rhyme,
Which Thought improved; I lost no time,
But presently, over Pot of Ale,
Writ a great part of this sad Tale,
Which, if you like, you may have more on it,
For I now have, or shall, have store on it.
The Tale.
WHen first the Indian Trade began,
And Ships beyond the Tropicks ran,
In quest of various Drugs and Spices,
And sundry other strange Devices,
Saltpetre, Drugs, Spice, and like Trading,
Composed the bulk of all their Lading:
Bengals, and Silks, of Indians making,
Our Merchants then refused to take in,
Knowing it would their Country ruin,
And might prove to their own undoing.
Nor did they carry Gold or Bullion.
To fetch home what Supplants our Woollen;
Nor were this Nation fond to wear
Such Indian Toys, which cost so dear:
Then were we clad in Woollen Stuffs,
With Cambrick Bands, and Lawn Ruffs,
Or else in Silk, which was Imported
For Woollen Goods, which we Exported;
Which Silk our English Weavers bought,
And into various Figures wrought.
Then scarce a Child was to be seen,
Without Say Frock, that was of green,
Our Hangings, Beds, our Coats, and Gowns,
Made of our Wool in Clothing Towns.
This Nation then was Rich and Wealthy,
And in a State which we called healthy.
But since the Men of Gath arose,
And for their Chief Goliath chose.
And since that mighty Giants Reign,
Whose chiefest Aim was private Gain,
This Trade was drove on by such measures,
As soon Exhausted much our Treasures,
For then our chiefest Artists went
With Patterns, and with Money sent,
To make and purchase Indian Ware,
For which this Nation pays full dear.
Then by great Gifts of finest touches,
To Lords and Ladies, Dukes and Duchess,
So far prevailed, as set the fashion,
Which Plague-like soon spread o'r the Nation.
Our Ladies all were set a gadding,
After these Toys they ran a madding;
And nothing then would please their fancies,
Nor Dolls, nor Joans, nor wanton Nancies,
Unless it was of Indians making;
And if 'twas so, 'twas wondrous taking.
This Antic humor so prevailed,
Though many against it greatly railed,
Amongst all degrees of Female kind,
That nothing else could please their mind.
Tell 'em the following of such fashion,
Would beggar and undo the Nation,
And ruin all our Laboring Poor,
That must, or starve, or beg at door,
They Would not at all regard your story,
But in their painted Garments glory;
And such as were not Indian proof,
They scorned, despised, as paltry Stuff:
And like gay Peacocks, proudly strut it,
When in our Streets along they foot it.
This humor strangely thus prevailing,
Set all the poorer sort a railing,
Or else with grief their Case bewailing.
The richer seeing what was doing,
And how the Nation ran to ruin,
To King in Council did complain,
In time of Charles the Second's Reign,
On which were several Lords appointed,
By him who was the Lords Anointed,
To hear the Case, and sad Complainings,
Of those that Then were for Restrainings;
Who plainly did their Lordships tell,
What mischiefs to our Trade befell;
How both our Men and Bullion went
To work in India, and be spent
In needless Toys, and gaudy Dresses,
For Ladies, Madams, Trulls, and Misses.
The Case thus heard, they were inclined
Some proper Remedy to find;
And something was in order doing,
To put a stop to further ruin,
But by the Craft of great Goliath,
Who all the Host stood in defy-a.
There is this story passing Current,
That say 'twas he that stopped this torrent,
By pouring Gold in plenteous showers,
In Ladies Laps, who bore great Powers,
Which strangely altered all their Measures,
Such charms there are in hidden Treasures.
Thus Barrocading all Complaints,
Drove Iehu-like, without Restraints
Filled Town and Country soon so full,
As ruined much, our Trade in Wool:
And such great Stocks of Wool and Cloths,
Were hoarded up, and eat by Moths,
Made Clothiers all, and Growers grumble,
When Clothes and Fleeces o'r they tumbled.
And further, mischiefs to prevent,
Complaint was made in Parliament:
And 'cause the Wool, so near affected,
This Salvo for it was then projected,
That since the Living would not bear it,
They should, when dead, be forced to wear it;
This helped in part, but the Grand Ill
Remains upon the Kingdom still.
Yet this our Ladies so offended,
As all our Female Sex contended,
And fain would had this Act rejected,
But then their Councels were neglected,
And Time has reconciled it so,
To this Wool Act they are now no Foe:
So that from Ladies great, to Skullion,
All buried lay in our own Woollen.
And happy thrice would England be,
If, while their Living, we could see,
Our noble Ladies but beginning,
To wear our Wool of finest Spinning,
Or in such Silks our Workmen make,
For which our Merchants Cloth do take,
Which soon would bring them in such fashion,
As they would be worn throughout this Nation,
By all Degrees, and Sex, and Ages,
From highest Peers to lowest Pages;
Nor would the meanest Trull or Besses,
Delight to wear these Indian Dresses,
Which certainly would Profit bring,
To them, their Tenants, and our King,
And Heaven's Blessings in the bargain,
Because they will keep our Poor from starving,
For they would soon be then employed,
Our Money too at Home would 'bide,
And happy then both great and small,
With Mirth in Parlour, and in Hall,
When thus, with Plenty, Beards wagg all.
EPILOGUE.
AND now this Tale, thus far being ended,
Methinks I see some Folks offended,
And against this Dogrel Poet rail,
Because he've told so plain a Tale,
And New and Old Stock, Jobbing Throng,
Crying it down, be it right or wrong;
But if they do, and away fling 'em,
It Is a great Sign, they are Truths that sting 'em.
But let them spend their Lungs, and hollow,
Such blustering Sparks he needs not value,
Since all his aim, and his designs,
Are to beat down their Indian Blinds,
That all true English Men may see,
What cause, their real Misery,
That so they may prevent their ruin,
And save this Nation from undoing:
But if they still will shut their eyes,
And demonstrations plain despise;
And if his Tale shall be rejected,
Or if this Cause be still neglected,
He only this has more to say,
That he can shift as well as they,
And that he writ this, not for Pay.
LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by A Baldwin in Warwick Lane. 1699


