THE QVAKERS CHALLENG, AT TWO SEVERAL WEAPONS. TO THE Baptists, Presbiters,
Papists and other Professors.
The Quakers Challenge.
WHEREAS certain Baptist Teachers, whose work is to be lie the Innocent, and to
fill the peoples Ears with false reports; as did Jeremiah Ives, Matthew Caffin,
and William Burnet behind my back at a dispute at Chertsey in Surey, with our
friend G. Whitehead, and finding my self Innocent of the Accusation; and
knowing that Jeremy Ives, and Mat. Caffin, to be known Enemies to the Lord, his
Truth, and his People; and for these so doing, I do here offer my self in Gods
behalf, and Truths behalf, and in the behalf of the People scornfully called
Quakers.

I do Challenge Matthew Caffin, Jeremy Ives, and William Burnet, or any of the
Teachers amongst the Baptists, or Independants, or Presbiters, or Papists, or
Jesuits high Priests, and low Priests, for these are all blind Guides, and
their profession is rotten, their Church is Babylon, their Faith is unsound,
and their Doctrine is false for ever; and I will maintain it by these two
Weapons, Viz.

To Fast seven days and seven nights and not to Eat nor to Drink. And the next
Weapon is; To Wake seven days and seven nights, and not to Sleep till they be
faithfully performed before the Lord: And the God that answers by Fire shall be
the true God; and he that the Lord shall carry through this fiery Trial, shall
be counted a Worshiper of the true God, and shall give him the glory and
honor, and acknowledge his Power, who alone is worthy, who is over all God
blessed for ever.

But he that tyres by the way, shall be counted a member of a false Church, and
a Heretic, whose God is his Belly, whose Glory is his Shame, whose End is
Destruction.

Come Papists with your Murdering Weapons: Will you maintain that your Church
is a true Church which is established by Blood. Answer the Quaker; Was not the
Devil a Murderer from the beginning? your God is your Belly; for you pretend
to Fast in Lent from Flesh, and yet you Eat Fish; and is there not a flesh of
Fish, as well as of Birds, wherefore I testify against you, that your Faith is
unsound, and your Church and Doctrine is false for ever.

Come Protestants, Who are called by the name of Presbiters, Independants, and
Baptists, Fifth-Monarchy, Seventh day Sabbath-men, and Family of Love; the
Quaker denies you all, and is come to try you; not by the tongue which is your
glory, but by the belly, for that is your chief God; for of a truth, you all
are Shut out of the Saints society, And your book of the Practice of Piety.


Come Papists and Protestants, Gogg and Magog, will you be daunted by a Quaker?
stand up Presbiter with your hippocritical Fastings, who fast for strife and
debate, who for matter of Persecution there is none exceeds; you had need to be
ranked next the Papists; for who so cruel as you against the Truth, witness New
England, who cruelly Whipped our Friends, and afterward hanged two Men and a
Woman, who feared God, and eschewed Evil, and sent many into the Wilderness
after they had been sorely Whipped in Frost and Snow, and we know, that if you
had the Power in your hands again, We should feel your cruel Weapons, and
Halters, and Gibbets: We know your hippocrasie of Old, toward God and his
Truth. Come go with me these fourteen days journey; and after this two times
seven is over, we will have three times seven more, I never knew the Quakers
Conquered yet by all your cruel Weapons, therefore if ever you conquer the
Quakers it must be by Fasting and Watching.

Come Thom. Vinson who proffered the Quakers a Dispute, but when they came,
thou fell'st a Preaching and Praying among a rude Multitude, and presently got
away, and would not answer them; though a Servant of the Lord told thee, That
thou did Preach the Doctrine of Devils: Come I have a mind to Challeng thee,
and thou shall see I will not slink away as thou did, but if thou do not
answer, if either Papists, or Protestants, Jesuits or Priests are willing to
answer this Duel: Let them name their day and time; and for what God, and for
what People; and I will answer you, or whom you can produce: yea, I will make
you in the name of the Everlasting God that made Heaven and Earth, the Seas and
Fountains of Waters, and in the behalf of his People scornsully called Quakers,
who are in the Truth and none but they; whose Principle is, Christ the true
Light, that does enlighten every man that comes into the World.

Who is in us the hope of Glory, and they that walk according to this rule, are
the people of God and none else; and their Principle is the true Principle and
none else, and it shall live, and out live all; and grow, and out grow all; for
he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only has Immortality dwelling in
the Light which no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen or can see, to
him be glory Everlasting, Amen. 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14.

Come Jeremy Ives thou false man, who did say, that that body, that hung upon
the Tree, when the spirit was out of it, was but as an empty Trunk: Whereas thy
Brethren Jo. Lukis and Robert Porter have affirmed before many witnesses, that
the Blood that followed the Sphere was the Blood of the New Covenant; Did the
Blood of the New Covenant come out of an empty Trunk? Why do thou go about to
overthrow the Faith of thy weak brethren; wherefore I Challeng thee, as Elias
did the false Prophets, and thou John Brown Baptist Teacher, when thou wast
asked of G. W. what became of the Blood that followed the Speere, thou
repliedst and said, (it sank into the Ground; But did the Blood of the
New Covenant sink into the Ground? You Blasphemers come and answer this Duel.

Stand up you sleepy Professors, and maintain your assertions; Come Jeremy, I
must not pass thee by, for I testify, thy Faith is false, and so is thy
Doctrine, and thy Profession is rotten, and thy God is thy Belly, and thy Faith
is the Faith of Devils that purifies not the heart: And was thy heart pure
Jeremy, when thou tookst an Oath in open Court; O base: And yet take the Holy
Scriptures into thy mouth to hold Disputes and Janglings, and ye^ the Scripture
is against thee, and the Spirit that gave them forth, and the Saints in Light
are against thee, and Jesus Christ the King of Saints is against thee, who
said, Swear not at all: And his Apostle James is against thee; who said, Above
all things my Brethren Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor
by any other Oath. Mark that Jeremy.

Stand up old Thomas Lamb, of whose Church I was a Member; but why did thou
take the Oath without any Mental reservation. Come old Thomas, and young
Thomas, and help your brethren Jer. Ives, and Mat. Caffin, and William Burnet;
For the Quaker denies your Church, and is come to the true Church, which is the
Pillar and Ground of Truth, and the true Faith that overcomes the World is
known, and the Rock of Ages is known, and the Ancient of days is come, and the
Tabernacle of God is with Men again: Glory over all be unto our God, that sits
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore Amen.

Come Will. Burnet (What Is thy Faith good for) who say in thy 15 page, That
the Light that is in every man, is neither God, Christ, nor Spirit; and then
thou said thou shall indeaver to show, what that Light is in every Man, and
thou go to prove it, to be Conscience and cites 2 Romans 4. 5. But does not
the thoughts in the mean while accuse or excuse; and what is that which shows
unto Man his thoughts, is it not the Lord God of Hosts, Amos 4. 15. Isa. 42. 6.
7. Isa. 49. 6, 8. Thou falss Messenger, for the true Prophets and Messengers of
Truth Condemns thee, Jo. 1. 1, 15. And that of God in thy Conscience shall one
day awaken in thee and Condemn thee; and then thou shall read me, who does bear
witness to that, which is, the Light of Christ in thy Conscience, which was
before Conscience was: Yea, is not all that made manifest, made manifest by the
Light, Ephesians. 5. 13. O People hear him no more; for he that denies the Father
and the Son; yea, he has denied God, and the Father and Christ: (First, he
has denied God) read, for God who Commanded the Light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our Hearts to give the Light of the knowledge of God in
the face of Jesus Christ, Cor. 2. 4, 6. Again, John the Divine will tell your
Messenger W. Bur. That he is a false Messenger, for, this is the message that
we have received of John, and deliver unto you, That God is Light, and in him
is no darkness at all; Jo. 1. 1. Whose Messenger is W. B? stop thy mouth for
shame; and thou have denied the Father: For every good and perfect gift comes
from the Father of Lights, Jerem. 4. 17. And he has denied the Lord Jesus
Christ, as all that pass by may read; John 8. 12. 9, 5.

Therefore I Challenge thee for a false Profit, and an accuser of the Brethren.
Come Baptists, Independants, and Presbiters, and Papists, you talk of Moses,
Elias, and Christ, who fasted forty Days, and forty Nights, and the Apostle of
Christ did exercise himself much in Fasting and Watching 2 Cor. 6, 5. Let none
of you say, that it is a tempting of God to cease from Sin, for Peter says,
They that suffer in the Flesh, cease from Sin.

And John Wiggins the Blasphemer has left behind him a Writing, though he be
gone to his long home; yet, in his Book he says, That Christ the Light, that
lights every Man that comes into the World, is an Idol: Let the Reader read,
Jo. 8. 12, 9. 5. And he says in his Book, That Christ's Blood was not shed for
all; but John the Divine bears Witness against him, Jo. 1. 1. Rev. 19. 13. all
these make against him, and yet this man went for a Minister of the Gospel, but
he has left a stink behind him, and better had it been for him, That a
Millstone had been hanged about his neck and cast into the Sea, than ever he
should have opened his mouth against the Saints in Light, or their Principle.

Come forth you Jesuits and Papists, and Monks, and Friars and Star gazers,
and Monthly-Prognosticators, and Astrologers and all the Devils Conjurers; will
you not find a man to answer the Quaker: If you do find a Man, let him be known
who he is, and for what God, and for what People; and let him send one to me,
to see me perform my Challenge, and I shall send one to him, to see him perform
his Answer: Or we will be shut up togeter in one Room.

Stand up Muggleton the Sorcerer, whose mouth is full of Cursing, Lies, and
Blasphemy; who callst thy last Book a looking-glass for G. Fox, whose name thou
art not worthy to take into thy mouth, who is a Prophet in deed, and has been
faithful in the Lords business from the beginning: It was said of Christ, That
he was in the World, and the World was made by him; and the World knew him not:
So it may be said of this true Prophet, whom John said, he was not; but thou will feel this Prophet one day as heavy as a Millstone upon thee; and although
the World knows him not, yet he is known.

Thou say in thy 84 page, of thy Pamphlet, that that Christ the Quakers are
in: I that am but a man, have separated their Christ from them; and one from
another: This is fourteen years ago thou cursed them, and they are Blessed for
ever.

An. Those that went out from the Truth, were separated from Christ, before
they came to thee, and were never joined to the Truth, nor owned of us,
therefore such may easily become thy Disciples, being gone from God, his Truth,
and his People; and given up to believe lies, and so they have found out
Lodwick Muggleton the lying Prophet.

Thou say, thou have Power over the Quakers, Christ within them, and that
Judgment thou have given upon the Quakers, will surely come to pass: Neither
can you, nor your Christ within you, deliver you from it.

An. Thou Fool, The Quakers Christ within them, Is the Cornerstone which shall
bruise thee to powder; neither shall any deliver thee out of his hand, who is
the true Light, that lightens the Gentiles, and Gods Salvation to the end of
the World: but thou have no share in these sayings.

Thou say, The Quakers Principle within them, shall vanish like smoke.

An. The Quakers Principle, will shake thy Foundation, and all the Foundations
of Men; it is the Foundation of many Generations, and can never be moved.

Thou say, When I am dead, many of the seed of the Serpent shall have regard
to my Writings, page 61.

An. Who should else? For thou art a Messenger of the Old Serpent, therefore,
needs must his Seed have regard to thy Writings.

But why do thou say, when I am dead? who is dead already unto God, but alive
to Sin and Blasphemy: but when thou art dead as thou say, thou shall be dead
indeed to God, but alive to the Pain; by the Worm that shall never dye, and
forever to be tormented: Neither shall thou be able to shut out the sense of
the Torment, but the smoke of thy Torment shall ascend for ever, and ever; and
thy pain shall have no end, in the flame that cannot be quenched: And then thou
shall know, that thy Soul is Immortal and cannot Dye; and then thou shall feel,
what thou have done against God, his Truth, and his People; unto which place
thou art hastening. Now in the mean time, I Challeng thee, or any of thy
Disciples; and will maintain, that thou art an Epicure whose God is thy belly,
and thy end shall be everlasting Destruction from the presence of God: The
mouth of the Lord has spoken it: and Repentance is hid from thy eyes. Though
thou did tell me, that I was Damned, Body and Soul, to all Eternity; thy
blessing and thy Curse is all one to me: thou say, That God is no biger than
a Man; and yet Job says, God is greater than Man, Job. 33. 12. And again, thou
say, That thy God is a Man, and had Arms, and Shoulders as I had; but
according to Job I shall answer thee: That God is not a Man as I am, Job 9. 32.
Now all may see, That Muggleton is a false Prophet: For, God himself says, I
am God and not Man the holy one in the midst of thee, Hosea 11. 9. And thou
have often said, That thy God is a God of Flesh, Blood, and Bones. But Christ
says, God is a Spirit, and has not Flesh and Bones, John 4. 24. Cor, 2. 3,
17. Luke 24. 39.

Come forth Robert Porter, thou should answer this Duel, for art not thou the
cause of this quarrel, and has opened the mouth of Gods enemies against the
Truth and his People: but is not thy God thy Belly, as the rest of thy lying
Brethrens? Come forth, it is but fourteen days, and if I fall by the way, then
may thou say, the Lord never sent me.

Stand up all the Armies of the Beast, Papists, Jesuits, Presbiters, and
Baptists, and all the false Prophets of the Nation.

Come Gloucester Professors, to whom I writ a Challenge once, but none would
answer me; come William Shepard the Lawyer, and Thomas Marriot; Come William
Jordan the Presbiter, who said, thou would fast with me 39 days, and I could
never get thee to fast one. O ye Presbiters are horrible liars, but this is my
Council to you all* you that have had a hand in speaking against the Quakers
Principles.

Houle you Papists and Jesuits, Houle houle; yea Presbiters houle; yea
Baptists, for the Woes, Judgments, Plagues, and Torments, will assuredly come
upon you, suddenly as a Woman in pain of travel, and you shall not escape, the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it. O, Woe will be to every one that has spoken
against the Light. and has lifted Tongue, or Pen against the Lords Heritage.
Well, shall it be with that Man that can say, God bethanked, I never spoke
against the Light, nor the People that walk therein; yea, though they cannot be
excused for other Sins; yet they shall be glad that they did not meddle with
such weighty things, but all they that have so done, shall weep bitterly, and
gnaw their Tongues fot pain: Oh I say again, Repent spedily, before it be too
late, that ever you lifted up a Tongue, or Hand, or Pen, against the Light of
Jesus Christ, which does enlighten every man that comes into the World, or
against his only People; for never did any thrive, that spoke against the
Quakers.

I am a Friend to all the upright in Heart, and one who loves the appearance of
Jesus Christ; Who do write my Name Solomon Eccles.
The 17 of the Nineth Month, 1668.
THE END.

