In the year 59. in the fourth Month, the last day of the Month being the 5th
day of the Week.
THE presence of the Lord God was felt within me, and in his light he let me
see what his pleasure was with me; it was clearly showed me that I should go
to the Steeplehouse in Alderman-bury the first day of the week then following,
and take with me something to work, and do it in the Pulpit at their singing
time.

(...) which sight I found much unwillingnesse in my self, yet sitting still
with trembling, there came upon me a very great weight pressing me to
obedience; yea a heavy burden was felt, till I had consented to obey; I felt
the weight to increase, oh how hard my unwilling will was to yield, but the
Lord strengthened me, and having consented, I found a little ease, yea I did
resolve in the power of the Lord to go on: I purposed to carry with me a
Pocket to sow.

So the first day morning being the 3d day of the 5th month after the 8th hour
one of the Doers being open, I passed in, thinking to get into the Pulpit to
hide my self there till their singing time, and then get up and work; The
Sexton spying me, took me by the arm, said friend we do not open yet, for it
was their Communion day as they call: but the time I was in, I found that the
Galleries were higher then the Pulpit, and I should have been discovered before
their song began; I see the Clark giving Tickets: so about the 9th hour their
Doors were opened, I passed in as one of their own crowd, the throng came in
very fast, I gat into one of the Galleries to spy if possible to get in the
Pulpit some way, but I found none at that time, so they began to read, and I
came down, and finding no way to get into the Pulpit, I came to the Table that
is prepared for that troop, I thought to get upon the Table to work, but the
Table was set round with young men, and when they began their song, they laid
on their hats upon the Table, so I standing still waiting on the Lord, having a
great mind to do the Lords work; their song being up, my hat offended them,
they took it off, and cast it away, and one of the young men gave it me again,
I put it on, and it offended again, in so much that Piercefall did perceive me,
who came violently, and took my hat off to flng it away, but I held it, then
he took me by the hair of the head, and dragged me out, and as one of their own
company testified to his face that he stroke me, but I cannot say that, but a
lusty red hair'd man did strike me, I supposed him to be an officer in that
hateful place, but Piercefall after he had dragged me out by the hair, said
Sarrah do you not know William Duike, I said nay, for I did not know him;
Sorrah said he, I put him in prison, and find him ten pound, and you must be
served so to, and so charged the Constable with me, and went himself in again,
and received the Sacrament for all this.

The Constable told me that I might go away if I would, but in again I must
not. So I stood a while and finding in my self no constraint, I passed away
toward More fields finding a little ease from the weight of the burden, being
faithful to what might be done at that time: but the 6th day of the week
being the 8th day of the month sitting at work in my Shop but not on the
Shop-board, the burden of the Lord came upon me, and the light making manifest
the same thing that was not yet done, must be done, and the Lord would not
discharge me, but laid a necessity upon me. I beholding this with trembling and
fear; I did resolve in the power of the Lord not to eat nor drink, till I had
performed the Lords requiring. So having purposed in heart, I greatly desired
the Lords assistance; and it was showed me how to do it, and the Lord made way
for me.

So the first day of the week being the 10th day of the 5th month, I waited
opportunity till the singing time began, which when I heard, I passed in, but
being fearful to he taken with the hat again; and so loose my maine
business, for the Lord: I stepped out again, but staid not, I came in again; I
looked toward the Pulpit and spyed the pue door open, that the Priest might
p^sse up the Pulpit. So I waited thinking that Edmund Calomy would go up the
Pulpit, I intended to get in before him; for thought I that boy that sits upon
the stairs will open the Pulpit door for the Priest, and I Will get in before,
but no Priest came, whereupon in the power of the Lord; I fixed my eye upon the
Pulpit, and I spyed and iron hook, and I passed through the pue up the stairs,
and unhookt the door, and pulled twice and gat it open, and I sat my self down
upon the Cushin, and my feet upon the seat where the Priest when he has told
out his lies does sit down, and having my work ready, I pulled one or two
stitches. The people lost their song, and some cried pull him down, some
break his neck down, and a lusty fellow came up and did intend to do me a
mischief, and rang my neck as if he would have rung it in two. So I let go
my hold and he flang me down stairs; but the Lord preserved me, and I felt no
hurt; for having done that which the Lord required me to do I was full of
peace; and it had been little to me if they had there taken away or killed the
body. For I was full of joy, and they were full of wroth and madness; so they
tore my Coat off and my hat, and draged me out, and one took me by the hair
and flung me upon the ground, and some that was without said why do you use the
man so, but I gat up again, then they draged me quite out into the street, and
there held me, and while they held me, one came, and gave me a violent kick on
the shins, and said he could find in his heart to knock me down, he made my
shin bleed, and another kicked me on the other shin, but did not much hurt,
another said that I had been some notorious sinner heretosore and now came to
do something that might merit, Presently the Churchwarden as they call him,
came out, and he and the Belltoler carried me away to the Counter till their
Sermon was ended, as they call it, then they carried me away to Paul's Yard to
stay for the Mayor, but the Sargent said he would carry me away to the Mayors
House and there stay me till he came in; so he did: And all the way through
Paternoster-Row as I went, the boys kicked my heels, so then the Mayor came in,
and they told him that I was at work in the Pulpit; then said he to me,
Wherefore did you work there? I said in obedience to the Lords commandment: he
said, It was a false Spirit, and said he, Where are your sureties? I said The
Lord was my surety; he said, The Lord would not bear me out in this thing:
said he to them, Carry him again to the Counter: So they carried me back
agine, and there I was till the third day.

Now let all sober people judge whither I did this thing out of envy against
either Priest or People.

Yea farther I say, the Lord God lay it not to their charge, who have said that
I did it in malice, divilishnesse, and envy; it is the desire of my soul that
they might be saved.

And so do write my name being a Prisoner for the Testimony of the Lord in the
Common Goal in Newgate London: Committed the 15th. of the 5th. Month 59.
Solomon Eccles.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for M. W. in the 6th Month, 1659.


