THE PARLIAMENTS INSTRUCTIONS To the Earl of Essex, Lord General of the Army,
Agreed on by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, September the 17.

Likewise the Resolution of his Excellency, to advance his Forees from
Norhampton, and march toward the Kings most Excellent Majesty, together with
his Desires to both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

Also, the Resolution of the Earl of Cumberland, the Earl of New Castle, and
the Lord Strange, to join their Forces together in a full Body, and meet the
Earl of Essex, with Sir John Hothams Determination concerning the same.

C R
central circle flanked by the English lion on the left and the Scottish
unicorn on the right and containing the initials of King Charles, all of these
figures enclosed within a rectangle flanked by angel on the left and right

LONDON: Printed for H. Blund. September 20. 1642.

THE PARLIAMENTS INSTRUCTIONS To his Excellence the Earl of Essex, Lord
General of the Army.
Agreed on by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, upon Satterday
Sep. 17.
THE Great and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT having out of their Pious and
Judicious Wisdoms, taken into serious consideration the great and manifold
Oppressions that the true English Protestonts daily groan undes, by Reason of
the wicked and inhumane Actions of the Blood-sucking Party, and having had
great debate there upon, it was consented to, and resolved, that a speedy
redress should be had of all such particulars, and although they have incensed
his Majesty against this great and Honorable Assembly of PARLIAMENT, driving
and forcing into his Majesty's Royal Breast, such inveterate cruelty against
the Houses of Parliament, and does still in a most Traiterous manner, daily
strive and endeavor to possess His Majesty with such Thoughts, that this
Honorable Assembly does by all possible means endeavor to Raise Forces
against his Majesty's Royal Person.

VVhereupon the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, having seriously
weighed and considered the said Particulers, fell into Debate of the Petition
of both Houses of Parliament to His Majesty, in the behalf of themselves and
all the Commons of ENGLAND, the Earl of ESSEX being ordered to march speedily
toward his Majesty, and to carry the same with him into the field.

Wherein he is to Declare and lay open to His Majesty, the occasion of their
Raifing of Forces, and the true meaning of all their Intentions, that so there
may be a good Understanding wrought betwixt His Gracious Majesty, and the
Honorable Assembly His High Court of PARLIAMENT.

His Excellency the Earl of Essex, is likewise ordered and commanded by both
Houses to show and Declare unto his Majesty, amongst diverse other particulars,
that they have no Intent or purpose to make War against His Majesty, but to
the contrary, that their utmost aim and endeavor is to maintain the safety
of His Majesty's Person, and the true Protestant Religion.

The House likewise ordered, and to that end resolved, to send certain
Instructions to the Earl of Essex, declaring their will and pleasure that he
should forthwith advance his Forces from Norhampton, toward the Kings
Majesty, which he is Resolved to do and perform accordingly.

But it is signified by diverse Letters from York, to both Houses of
Parliament, that the Forces raised by the Earl of Cumberland and other Lords in
the Northern parts, are making of themselves ready to march to his Majesty's
Forces at Nottingham, where they intend to join in a full Body, and march
against the Earl of Essex his Army, Sir John Hotham is resolved to assist the
Earl of Essex, and to come again the enemy upon the Arrear, he having now taken
the City of York from the Malignant Party, having beaten the Earl of
Cumberlands Forces from thence.

The Earl of Essex his Letter to the High Court of Parliament, Sep. 17.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Remember so great expression of affection from the City of London, at my
departure from you, that I cannot despair, but to obtain my suite from you
that shall be an advantage to the Commonwealth, upon the true judgment of the
condition of our Affairs, and of that of the enemy. I am confident, we may
bring a quick and happy conclusion; God does bless us with so good success
daily, and the other Party by their plundering and burning of towns grow so
odious, that they grow weaker, and we stronger every where.

Yet are we in one great straight, and such a one, as if it be not speedily
remided, may quash all our hopes, and may endanger the Peace and Liberty we so
much strive for, our Treasure which must maintain the Army grows near to an
end, and you well know that our Army consists of such as cannot be kept one day
without pay.

What a Ruin would it bring upon us, if a disbanding should happen, I leave to
your Judgments.

My Desire unto you is, That you would supply us with the speedy sum of one
hundred thousand pounds, which I am confident would with Gods Blessing bring
these unhappy distractions to an end suddenly.

Your City has hitherto had the Honor (next to God) to be the chiefest safety
of the Kingdom and Parliament: This will render you to all posterity, the
finishers of this great work, if any thing of particular love or respect to me
may be an Argument herein, I shall take it as the greatest honor that has
befallen me, and will oblige my self to acknowledge it, by the utmost and most
faithful endeavor of

Your faithful Friend, ESSEX.
From the Rendevouz at Norhampton, Sep. 15. 1642.
portrait of the Earl of Essex (?)

