TWO LETTERS FROM HIS EXCELLENCY Robert Earl of ESSEX: The one unto the
SPEAKER of the House of Commons; Relating the true state of the late Skirmish
at Chinner, between a party of the KINGS and Parliaments Forces, on the Sabbath
day the 19. of June, 1643. with the number of such persons as was taken and
slain on both sides.

The other to the well-affected of the County of ESSEX.

ORdered by the Commons House in Parliament, That these two Letters be
forthwith Printed and published.

Hen: Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed by John Field for Edw: Husbands, and are to be sold at his
shop in the Middle Temple, June 23. 1643.

A Letter sent from his Excellency Robert Earl of Essex, directed to the
Speaker of the House of COMMONS.
SIR,
THere being some of my Horse that had an Encounter with the Enemy yesterday
being Sunday; I thought fit to give the House an Account of the particulars of
it, knowing how apt many are to mis-report things to our disadvantage.

About two of the clock on Sunday morning, the Enemy with about twelve hundred
Horse and a great body of Dragoons fell into a Town called Percham, where o^e
Troop of Horse (being Colonel Morleyes) was Quartered, of which they took
the greatest part, and from thence went not far to another Village called
Chinner, where they beat up some of the new Bedfordshire Dragoons and took
some of them Prisoners, and three of their Colors, and some of the Officers
behaving themselves very well, and defending the Houses wherein they were; they
set fire on the Town; these being out-Quarters, the Alarm came where Major
Gunter lay with three Troops (viz.) his own, Captain Sheffields, and Captain
Crosses, whom he presently drew out and marched toward the Enemy; Colonel
Hampden being abroad with Sir Samuel Luke and only one man, and seeing M^jor
Gunters Forces, they did go along with them, Colonel Dulbeir the Quartermaster
General did likewise come to them: with these they drew near the Enemy, and
finding them marching away, kept still upon the Rear for almost five Miles. In
this time there joined with them Captain Sanders Troop, and C^ptain Buller,
with fifty commanded men, which were sent to Chinner by Sir Philip Stapleton,
who had the Watch here that night at Them, when he discovered the fire there,
to know the occasion of it, he likewise sent one Troop of Dragoones under the
command of Captain Dundasse, who came up to them. There were likewise some few
of Colonel Melves Dragoons that came to them: at length our men pressed them
so near, that being in a large pasture ground they drew up, and notwithstanding
the inequality of the numbers, we having not above 300. Horse, our men charged
them very gallantly, and slew diverse of them; but while they were in fight, the
Enemy being so very strong, kept a Body of horse for his reserve, and with that
Body wheeled about and charged our men in the Rear, so that being encompassed
and overborne with multitude, they broke and fled, though it was not very far;
For when I heard that our men marched in the Rear of the Enemy, I sent to Sir
Philip Stapleton, who presently Marched toward them with his Regiment; and
though he came somewhat short of the Skirmish, yet seeing our men Retreat in
that disorder, he stopped them, caused them to draw into a Body with him, where
they stood about an hour: Whereupon the Enemy marched away. In this Skirmish
there were slain forty and five on both sides, whereof the greater part were
theirs.

They carried off the Bodies of diverse persons of quality. On our side Major
Gunter was killed, but some say he is prisoner and so hurt; a man of much
courage and fidelity, his bravery engaging him, and his small party too far:
Colonel Hamden put himself in Captain Cross his Troop, where he charged
with much courage, and was unfortunately shot through the Shoulder. Sir Samuel
Luke thrice taken prisoner, and fortunately rescued: Captain Cross had his
horse killed under him in the midst of the Enemy, and was mounted by one of
his own men, who quitted his own horse to save his Captain.

Captain Buller was shot in the neck, who showed very much resolution in this
fight, taking one prisoner after he was shot. Mounsieur Dulbier with Captain
Bosa and Captain Ennis, did likewise carry themselves very well. We likewise
lost two colors, viz. Major Gunters and Captain Sheffeilds; no prisoners of
quality were taken by the enemy, but Captain Sheffeilds Brother. Prince Rupert
was there in person, and the Renagado Hurry. We took prisoner one of the Earl
of Berks sons, Captain Gardener, the late Recorders son of London, and
captain Smith, with some others of quality and diverse prisoners.

Sir, this is the true Relation of what passed in this business, I rest;

Your assured Friend ESSEX.
Them. 19 June. 1643.
A Letter sent from his Excellency the Earl of Essex, to the Gentlemen,
Freeholders and well-affected people in the County of Essex.
HEaring of your readiness to assist in this great cause with your persons and
purses, for the defense of Religion and Liberty, and what ever is dear unto
us, and of your willingness to rise generally, and to join with other
Counties, to deliver your selves from that slavery and misery that our enemies
would bring upon us. I do with much joy receive your resolutions, and count it
a special mercy of God, that makes his people sensible of their dangers, and
willing to hazard their lives for him, and do judge it the most hopeful means
of concluding these unhappy distractions of the Kingdom. Therefore I desire you
to assure your selves of all assistance from me that the Army can afford, and
my earnest desire is to help you in it. And I desire such may appear in this
cause, as have most interest in it; such of whose constancy and courage we may
be assured, men of Religious lives and affections fittest to bear Arms for
truth of Religion, Men of estates to defend those estates that the enemy seeks
to devour: The employment is not too mean for the best men, and then we shall
hope for success when such put their hands to the work; for assure your
selves, the loosnesse and inconstancy of the Soldiers, amongst others is one
cause of the continuance of the War. I desire you to provide your selves as
well as you can with arms and necessaries, and to bring six weeks pay in your
purses, considering that the march is long, and but a month of that may be
spent in service; when that time is expired, we hope you may return home with
peace; If we shall entreat your further help, we shall provide for you as well
as God will enable us. Choose Commanders your selves, Colonells and Captains,
when we shall hear their names we shall send them Commissions, and when you
shall come near us, we shall send some able and experienced Commanders from our
Army to assist you. Doubt not of your Country in your absence, we shall take a
course for the securing and quieting of the Malignants; your safety is in being
in Arms, it will be your happiness to fight with your enemies at distance, and
so keep them from spoiling that as yet peaceable and flourishing County. If God
stir the hearts of people to appear generally, and to prosper our
endeavors, we hope the success will be happy and comfortable.

Stoken Church, 9. June, 1643. Your assured Friend, Essex.

FINIS.

