SEVERAL PROPOSITIONS PROPOVNDED, By his Excellency, the Earl of Essex, to the
Cavaleees, near Darby-shire, September the 21. 1642. being very fit and
necessary to be published throughout the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

Together with a true Relation of a famous Sea Fight, performed by Van Trump
the Dutch Admiral with ten ships, against the Spanish fleet, being going to
assist the Bebels in Ireland, with men and ammunition.

With the manner of his obtaining the Victory, and after 11. hours fight took
ten of the Spanish ships, and put the rest to flight.

Reported to the House of Commons, Septem. 20.

C R
printer's device consisting of a central circle flanked by the English lion on
the left and the Scottish unicorn on the right and containing the initials of
King Charles, all of these figures enclosed within a rectangle flanked by angel
on the left and right

Printed for I White, September 21, 1642.

A true RELATION OF A Famous Sea Fight, performed by Van Trump the Dutch
Admiral, with eight sail of ships, against seventeen Spanish ships that were
going to aid the Rebels in Ireland.
ON the 20 day of this month Letters came to the Honorable House of Commons,
signifying, that the Hollander has obtained a great Victory over the Spanish
fleet that were going to aid and assist the Rebels in Ireland, being in number
17. lusty ships, as is manifestly declared in these ensuing particulars,

The States of Holland having received information, that a great Navy of
Spanish ships lay at Dunkirke ready to lance forth, which was supposed, either
for some Design against England, or else for the relief of the Rebels in
Ireland, and after some consultation thereupon, they fort with dispatched a
Messenger to Van Trump Admiral of their Navy, desiring his care and
vigilancie therein.

The said Van-Trump had no sooner received this News from his Masters the
States of Holland, but with all expedition, he sent 10 lusty ships, himself
going in person also, and having sailed for the space of 7 hours, he espied the
Spanish fleet, who making after them with full speed, and being within half a
league of them, the Spaniard though it a great disparagement to fly, by reason
they did exceed them in number. Whereupon the Spaniards prepared themselves, and
made them ready for Battle, and as soon as Van-trump came within Canon-shot,
the Spaniards let fly many pieces of Ordnance to welcome him, thinking the day
their own.

But the Hollanders took the same Resolution, as they have formerly done in the
West Indies, and diverse other places at Sea, resolving to fight it out to the
last man, which indeed are brave testimonies for all other Mariners.

Van-Trump seeing the Spaniards begin so furiously, caused his Vice Admiral
and two more to play against them with their Broadside, which made the Spanish
Admiral, and some others, glad to fall back, and for 8. or 9. hours the fight
continued very hot, much blood being shen on both sides, till Van Trump with
the Admiral came up, playing with his great Ordnance against them, insomuch
that he boorded the Spanish Admiral twice, and at last took 11 of their ships,
together with great store of men and ammunition, and put the other 6. to flight.

The Earl of Essex his Proposisions to the Cavalees, Sep. 21.
ON the 22. of this month there came a Post from his Excellency the Earl of
Essex, declaring many Defeates and Overthrowes given to the Cavaleers, by his
Excellency, and that since his first advancing his Army from Norhampton, he
has had very good success, in all places where he has bin as yet, the
Cavaleers not daring to withstand him.

Whereupon, the Earl of Cumberland, the Earl of Lindsey, the Lord Strange, and
diverse others, have sent out Warrants to all the Cavaleeers now resident in the
Northern parts of this Island, to make their appearance upon the 21. of this
month at a place called Stokes Green in Lincolnshire, giving them strict
Command, not to fayl at the day prefixed.

And the said Commissioners are resolved at the meeting, to join their Forces
in a full body, and march against the Earl of Essex, otherwise, they fear that
their hopes will be quite frustrated.

But such is the courage of the London Volunteers, and pious Branches, that
their hearts are filled with joy, when they hear that they must go to battle;
for they have all with a general consent set down their Resolution, either to
lose their lives, or win Fame, before they return to London. For they depend
wholly upon their cause, although some depends upon their power and strength.

His Excellency the Earl of Essex, after he had advanced his Forces from
Norhampton, took his Journey toward Darbishire, but before he came to the said
County, he had information that about 2000 Cavaleers were billeted near to the
said City, where having received this News, he marched to the Cavaleers, and
propounded these following particulars to them. 1. That they would deliver up
their Arms, and resign them to his Excellencies Custody. 2. That in so doing,
he would give every man of them free leave to go home to his own dwelling. 3.
That those which did withstand him, and refused to agree to his Demands, should
stand to his mercy.


These are the Propositions which his Excellency propounded to the Cavaleers at
their meeting.

FINIS.

