True and happy News From WORCESTER.

Read in the Honorable House of Commons, Septem. 24. 1642.

Sent in a Letter from His Excellency the Earl of Essex upon Saturday the 24
of September, 1642. to the House of Commons.

Wherein is declared a Famous Victory by Master Fines a Member of the House of
Commons over Prince Robert, who came to the said City with 500. Horse, upon
Thursday last.

Relating also the same Description of the Battle and the number that was
slain on both sides,

Likewise the proceedings of His Majesty since his coming to the said City
expressed in the said Letters.

Together with His Resolution concerning the City of London, being happy
tidings for all those that wish well to this happy Resolution.

London, printed for Tho. White. Septem. 26.

True and Happy News from Worcester.
Upon Thursday last Prince Robert marched toward Worcester with his Army,
being in number 500. Horse and not any Foot, and at his coming thither Mr.
Fines stood in opposition against him, where Prince Robert caused his men to
discharge so fast, insomuch that there began a great skirmish between them,
holding for the space of two hours: Prince Robert with his Forces began to
retreat, and at that time the Prince lost 12. men, and Master Fines 5. men. The
said Prince Robert is making of spoil, to the great hurt of the said City, and
planting of Ordnance, and he has already spoiled and burnt some houses. This
News was sent to the Honorable House of Commons upon Saturday last, which
signified that the Kings Majesty was in person at Worcester, and that the Earl
of Essex is marching thither with 22000. men. Sent in a Letter from the
Honorable Mr. Fines.

The Kings Majesty having often times declared his Royal intention and
Resolution toward this City of London, has occationed a great jelousie in
the hearts of diverse and allthoughe he has often times dclared that tumults
were punished and suppreessed he would take his jorney toward this City and
although some peaple weak of opinion that his Majesty any intention to take
his jorney toward this City yet by these perticulers following, it will most
evidently and plainly appear that his Majestyes Royal heart has always
been conioyning to this City and it does most manifestly testify that his
Majesty has ever and does still owe and bear more afection and love to his
subjects in this City then he did to any other City in this Kingdom although
his Royal and sacred Majesty has been misled and insenceb against his
loueing subjects that are resident in this Honorable City of London by that
party which seeks daily to bring the inhabitants here into utter ruin and
destruction for as it is the Ch^efest and Metropolitan City of the Kingdom, so
they seek and labor day ly to bring it to the least and meanest estat of any
City in this Island or under the heavens, and to discover and bring to light
some more of their mischeeuos and devilish intentions which I believe it is not
unknown unto diverse that do understand proceedings of cavaleers, and other of
the maliguant party of this Kingdom their greatest malice and envy that is so
drownded in their hearts that it is almost impossible thing to have us removed,
un-God puts his helping hand thereto, because the Foundation of Reformation is
now beginning to take place in this Metropolitan City, and our Honorable
Assembly the Worthies of Israel does now labor and endeavor to bring the same
to perfection, God of his great mercy send his helping hand thereto: But
because I will now proceed to the Resolution and intention of his Sacred
Majesty the King of Great Britain, concerning this Honorable and renowned City
of London, (viz) His Majesty, as has been often said, has had a longing
desire to come near to the City of London, and uses the means, as it does
accordingly appear, for upon the 16. day of this month there was a great
disturbance amongst the Cavaleers at Darby, by reason that His Majesty went
from thence privately to Nottingham, they supposing he had took his journey
toward London, and indeed it is thought, that although His Person be amongst
them yet his heart is better affected toward us, for did not the Cavaleers
pursue and follow Him so close at His removal from one place to another, it is
thought that he would soon be here, but such is the jealousy of these
Malignant persons, that they will not suffer His Person to be out of their
sight not a minute in a manner, but presently post after him to any place where
he goes; and although His ^acred Majesty has often declared to the Cavaleers,
that he will venture his life in their defense, yet they are very jealous of
his words, and does daily fear, that he will come to composition with His
Parliament, by reason that be does show some countenance to the Parliaments
Petitions, and were it not for them, doubtless but we should have him here
very suddenly. The Honorable Earl of Essex has declared his Resolution to
his Majesty, that he is resolved to put nothing in act, but what should tend to
his Majesty's honor safety and securty, and the good both of Church and
Religion, and that to the utmost of His power He will have a wa^chfull eye,
that no outrages and abuses be committed by any of his Soldiers, and that His
coming now with his Forces is not against His Majesty but against the
Malignant party, the wicked incendiaries of this Kingdom that are now about
His Royal person, whose minds does daily thirst after the blood of our
English and Scots Protestants, this is the Noble Resolution of his Excellence
the Earl of Essex.

FINIS.

