Etmullerus Abridg'd: OR, A Complete System of the Theory and Practice of
Physic.

BEING A DESCRIPTION OF All Diseases Incident to Men, Women and Children.

WITH An Account of their Causes, Symptoms, and most approved methods (...)
Cure, PHYSICAL and CHIRVRG^^^L.

To which is prefixed a short View (...) the Animal and Vital Functions; and
the sev^^^^ Vertu^^ and Classes of Med^cines.

Translated from the last Edition of the Works of Michael ETMUILERVS, late
Professor o^ Physic in the University of Leiptsich.

LONDON: Printed for E. Harris, at the Harrow in Litte-Britain, F. Hubbard,
next Door to the Crown Tavern in Duck Lane, and A. Bell, at the Cross Keys and
(...) in Cornhill, near Stocks-Market. 1699.

THE TRANSLATOR's PREFACE.
SInce Practical Sciences are infinitely more useful to mankind, than the most
Curious speculations; Doubtless, the Practice of Physic may justly claim the
same Privilege, with respect to its Theoric Companions. Anatomy, Chymy, Botany,
and the whole Circle of Sciences that retain to Physic, are only serviceable
when they conspire to improve a regular and safe Practice. When they carry on
any different design, their Positions are deservedly neglected as idle and
useless Curiosities. The only plea they can make, is, the Diversion and
Entertainment of a few whose Heads are turned that way. Whereas, the Advantage
and Benefit of the World is the Result of Practical Truths.

Upon this Account, I chose to abridge Etmullerus his Practice of Physic, as
being the center and substance of all his Performances. The Choice was
determined by the Advantage which accrues to the Theory in being applied to
Practice, and backed by Experience, without which no Argument is good; in being
delivered in such a method as must naturally ingross all its useful and
instructing Part, and leave out what is only Calculated for Diversion and
Pleasure. Thus, it is restored to its Natural tendency, and stamped with an
inviting Character. It Is cleared of the Crimes that are charged upon frivolous
niceties, and recommended to the World as a substantial and necessary part of
Physic.

Had this method been always followed, it had prevented a great many
Inconveniences; as it will appear by the following Instances. Most of our
Courses of Practice are stuff^d with the Nauseous Repetition of ineffectual
Medicines. Their unexperienced Authors deliver their mistaken notions as a
standing Rule, and with an assuming Air pretend to Dictat to Experience. So
great is the Self-sufficiency of a teeming, Brain, and such is the Consequence
of that unhappy Distinction between the Theory of Diseases, and Actual
Practice; By this means Various Sects arise, Their respective Votaries become
Physicians by Echo and form their precarious methods from the Placita of
Opinionative Men: The m^st solid and useful Positions are misconstru'd, or
wrangl'd away; and plain Practice is confronted by vain fancies, or run down by
the humor and bias of a Party.

On the other hand, a certain set of Men, disobliged by the stiffness of the
speculative Tribe, and their small regard to Experience, have chose to lay
aside all the advantages of (even useful) Theory, and trust wholly to the
Conduct of an Ignorant Experience. Thus Medicines, that in a few singular
Instances have been Crowned with success, are recommended as infallible in all
Diseases of the like form. Whereas, were these Empyric Pretenders acquainted
with the Various Causes of the same effect, and the peculiar Constitutions of
Men, they would be able to single out the particular Cases in which their
Medicines are proper, and second 'em with solid Reasons. But they foolishly
disdain the least Tincture of Knowledge; they boldly decry what they do not
understand: and with a successful impudence, impose upon a Credulous World.

Now the result of all, is, that a happy Conjunction of Speculative and
Experimental Knowledge, is the only remedy of the Inconveniences that Cramp a
regular Practice. And it is in great measure, accomplished in the following
sheets: Here the orderly Scheme of the functions of the Body, The General
Classes and Virtues of Medicines, and their forms of Prescription, are briefly
accounted for, in few Preliminary Chapters. Here the Reader will meet with the
Spirit and Perfection of Practice, supported by all the ^^^ful discoveries of
Anatomy, and Chymy, and a Judicious Account of the Materia Medica. Here the
nicest Philosopher will find entertainment answerable to his humor; and the
meanest Empyric, will be Accommodated with suitable Instruction. Our Author
omits nothing that may promote the Grand design. He reasons with the manly
force and Dexterity of a Philosopher, and yet stoops to the meanest stroke of
unaccountable Experience. He weighs all the Instances of Quack-Cures, even
Sympathy it self he pay's a deference to, and choos^s rather to check the most
refined reason, than control matter of fact. He traces the Ancients to their
earlyest date, and omits no piece of Modern Discovery. He Reconciles the
Experience of former Ages, with the improvements of later Authors. He unites
the jarring Hypotheses of Willis, Sylvius and Helmont; and makes 'em conspire
to illustrat and imbellish an uniform Practice.

In the Division of Diseases he chooses to follow the most Natural method, in
ranking 'em with the functions of the Body, and fetching in the Stragglers to
the place where their cause is lodged. In this he was obliged to depart from
the ordinary measures of our Commonplace Writers, who split diseases as their
effects va^y, and multiply 'em according to the Number of their Symptoms. By so
doing he avoid, the Inconvenience of Charging our memories with multiplied
Cures, that may be compassed by one method. As for Instance, he fetches the
cause of all Chronical Diseases from the Stomac; and with one Blow Cuts off the
Preposterous plea of Obstructions in the Bowels, and a Numberless train of
Symptoms. Nay, he Penetrates into the hidden source of most of our Northern
Diseases; and by accounting for that l^pps off a great deal of unnecessary
Practice: As it appears by his method of Curing Children's Distempers; which
has already met with a welcome reception from the English World.

But, it is a needless piece of formality, to anticipat the Reader's Curiosity
with a Character of the Book or Author. His Name is an Ample Recommendation.
His Works (in the Language of the Learned) have been received both here and
abroad, with the unanimous Approbation of the best Judges; and have justly
Entitled him to the Character he bears in the Title Page of their Last Edition
at Amsterdam, viz. Practicus per Omnem Europam Celeberrimus. His Practice of
Physic is doubtless the Compleatest now extant: As being so admirably fitted
for all the Measures of Theory and Practice. It Is Countenanced by Anatomy,
Improved by Chymy, distinguished in the Minutest Circumstances, warranted by
Experience, and finished to the last Degree. His Method is Easy; The Causes he
assigns to Diseases are Natural, his Reasons Convincing, his Proofs Solid, his
Cautions Seasonable, his Observations Just, his Experiments true, His Vouchers
Men of Credit, his Medicines Nicely Prepared, and all his Compositions
admirably well Contrived. In a word, every Period of his Writings may furnish
us with convincing Proofs of his Infinite Reading, clear Apprehension, solid
Judgment, large Experience, and unsullied Integrity.

As for the Abridgment, or Translation; I shall neither trouble the Reader nor
my self with any Apology for it. If the Imperfections are only such, as, the
hurry of the Press, the Injunctions of Booksellers, the limited Number of
sheets, and the Common plea of oversights may account for, I have some Title to
bespeak forgiveness of the Reader. If it be justly charged with grosser faults,
I can offer no deference that is sufficient.

THE CONTENTS
OF THE Introduction.
SECT. I. Of the General Virtues of Medicines. p. 3 Sect. II. Of the Vital
Functions of the Body. p. 5 Sect. III. Of Acid, Alcalin, Pituitous, and Serous
Cacochymies, or Corruptions of the Juices in the Body: p. 12 Sect. IV. Of the
Medicines that Evacuat the Corrupt Juices of the Body. p. 17 Chap. I. Of
Vomiting Medicines. Ibid. Chap. II. Of Purging Medicines. p. 25 Chap. III. Of
the Medicines that provoke Urine. p. 35 Chap. IV. Of the Medicines that procure
Sweat. p. 38
Sect. V. Of the Animal Faculty. p. 41 Sect. VI. Of the Choice of Practical
Authors. p. 45
The Contents of the First Book.
SECT. I. Of the Appetit, and the Disorders it is Obnoxious to. p. 47 Chap. I.
Of the loss of Appetit. p. 48 Chap. II. Of the Depravation of the Appetit. p.
56 Chap. III. Of an Immoderat, or Dog-Hunger. p. 59
Sect. II. Of the Disorders of Thirst. p. 62 Chap. I. Of Immoderat Thirst. Ibid.
Sect. III. Of Diseases relating to the Chewing Faculty. p. 66 Chap. I. Of the
Contorsion of the Muscles of the mouth, or a Dog-Cramp. Ibid. Chap. II. Of the
Loss, Corruption, Blackness, Looseness, Numness, and Chilness of the Teeth. p.
68
Sect. IV. Of the Diseases that hinder swallowing. p. 72 Sect. V. Of the
hindrances of Chylification. p. 74 Chap. I. Of Diseases Incumbring, or
Extinguishing Chylification. p. 74 Chap. II. Of Wind in the Stomac or Guts. p.
79
Sect. VI. Of the Diseases that hinder the Retention of Food in the Stomac. p.
83 Chap. I. Of a Vomiting and Loathing of Meat. Ibid. Chap. II. Of a Vomiting
of Blood. p. 87
Sect. VII. Of Pains in the Stomac. p. 90 Sect. VIII. Of disorders hindering the
due separation of the Chyle from the Excrements in the Guts. p. 96 Sect. IX. Of
disorders relating to the Expulsion of the Excrements by Stool. p. 98 Chap. I.
Of the Diseases which impair the Evacuation by Stool. Ibid. Art. I. Of
Costiveness. Ibid. Art. II. Of the Iliac Passion. p. 102
Chap. II. Of the Diseases which enlarge the Quantity of Excrements voided by
Stool. p. 106 Art. I. Of a L^oseness. Ibid. Art. II. Of the Disease called
Cholera. p. 112 Art. III. Of a Lienteria. p. 114 Art. IV. Of the Looseness
called Caeliaca. p. 115
Chap. III. Of Depravations relating to the Expulsion of Excrements by Stool.
p. 116 Art. I. Of a Dysentery, Tenesmus, Hepatic Flux, and Itching of the Anus.
Ibid. Art. II. Of the Piles. p. 125

Sect. X. Of Worms in the Guts. p. 130 Sect. XI. Of Pains in the Guts, and
Particularly of the Colic. p. 132 Sect. XII. Of the Vicious Postures of the
Guts. p. 141 Chap. I. Of Ruptures. Ibid. Chap. II. Of the Downfalling of the
Anus. p. 144
Sect. XIII. Of the Encumbrances of the Chyle in its Passage from the Guts. p.
146 Sect. XIV. Of Diseases relating to the Lungs and Organs of Respiration. p.
150 Chap. I. Of Inspiration Abolished, or Suffocation. p. 150 Chap. II. Of
Inspiration depraved, or difficult Breathing. p. 152 Art. I. Of Asthma's. Ibid.
Art. II. Of a Hiccough. p. 158 Art. III. Of the Nightmare. p. 160
Chap. III. Of Disorders relating to Exspiration. p. 161 Art. I. Of Immoderat
Sneesing. Ibid. Art. II. Of disorders of the Voice. p. 162 Art. III. Of a
Cough. p. 164 Art. IV. Of a Choking Catarh. p. 171

Sect. XV. Of the Accidents that disturb the transformation of the Chyle, and
fermentation of the Blood. p. 193 Chap. I. Of Fevers in General. p. 195 Chap.
II. Of Intermitting Fevers. p. 204 Chap. III. Of Continual Fevers. p. 230
Chap. IV. Of slow Fevers. p. 244 Art. I. Of Catarrh-Feavers, or such as
proceed from the Lymph, separated in the Round Globe-like Glandules ib. Art.
II. Of Fevers proceeding from the Lymph of the Conglomerated Glandules, or
such as are rolled into a Cluster p. 247
Chap. V. Of malignant Fevers p. 254 Chap. VI. Of the Small Pox and Measles p.
265 Chop. VII. Of the Plague and Pestilential Fevers p. 273
Sect. XVI. Of Disorders relating to the Blood's motion from the Heart to the
outer Parts p. 281 Chap. I. Of the Palpitation and Trembling of the Heart. p.
282 Chap. II. Of Swoonings. p. 286
Sect. XVII. Of Nutrition: p. 290 Chap. I. Of a Consumption and Phthisic p. 291
Chap. II. Of Immoderat Nutrition, or Corpulency. p. 300 Chap. III. Of a
Depraved Nutrition. p. 302 Art. I. Of a Cachexy, Leucophlegmacy and Anasarca.
Ibid. Art. II. Of a Universal Dropsy. p. 305 Art. III. Of the Yellow, Black and
White Jaundice. p. 314 Art. IV. Of the French Pox. p. 318 Art. V. Of the
Hypochondriacal and Scorbutical Diseases. p. 326 Art. VI. Of Breakings-out in
the Skin. p. 346

Sect. XVIII. Of Diseases hindering the regular Reflux of the Blood to the
Heart. p. 353 Chap. I. Of Inflammations. Ibid. Art. I. Of a Quinsey, Thrush and
Falling of the Uvula, or Palate of the mouth. p. 356 Art. II. Of Inflammations
of the Stomac, Guts and Fundament. p. 360 Art. III. Of Inflammations of the
Mesentery, Sweetbread and Caul. p. 362 Art. IV. Of Inflammations of the
Internal Parts of the Breast, and Particularly of a Pleurisy and Peripneumonia.
p. 364 Art. V. Of Inflammations and Ulcers of the Liver and Spleen. p. 371 Art.
VI. Of Inflammations and Ulcers of the Kidneys. p. 373 Art. VII. Of
Inflammations and Ulcers of the Bladder. p. 375 Art. VIII. Of a Phrensy, or
Inflammation of the Membrans of the Brain. p. 377 Art. IX. Of the Genuin and
Spurious Inflammations of the Eyes p. 378 Art. X. Of Inflammations and Ulcers
in the Ears. p. 383
Chap. II. Of the Effusion of Blood into the Cavities of the Body, and
Particularly of an Empyema p. 384 Chap. III. Of a Bleeding, or the Bursting of
the Blood Vessels p. 389 Art. I. Of Bleeding at the Nose and Gums. p. 394 Art.
II. Of a Spitting of Blood. p. 396

Sect. XIX. Of Diseases relating to the Alterations of the Blood in the Spleen,
Liver and Kidneys. p. 399 Chap. I. Of Distempers relating to the separation of
Serum in the Kidneys. p. 401 Art. I. Of an Ischuria in the Kidneys, or a
Suppression of Urine arising from the want of a due separation in the Reins.
Ibid. Art. II. Of the Stone in the Kidneys. p. 405 Art. III. Of a Diabetes, or
Excessive flux of Urine. p. 414 Art. IV. Of a Pissing of Blood. p. 416
Chap. II. Of Diseases relating to the Expulsion of Urine from the Bladder. p.
418 Art. I. Of a total suppression of Urine, arising from its stay in the
Bladder. Ibid. Art. II. Of the Stone in the Bladder. p. 421 Art. III. Of the
Incontinence of Urine. p. 422 Art. IV. Of a Strangury. p. 424 Art. V. Of a
Dysuria, or Heat of Urine. p. 425

Sect. XX. Of Diseases relating to the separation of Lymph in the Glandules,
and its regular motion: p. 427 Art. I. Of Catarrhs. p. 428 Art. II. Of a
Coryza. p. 431

The Contents of the Second Book.
SECT. I. Of the Diseases which disturb the Generation and Distribution of the
Animal Spirits, and Consequently the due performance of sense and motion. p.
433 Chap. I. Of Immoderat Watchings. p. 435 Chap. II. Of Excessive sleep. p. 438
Sect. II. Of the External Senses. p. 444 Chap. I. Of Diseases relating to the
Eyes. Ibid. Chap. II. Of the Disorders of the Ears. p. 455 Chap. III. Of the
sense of feeling, and the disorders it is obnoxious to. p. 460 Art. I. Of Pain
in General. p. 461 Art. II. Of sharp tearing Pains in the Joints. p. 463 Art.
III. Of the Toothache. p. 465 Art. IV. Of the Aches of the Eyes. p. 467 Art. V.
Of Pains in the Ears. p. 468 Art. VI. Of Head-Achs. p. 469 Art. VII. Of
Arthritic Pains. p. 476
Chap. IV. Of the Disorders of the Sense of Tasting p. 481 Chap. V. Of the
disorders of the sense of smelling. p. 484
Sect. III. Of the disorders of the Internal Senses and Animal Functions. p.
487 Chap. I. Of a swimming in the Head and Preter-natural Commotion of the
Spirits in the Brain. p. 488 Chap. II. Of the Irregular Incursions of the
Spirits into the External Parts. p. 492 Art. I. Of Alternat Convulsions, and
the Epilepsy or Falling Sickness. p. 493 Art. II. Of a Cramp, or continued
Contraction. p. 503 Art. III. Of Trembling.
Chap. III. Of the Diseases in which the Animal Spirits cease to move. p. 507
Art. I. Of an Apoplexy. Ibid: Art. II. Of Particular Apoplexies. p. 520 Art.
III. Of a Palsy. p. 523
Chap. IV. Of the Deficiency of Rational Operations. p. 532 Art. I. Of the
Defect of Memory and Stupidity. Ibid. Art. II. Of Doting, or Deliriums in
General. p. 536 Art. III. Of Deliriums arising from Internal Causes, viz.
Phrensies, Melancholy and Madness. p. 537 Art. IV. Of Deliriums from External
Causes. p. 553


The Contents of the Third Book. Of the Diseases Peculiar to the Male Sex.
SECT. I. Of the Disorders of the Genital Liquor in Men's Bodies. p. 557 Chap.
I. Of the Defect or Insufficiency of the Genital Liquor in Men. p. 558 Art. I.
Of the Inflammation of the Testicles. p. 561 Art. II. Of a Pueumatocele, or
Distention of the Stones by Wind. p. 562 Art. III. Of a Hydrocele, or
Collection of Water within the Membrans of the Stones. p. 563 Art. IV. Of the
Schirrous swellings of the Stones. p. 564 Art. V. Of a Sarcocele, or fleshy
swelling of the Stones. p. 565 Art. VI. Of the Distention of the Spermatic
Veins, or Hernia Varicosa. p. 566
Chap. II. Of the Irregular Ejaculation of the Seed. Ibid. Art. I. Of a
Running, or Involuntary Emission of the Genital Liquor. Ibid. Art. II. Of the
Overhasty Ejaculation of the seminal matter. p. 571 Art. III. Of the Over-slow
Ejaculation of the seminal matter. Ibid. Art. IV. Of Caruneles in the Yard,
hindering the Ejection of Seed. p. 572

Sect. II. Of disorders relating to the Erection of the Yard. Ibid. Chap. I. Of
Impotency, or the Defect of Erection of the Yard. p. 573 Chap. II. Of the
Immoderat Erection of the Yard. p. 574 Chap. III. Of the Depravation of the
Erection of the Yard. p. 576

The Contents of the Fourth Book. Of Diseases Peculiar to Women.
SECT. I. Of the Disorders of the Menstrual Flux. p. 578 Chap. I. Of the
Deficiency of the Terms. p. 579 Chap. II. Of the Immoderat Flux of the Terms.
p. 584 Chap. III. Of the Depravation of the Menstrual Flux. p. 587 Art. I. Of
Vneasyness attending the Menstrual Flux. Ibid. Art. II. Of the lesser Quantity
of the Monthly Flux. p. 589 Art. III. Of the Flux of the Terms by Drops. Ibid.
Art. IV. Of several other defaults of the Terms. p. 590
Chap. IV. Of the Whites, or White Flux. p. 591
Sect. II. Of the Disorders of Women, relating to the Venereal Appetit. p. 594
Chap. I. Of the Loss of Virginity. Ibid. Chap. II. Of the Depravation of the
Venereal Appetit. p. 595
Sect. III. Of the disorders of the whole Body supposed to proceed from the
Womb. p. 597 Chap. I. Of the Green Sickness. Ibid. Chap. II. Of a Cachexy in
Women. p. 598 Chap. III. Of the Hysteric Passion. p. 600
Sect. IV. Of the disorders of Women denying Admission to Men. p. 604 Chap. I.
Of the Downfalling of the Womb. Ibid. Chap. II. Of the Inflammation of the
Womb. p. 606 Chap. III. Of Ulcers in the Womb and Vagina. p. 607
Sect. V. Of Disorders relating to Conception. Ibid. Sect. VI. Of the Conduct
of Bigbelly'd Women. p. 612 Sect. VII. Of Disorders relating to Childbirth. p.
615 Sect. VIII. Of the Management of Women in Childbed. p. 620 Sect. IX. Of
Disorders relating to Suckling. p. 627
The Contents of the Fifth Book.
Of the Diseases of Children. p. 630
The Contents of the Sixth Book. Of Surgery. 644
CHAP. I. Of Tumors. p. 645 Chap. II. Of Wounds. p. 658 Chap. III. Of Ulcers.
p. 666 Chap. IV. Of Dislocations. p. 671 Chap. V. Of Fractures. p. 673 Chap.
VI. Of a Gangrene, or Sphacelus p. 675
AN ABRIDGMENT OF ETMULLERUS's Practice of Physic, etc.
THE INTRODVCTION.
HAving undertaken to compile a System of Physic, I am obliged, in the first
place, to distinguish the Common and Ordinary Practice from that which is
Uncommon and Extraordinary. The former is, as yet, very Lame, by reason of the
Scarcity of Chemical and Anatomical Experiments; which occasions our Ignorance
of the Radical Causes of Diseases, and leaves only some occasional Symptoms to
build the Theory upon. Nor is it less deficient in Generous and Proper
Remedies, which might effectually accomplish the Design, with less Violence and
Torture to the Stomach; Such as Paracelsus, Helmont, and other Noted Chemists
have distinguished themselves by.

The Extraordinary Practice differs from the former, both in the Nature of its
Remedies, which are all Arcana's, tho otherwise never so common: And in the
manner of their Operation, which is generally performed by Sympathy,
Enchantment, or some such Secret way. This I reserve to the Latter End; and
shall now confine my self to the Ordinary Practice, which I endeavor to make
as perfect and complete as possible, both in its conformity to Chemical and
Anatomical Observations, and in the choice of Genuin and Proper Remedies.

I propose to discourse of All Diseases incident to Human Bodies: And in
Tracing every Disease, shall observe the following method.

First, To give the History of the Disease, the Manner of its Invasion, and the
Signs which generally accompany it.

Secondly, To describe the Part affected, whether mediatly, by being influenced
from another; or immediately, by the Residence of the Morbific Cause within its
self.

Thirdly, The Causes of every Distemper, both Radical and Occasional.

Fourthly, What Prognostics we can have of the Event of every Distemper.

And, Fifthly, To subjoyn the Method of Cure, both General and Special; the
Nature of the Remedies, whether Simple or Compound, Universal or Specific:
Together with Historical Cases, and Practical Observations applied to every
Disease.

But some things are necessary to be premised, before we launch into the
Practice.

Whoever would understand it thoroughly, must be well acquainted with the
Principles of Chymy and Mechanics. The former are serviceable in explaining
the Vital Functions of the Body, and the latter in the Animal Musculary Motion:
For Nature has acted Geometrically in framing our Bodies, as well as in every
thing else.

The remaining Preliminary Principles that a Student ought to know, before he
Commence the Practice of Physic, are briefly couched under the following Heads.

SECT. I. Of the General Virtues of Medicines.
AS the Economy of Man's Body is only explicable by the different Forms,
Sizes, and Various Combinations of the Minute Particles, of which every Body is
compounded, according to the Principles of Mechanism: So the Virtues of
Medicines may best be deduced from the same Cause: Especially since Occult
Qualities are now hissed out of Doors; and the four first Elementary Principles
of Cold, Hot, Dry and Moist, are more Imaginary than Real. This Particular
Disposition and Texture of Parts, that entitles all Medicines to their
Respective Specific Qualities, is Originally owing to the Seed; and may
properly be called the Seminal Disposition. As for Example, Scurvygrass is a
Specific against the Scurvy; not because it is Hot, or enjoys such an Occult
Quality; but because it enjoys such a Texture of Parts, that makes it a subtle
penetrating Body, fit for altering and subduing the Acid Scorbutical Matter.
Now its precise Seminal Virtue is not Common to all its Parts, but peculiar to
a sharp Volatile Salt, couched within its Body, that actuates the other Earthy
Particles. And indeed the Various Exaltation, or Depression of Acid or Alcali
Salts, is the distinguishing Character of all their respective Textures;
because the Saline Particles are more active, and produce more Notable Effects
than any of the rest; tho it is probable all of 'em Originally may have sprung
from Water.

Thus, such Medicines were by the Ancients accounted Hot, as by their sharp
pointed Particles affect the Tongue and Palate, the same way as Fire is wont to
do; or by Virtue of a Volatile Oily Salt, dissolve the Mass of Blood, and
augment its Fermentation. Those of a contrary Virtue they styi'd Cold; Such are
all Acid or Nitrous Medicines. Those they called Dry, which either drink in the
moisture of the Body, as Burnt Hartshorn, etc. or open a Door for its Passage,
as all Sudorifics. Those Moist, that either supply moisture, as all Nourishing
and Liquid Things; or give a stop to its Consumption, as Quieting, Pacific
Medicines.

All Medicines fit for Conquering a prevailing Acid, or Alcali, in the first
Passages, were by the Ancients called Aperitive. I choose rather to Christen
'em Alterative. If they are Anti-Acids, they perform their Task by imbibing the
peccant Acid, as Steel and all Earths; or qualifying its sharpness, as Oily fat
Medicines; or fermenting with it, so as to work it into a Third Compound, as
all Ascali's, both Fixed and Volatile. If their business be to conquer Alcali's,
they reduce the Bile, or any other Vicious Alcali, to its true Temperature, by
opposing themselves to their Extremes. For it is the Disproportioned Mixture of
the Juices, in the first ways, that destroys the Natural Fermentation of the
Blood, and is the Source of all Chronical Distempers, commonly, but falsely,
imputed to Obstructions. And all remedies capable of reducing them from either
Extreme, are what I call Alteratives in General; But are distinguished by
several particular Names corresponding to their special Qualities. As those of
an Oily Mucilaginous Body, and free from any Predominant salt, are called
Softening, Suppurating, Expectorating, Incrassating, Anodyne, etc. Opposite to
them are the Astringents, of a Styptic, Austere Body, Compounded of Earth and
an Acid Salt, which thicken fluid humors, and eontract the fibers of the Parts,
as Alum, etc. Those that are most Famous for making head against Acids, are
sometimes termed Febrifuga's, by reason of their Noted Virtue in Intermitting
Fevers; and sometimes Vulnerary, by reason of their healing Virtue. Such as
have a sharp penetrating Salt, whether Acid or Alcali, are Attenuating,
Discussing, etc. Those endowed with a Volatile Oily Salt, a piercing Smell, and
a grateful Taste, are Aromatic, Carminative, Cephalic, etc. and are commonly
used for Cordials. Those of a Volatile Salt, apt to dissolve the Mass of Blood,
are Diuretic, Sudorific and Alexipharmacal.

These are the General Classes of all remedies used in Physic. Such of 'em as
are more Universal, and Answer more Indications are to be most esteemed. As
Opium, Sal volatile Oleosum, and the fixed Sulphurs of Minerals and Metals;
which are all useful in an infinity of Cases; and are upon that account
Entitled to a preference, before others of a narrower extent.

SECT. II. Of the Vital Functions of the Body.
HAving touched upon the Virtues of Medicines and their manner of Operation,
the next thing is to consider the Subject or Body upon which the Operation is
performed. Its structure presents us with some gross material Parts, and some
more subtle and active, which serve to inform and actuate the other. The
former represent the External Fabric of an Ingenious Machine; the latter the
Internal Wheels and Springs of Motion.

The Ancients imagined our grosser part to be compounded of the four first
Elements, but without either Reason or Experience. I deny not but that there
are such things as Water, Earth and Air, which make up the greatest part of our
Terraqueous Globe; but I doubt much, if they and fire are the first and
simplest Ingredients of all Compounds.

Indeed as to Water, I do not dispute the point. Thales and Helmont have
clearly made it out, that all things consist of Water. But as for fire, the
Modern Experiments do sufficiently prove, that it is nothing else but a division
of the smaller Particles of fat Acids, such as we call sulphurous, by means of
the Air; from whence heat and light must necessarily ensue. We see that flame
is only a further rarefaction of the same Particles that, when more
condensated, appear in smoke; and a little more Condensation converts smoke
into soot; and the Oil of Soot, which is a fat Acid, differs from all the
three, as they from one another, by a further or lesser degree of Rarefaction
or Condensation. Thus the Various Conjunction, Separation, or Transposition of
the same Minute Particles, is the Original of the Generation and Corruption of
different Bodies. Therefore our modern Philosophers have thought fit to depart
from the common Elementary Road, and search for the Elements of Bodies among
these minute particles, which by combining or separating from one another, in
greater or lesser proportions, alter the Constitutions of Bodies, and transform
'em into others of a different mould. See the Houourable Mr. Boil of the
Original of Forms and Qualities.

As I take it, these Particles that enter into the Composition of all Bodies,
and are the most immediate Elements into which they resolve, may be justly
divided into four Classes. 1. The Saline Particles which are either Acids,
Alcali's, or Nitrous. 2. The Fat Oily Parts. 3. The Watery, and 4. The Earthy.
These I say, are the most immediate Principles of dissolved Body's. I do not
advance them for the first and simplest, nor for the last; for even these may
be resolved into others, and most of 'em into Water. Perhaps the Watery
Particles have a better Title to that Character. The various twisting of 'em
together, according to the respective seminal Virtue, may give rise to most, if
not all, Compounds; which dissolve into Water again, when the seminal Power
ceases to operate.

Our Body is immediately framed of these four sorts of Particles, especially of
Salt and Sulphur; which are the chief Ingredients of the Blood, Chyle and other
Juices. The seminal Power determines 'em to such a particular concretion as
appears in our Organs; and the respective Texture and Proportion established
among 'em, is the Gauge and Measure of our Temperaments.

The Changes that happen to Bodies, are chiefly occasioned by the Activity and
Various Engagements of the Saltish Particles. Fermentation and Effervescency,
which are the most remarkable motions in our Bodies, are totally owing to them.
The former, is an Intestine motion of the minute Particles, occasioned by the
mutual Jarrs of Acid and Alcali salts, which disturbs all the other parts, and
terminates either in the final dissolution of the Body, or such an alteration,
as a New Union and Temperature of the Salts may allow of. Effervescency or
Boiling is a much stronger motion, occasioned by the greater Purity, and
Sharpness of the Salts.

The more subtle penetrating parts of our Body are the Principle of Life and
Action. When they cease to perform their wonted motions, death takes place.
Their regular and undisturbed motions are the measure of Health; and the least
disorder among 'em is justly called a Disease.

They are nothing else but the Subtiler and more Volatile Parts of the Blood
separated in the Brain; which by Reason of their Activity are called Spirits,
tho in effect material, divisible and liable to Corruption. When they are mixed
with the Blood, and serve to enliven and exalt its Mass, Accompanying it
through all the Parts of the Body, they are called Vital Spirits, and are
employed in Vital Functions; but when they are Lodged in a different Apartment,
and Confine 'emselves to the Nerves and Brain, they are engaged in the Animal
faculty. In this Office they resemble the Bodies of Light, and are therefore
called Incid; but in the other they, fire-like, exalt and elevate the Blood.
Vid. Willis. de Anim. Brutor.

There is nothing more Conducive to a regular Practice of Physic, than a right
understanding of these two Faculties; and the several disorders they are
obnoxious to. The Animal faculty depends upon the regular motion of the
Spirits, and a sound Constitution of the Brain and Nerves. This I design to
treat of Annon. The Vital faculty consists in the regular motion of the Blood,
Chyle, and the other Juices. The external motion of the Blood is its
Circulation, but its Intestine motion is what we call a Fermentation. Both
these must be preserved in their due tenor.

The Encumbrances of Circulation are removed or prevented by Sudorifics, which
attenuate and dissolve the Blood; and put it into a swifter, but equal motion.
But the more present relief is from Blood-letting; which lessens the quantity
of the Blood, and makes way for a freeer Circulation, by emptying the Vessels;
or to speak with the Ancients Evacuates and Ventilates the Blood. It Is
indifferent what Vein be opened, when we only design to evacuate or lessen the
quantity; for that will certainly follow, open what Vein ye will. So in a
General Plaethora, all choice of Veins is ridiculous. But if there be any
particular Inflammation, that seizes only one particular Member, then indeed
Cases are altered. Not that I establish, even then, any necessity of
distinguishing Veins in one and the same Member. As if there be an Indication
for letting Blood in the Arm, I think it is much at one, whether the Cephalic,
Median, or Basilic Vein be opened. But it is chiefly in regard of the Superior
and Inferior Regions of the Body, that a difference must be observed. The Heart
is the Center of the Body, and divides the Upper Region from the Lower: Now if
there happen any Inflammation in the Upper Parts, opening a Vein in the Lower
Regions, as in the Foot, diverts the Blood; for the descending branch of the
Aorta, being thereby in some measure emptied, the blood will more plentifully
flow into it, than into the ascending branch, where the Stoppage, or
Inflammation blocks up its way. This is called an Universal Revulsion. A
particular Revulsion, or Aversion, is when a Vein is opened in the same Region
and Neighborhood with the part affected; as if in a Quinsey they let blood in
the Arm. If the very next Vein, or the Vein through which the standing blood
must naturally return to the Heart, be opened, it is called a Derivation. As in
a Quinsey, we first make a General Revulsion by bleeding in the Foot, to divert
the Universal Mass of the blood from feeding the Inflammation. Then for a more
particular Revulsion; we bleed in the Arm, in order to draw off the stagnating
blood, through a Neighboring Channel. If this do not take off the Inflammation
quite, we breath a Vein under the Tongue, in order to disengage and evacuate
the standing blood, that ought naturally to pass that way. In this Sense all
these Celebrated Effects of blood-letting, are very consistent with the Rules
of Circulation; which, in the Sense of the Ancients, were altogether
unexplicable. But the Universal Revulsion must always lead the Van, for fear a
particular one should increase the Inflammation, by inviting the blood to the
Adjacent Parts.

I Will only stay to present you with a Remarkable Instance of the bad
Consequences an ill-timed Aversion, or Derivation, may produce. I borrow it
from Lindanus, in his Practical Comment upon Hartman. A Surgeon of Amsterdam
was seized with an Inflammation in his Right Eye. He sent for some Old
Physician, that ordered him to be bled in the Right Arm: Accordingly he was
bled, which sensibly Augmented the Inflammation. The next day the Oracle was
consulted again. He, to mend the matter, ordered him to be bled in the Left
Arm; the Consequence of which was, that his Left Eye was inflamed, though
formerly untouched. The Third Day, the Old Gentleman persisting stiffly in his
wonted Course, ordered bleeding in the Right Arm again; the performance of
which made him quite blind in the Right Eye. And afterward, to make all Odds
even, he was bled again in the Left Arm, which heightened the Inflammation of
the Left Eye to the last degree. In this extremity he sent for a more skilful
Practitioner, who only let him blood in the Foot, and immediately the
Inflammation began to assuage. The cause of such Accidents is very plain. For
the quantity of the blood not being diminished before, and a Door being opened
to it in the Arm, it will naturally crowd upwards, where meeting with
Obstructions in the Passages, it cannot but accumulate and augment the
Inflammation. A Universal Revulsion in the opposite Region of the Body ought to
have Ushered it in; which would have prevented all the Inconveniences that
happened. So much for the Circular motion of the Blood, and the means of
preserving or retrieving it.

The fermentation of the Blood is occasioned by the Activity of the Acid and
Alcali salts, which entertain a perpetual Intercourse with the Sulphurous,
Watery and Earthy Particles. The different Proportions established among 'em, by
the Radical Power of the Seed, do vary this motion, which is peculiarly
Calculated for every individual temperament. This Idosin, crasy, or Seminal
property, is the Standard and Rule of the Natural fermentation. When it swerves
from that, it is called, a Cacochymy, or Corruption of the Juices; which is
nothing else but the disproportion and degeneracy of these Saline Particles,
and the irregular motions that ensue thereupon. If the prevalency of an Acid
Salt have occasioned it, it is called an Acid depravation of the Juices; if an
Alcali or Urinous Salt, it goes by that Name. These are the only possible
causes of a Cacechymy. If either of these Predominant Salts be lodged in a
Watery or Serous Humor, it gives rise to a Catarrh, or serous Corruption. If the
Humor be Phlegmatic and Viscid, it is called Pituitous, or Chylous. The
Melancholy Cacochymy of the Ancients is only a Predominant Acid, which must
either be Serous or Pituitous, according to the humor in which it is seated.
The Bilious, is a Volatile Oily Salt degenerated from its Natural Symmetry. So
all the different kinds may be reduced to these two Branches, of Acid and
Alcali.

An Acid Depravation of the Juices, is occasioned by the Prevalency or
Indisposition of the Acid Salts. If they are too plentiful, they thicken the
blood, and retard its Circulation. If they are otherwise corrupted, as too
Rancid, Austere, or Viciously Salt, etc. They create several irregular
effervescencies in the blood, such as we frequently meet with in Scorbutic and
Hysteric Constitutions. These Corruptions of Acid Salts, may be owing to the
Cold Air (which seems to be impregnated with a hidden Acid) Acid Food, or
Liquors, Grief, Care, Sorrow, Neglect of Exercise, and such like Errors in the
use of the six not Natural things; which either augment their quantity, or whet
and sharpen 'em beyond their Natural State. The Vrinous or Alcalin Depravation,
is occasioned by the disproportion or corruption of the Volatile Urinous Salts,
which, when mixed with Sulphur, Compose the Bile. If they are too Copious in the
Body, if too sharp and pointed, if too Oily or Fat, or otherwise degenerated
from their Seminal Properties, they Create Infinite disorders in the mass of
blood. Their Corruption may be owing to Aromatic, Sharp, or Penetrating Food,
immoderate Watchings, Exercises, Anger, and such like Passions, which
contribute to their unnatural Increase or Depravation.

The General Causes of all Cacochymical dispositions may be divided into three
Classes.

First, The formal efficient cause of all diseases is the Spirits; which, are
equally the cause of all natural and unnatural motions.

Secondly, The occasional and material cause enclining and disposing the
Spirits to perform such perverse Actions; which according to Hippocrates, is
the Disproportion and Intemperat quality of the minute Particles, that refuse
to Assimilate, or Incorporate with the Spirits, and so provokes 'em to
irregular motions.

Thirdly, The remote and mediat cause, is the Errors and Imperfections of
Digestion, especially of the first performed in the Stomac; which is the
Foundation of all other Digestions, and, if deficient, perverts all the Juices
in the Body.

The method of curing all Cacochymies, or, which is the same thing, all
irregular fermentations in the blood, is first to retrieve the Natural
qualities of the Juices and their minute Particles, by Altering Medicines, and
then to Evacuate the Corrupt Juices to prevent any further Infection. The
general Alteratives are such as Correct a peccant Acid or Alcali, and reduce
the Particles to their due Symmetry and Proportion. Besides, there are some
specific Alteratives which are peculiarly Calculated for the respective
Circumstances of the Corrupt Acid or Alcali. For one Acid may differ vastly
from another, according to the infinite ways of Corruption it is liable to, and
consequently may produce very different, if not contrary, effects. It Is true,
we cannot have, a-priori, any Circumstantiat account of their distinguishing
Characters: but the effects they produce, and the influence of medicines
attested by Experience, may lead unto know somewhat of their difference; and
accordingly to distinguish the specifics that we find successful in Vanquishing
one sort of Acids or Alcali's, but are not capable of gaining the like Victory
over others of the same General Class. This may be set in a clearer light, by
the following Example. It Is an unquestionable truth, that Pleurisies,
Stranguries, Ulcers in the Kidneys, Heart-Burn, Loosenesses, Gout, Gravel, etc.
may all be owing to Vicious Acids. The General Alteratives that are opposed to
Acids are convenient in them all, and are fit to usher in the specific Cure;
which they cannot of themselves Compass. For it is not one and the same sort of
Acid, that is the Predominant in all these Instances. In one, it is an Acid that
congeals the blood, and occasions Pleuritick Pains; in another it is an Acid
that sharpens the Urine and Occasions a Strangury; Accordingly we find that
though all fixed Alcali's are not inconvenient in Pleurisies, yet the Powder of
Boars Teeth and Pike Teeth, are specific Antidots against that particular Acid
that then prevails; as Crabs Eyes are in a Strangury. The like might be said of
all the rest.

This consideration Hippocrates had in his view, in his Incomparable Treatise
de Veteri Medicina, where he passionatly expells the general Elementary
Qualities, both from the Theory and Practice of Physic; and recommends to all
Practitioners, as in a manner the whole of their business, to enquire nicely
into the Subdivisions and Specific differences of the General things;
especially to the difference of tastes, whether Bitter, Sweet, Salt, Insipid,
and a Thousand such marks of distinction, which are to direct us in the choice
of such Specific Remedies, as are peculiarly levelled against the particular
qualities of the morbific matter. These you may expect in the separat and
particular description of every disease, and the method of its Cure.

SECT. III. Of Acid, Alcalin, Pituitous, and Sercus Cacochymies, or Corruptions
of the Juices in the Body.
IF the Indisposition be owing to a prevailing Acid, it ought to be Corrected
by Alcali's. These may be divided into the Vegetable, Animal, and Mineral
Classes.

The Vegetable furnishes us with the Vrinous and Ashy Salts of Wormwood,
Centaury, etc. Which destroy the Acid, and transform it into another concrete.
With Spices, Aromatic herbs, such as Mint, Fennel, etc. And Oily Sulphurous
medicines, that take off the edge of the Acid Parts. Some of these are prepared
by Distillation, and some by Expression; but the former are more effectual,
such as Spirit of Wine, Watercresses, Scurvy Grass, etc. And the Distilled
Oils of Mace, Cloves, etc. Camphyr and its Productions belong to this Family.

In the Animal Class we have the Spirits and Volatile Salts extracted from the
parts of Animals. Such as the Spirits of Hartshorn, Urine, Sal ammoniac, etc.
Which are of great use in all Acid Constitutions. The hard and friable Parts of
Animals are likewise very proper. As Crabs Eyes, Burnt Hartshorn, etc.

The Mineral Province affords us very Powerful Medicines, not Inferior to those
of the other two. Such as are Diaphoretic Antimony, and the fixed Sulphurs of
other Minerals: Earths, Stones and Metals, as Chalk, sealed Earth, and several
Metallic Productions. Whatever partakes of Gold or Silver, is of noted
excellency in subduing the inveterat Acids, that proceed from Wine, and are
peculiar to Gouty Constitutions. Lead and its Salt, called Saccharum Saturni,
have that property of assuming a sweet taste, when they meet with Acids, and
are thereupon Entitled to the Character of Alkali's. But above all, Steel may
justly claim a preference. And all remedies that have it for their Basis, are
certianly the most Sovereign Conquerors of Acids.

These are the remedies we use for Correcting Acids in General, which may be
prescribed after this or the like manner.

Take of prepared Crabs Eyes, Red Coral prepared, burnt Hartshorn of each a
scruple, Salt of Tartar, and Wormwood of each fifteen Grains, distilled Oil of
Cloves and Cumin. of each twelve drops, and four or five Grains of Laudanum
Opiatum, Prepared by fermentation. Mix all together; It will make a Powder for
six or seven Doses. Or,

Take of Crabs Eyes prepared a Dram and a half. Unicorn Mineral, Red Coral
prepared, and burnt Hartshorn, of each half a Dram. Salt of Wormwood a Dram.
Powder of Nutmegs two scruples. Mix all, and use it as the former Powder. Or,

Take of Prepared Crabs Eyes a Dram, Cuttle-bone half a Dram, red Coral
Prepared, and Chalk, of each a scruple. Salt of Wormwood two Scruples; Nutmegs
half a Dram. Make a Powder to be used as before. Or,

Take of burnt Hartshorn, or pr^par'd Spodium half a Dram, Red Coral, Salt
Prunel, and sealed Earth, or Salt of Wormwood, of each half a scruple, make a
Powder as before.

These are to be used before Evacuation, in order to qualify and prepare the
peccant Acid.

Take Salt of Wormwood and Crabs Eyes prepared, of each half a Dram. Make a
Powder for two Doses.

Take of Carduus Benedictus and Fennel Water, of each an Ounce and a half.
Spirit of Sal ammoniac a Dram and a half, Crabs Eyes and Red Coral, prepared,
of each fifteen Grains, Salt of Fumitory twelve Grains, distilled Oil of Cloves
Six drops, Syrrup of Mint one Ounce. Mix them for a draught.

These are the common forms of Recipe's against Acids in General, but steel is
a peculiar specific for subduing an Acid in the first Passages.

Sometimes we meet with an Austere Hypochondriac, or Hysteric Acid; which
requires Volatile remedies. They may be prescribed in this or the like form.

Take Marjoram Water, Mint or Rosemary Water, of each an Ounce and a half, or
two Ounces. Aquae Vita Matthioli, from three to six Drams. Essence of Castor a
Dram and a half. Spirit of Sal ammoniac, or instead of it Spirit of Hartshorn
with Amber, from half a Dram to a Dram, Syrup of Fumitory from half an Ounce to
six Drams. Mix all together and give a spoonful often.

Sometimes we add fifteen or twenty four Grains of Red Coral and Crabs Eyes, or
three or six drops of the distilled Oil of Cloves.

An Alcalin Depravation must be cured by Acids. The vegetable Acids are
Vinegar, Juice of Citrons, Berberis, Quenches, etc. The Acid Spirits are
commonly extracted from Minerals, as the Spirit of Salt, Vitriol and Nitre;
which last, if dulcified with Spirit of Wine, is of excellent use in a
redundancy of Choler. It allays the Saline sharpness, and fixes that Volatile
mobility which occasions preternatural Commotions. Mineral and Metalline
Sulphurs mixed with Nitre, are very proper on the same occasion. Such as are
Antimony Diaphoretic, and Bezoar Mineral, which qualify the sharp, and curb
the inflammable Particles; They are likewise Pacific, and Evacuate the
Particles thus fixed and corrected by the pores of the skin.

Neither are the Composing Medicines, that partake of Opium, to be neglected in
this case. It Is true, their cure is but Palliative; but the service they do in
Composing the Spirits, and Quelling all irregular motions, do sufficiently
justify their use.

All Acid remedies augment the quantity of Acids in the Body. The Aromatic and
Spirituous Liquors, the Volatile Salts as well sharp as Oily, and the bitter
Ingredients which we generally exhibit in Intermitting Fevers, are all
effectual restorers of the Volatile Oily Salt in the blood, and consequently of
the Choler which it produces.

If a sharp Volatile and Choleric Salt Reign in the Body, it commonly produces
Thirst, Choleric Loosenesses, and such like symptoms that attend burning
Fevers. The following prescriptions are usual in that case.

Take of Tartar Vitriolated one Dram, the Salt called Arcanum Duplicatum half a
Dram, or two Scruples, Bezoar Mineral one Scruple. Make a Powder for three
Doses. Or,

Take of Nitre Prepared with Antimony, or Arcanum Duplicatum half a Dram,
Bezoar Mineral one Scruple. Mix them for two Doses. Or,

Take of Nitre Prepared with Antimony half a Dram, Arcanum Duplicatum, Fifteen
Crains, or one Scruple. Mix for a Powder.

Take Powder of Ivory and Liverwort, of each half a Dram. Mix them for two
Doses.

Take Powder of Liverwort two Scruples, Crabs Eyes Prepared one Scruple. Make a
Powder to be divided into three Parts.

These Prescriptions are very useful, before Evacuation, where an Oily Volatile
Salt prevails.

Take Sorrel and Rasberry Water of each an Ounce and a half, fresh Juice of
Citrons or Quinces one Ounce. Diaphoretic Antimony from one Scruple to one
Dram. Bezoar Mineral from half a Scruple to a whole one. Syrup of Rasberries,
six Drams or one Ounce. With a convenient quantity of the Spirit of Nitre
dulcified, make a Julep. Dose two spoonfuls.

Take of Rasberry Water three Ounces. Juice of Rasberries three Drams,
Diaphoretic Antimony one Dram. Syrup of Rasberries half an Ounce. With the
Spirit of Vitriol, as much as suffices for a grateful sharpness; Make a Julep.

Thus I have hinted at the general Cures of Alcaline and Acid Corruptions.
Besides these already mentioned, there are some Universal Remedies not confined
to either side, but useful in both Cases. These are Emulsions extracted from
the Milky Seeds, the distilled Oils of Vegetables, Gums, Mucilages, and the
Sulphurous Productions of Minerals; which are all of a temperate Nature, and
equally removed from either extreme.

A Pituitous Cacechymy must be cured by Altering, Attenuating and Resolving
remedies, Namely Alcali Salts, as well fixed as Volatile, the more penetrating
Gums, and Generous Aromatics. The Morbific matter being viscid and tough, must
be prepared and digested before we attempt any Evacuation. The common forms for
Digestives are as follows.

Take of Tartar Vitriolated, and the Salt called Digestivum Hypochondriacum of
each fifteen Grains, Salt of Wormwood, and of Carduus Benedictus, of each half
a Scruple. Mix for a Powder to be divided into two parts. Or,

Take of Tartar Vitriolated one Dram, Salt of Carduus Benedictus half a Dram,
flowers of Sal ammoniac fifteen Grains. Mix them together, and divide the
Powder into three Doses. Or,

Take of Tartar Vitriolated half a Dram, Crabs Eyes prepared one Scruple, Salt
of Tartar half a Scruple. Mix them for two Doses.

Take Tartar Vitriolated half a Dram, Salt of Wormwood, Crabs Eyes prepared, of
each fourteen Grains. Make a Powder to be divided into three or four Doses.

Take of the Cream of Tartar one Dram, Tartar Vitriolated half a Dram, Salt of
Wormwood and Cichory of each half a Scruple. Make a Powder and divide it into
three equal parts. These Powders must be exhibited a Day or two before
Evacuation.

The following Powder is to be taken twice a Day, in the Morning before Dinner,
and in the Afternoon two or three hours before Supper.

Take of Sal ammoniac depurated a Dram and a half, Mastic half a Dram, Cinnamom
a Scruple, Salt of Wormwood six Grains. Mix them, and use as before directed.

If Liquid forms are more acceptable, they may be prescribed thus,

Take of Mint Water one Ounce, the Salt called Arcanum Duplicatum one Scruple,
Crabs Eyes prepared half a Scruple, Salt of Tartar five Grains. Syrup of Hyssop
half an Ounce. Mix them for a draught. Or thus,

Take of Mint Water two Ounces, Cinnamom Water six Drams, Gum Ammoniac
dissolved in Vinegar one Dram, Tartar Vitriolated one Scruple, Syrup of Roses
one Ounce. Mix them for two or three Doses.

A Serous Cacochymy is removed by the use of such remedies as alter the vicious
serum, and evacuate it. These last mentioned are the subject of the ensuing
Paragraph.

SECT. IV. Of the Medicines that evacuate the Corrupt Juices of the Body.
AFter the use of altering Medicines, it is a proper season to exhibit those
that evacuate the prepared humors. They are distributed into five Classes. The
first contains those which operate by Vomiting. The Second, those which move
the Belly, and perform their office by stool. Those of the Third pass by Urine.
The Fourth by the Pores of the Skin. And Lastly, the Fifth is allotted to the
Medicines which evacuate by Salivation. This last Class I have taken notice of
elsewhere; but the other four I shall briefly run over.

CHAP. I. Of Vomiting Medicines.
THE Animal Family affords no Vomits that I know of, except the Pairings of the
Nails of Human Bodies. Which we infuse in generous Wine over Night, and in the
Morning give the strained Liquor to Drink. It Is an excellent Vomit.

Among the Vegetables, Asarabacca is the safest and most successful Vomit.
Dioscorides and the Ancients were not Ignorant of its efficacy. It Enjoys a
sharp pungent salt resembling that of Ginger and Zedoary; which provokes Urine,
Corrects the causes of Chronical distempers, and irritates the Fibers of the
Stomach. I have known Inveterat Tertian and Quartan fevers, cured by the use
of Asarabecca with white Pepper, that would not yield to any other Medicines.

It may be given by way of Powder, Infusion, or Decoction. If it be exhibited
in form of a Powder, it ought to be Pounded very fine; for the grosser
Particles cannot enter into the Pleats of the Stomach; and being eluded there,
procure to themselves a Passage by Stool. Its Dose is from half a Dram to a
whole Dram.

For a gentle Infusion we take Nine or Ten Green Leaves of Asarabecca, and chop
'em small, and infuse them for the space of a Night in four Ounces of Carduns
Benedictus Water, and half an Ounce of Mead. In the morning let the strained
Liquor be exhibited. It Is a gentle Vomit.

For a stronger Infusion, take Nine Green Leaves of Asarabecca, Beat them in a
Marble or Stone-Mortar, pouring simple Mead upon 'em, till ye have reduced them
to a Juice. Then take this juice, and dilute it with two Ounces of Carduus
Benedictus Water. It Is an Admirable Vomit.

As for Decoction; Helmont, Zwelfer, and the Honorable Mr. Boil, have
observed, that if ye boil Asarabecca Roots in Water, they lose their Vomiting
quality, and become Diuretic; whereas if ye boil them in Wine, it is an
excellent Emetic. The Reason of which I take to be this, Viz. That their
diuretic virtue proceeds from an essential salt not very Volatile; the saline
Volatile Emetic parts being evaporated in boiling with Water: but Wine
penetrates into the Texture of its body, before these Volatile salts are gone,
and so partakes of their Virtue.

If ye boil Asarabecca Roots in Mead, ye have a Noble Pectoral Medicine. It
Attenuates the slimy humors in the Breast, and has no Emetic force.

There are no other Vegetable Vomits, fit to be used. White Hellebor, it is
true, was frequently exhibited by the Ancients. But they infused it in a sweet
Wine which qualified its sharpness; and besides, the difference of Climats
alters the Virtues of Medicines. I have seen very Tragical effects produced by
white Hellebor, and therefore would not advise any to use it, except in one
case, Namely Madness. It Is a specific for that disease, and is frequently
attended with success, where Antimonial Vomits have proved ineffectual. Let it
be used thus,

Take of the Roots of White Hellebor one Dram, infuse it in Rhenish Wine, or
rather macerate it in some hot place for the space of one Night. Then boil it;
strain off this Wine and throw it away, for it is too sharp. And pour fresh Wine
upon it, only to stand in infusion all Night. In the Morning exhibit a Dram and
a half, or two Drams of the strained Liquor to the Mad Person: It Is a Medicine
admirably fit for this case, and this only.

In the Mineral Family, Antimony and Vitriol are the two noted Emetics. But
Vitriol is not so Friendly to Nature as the former; it weakens the Body, and
disorders the Stomach, whereas Antimony produces no such effects. The Vitrum
Antimonii alone is of more use and efficacy than a Thousand others. In this
Preparation, the Antimony is stripped of its External Acid Sulphur. And contains
only some Vitriolic Particles which cause an Evacuation by provoking the Fibers
of the Stomach to a Contraction; and an Internal fixed Sulphur, which Composes
the Irregular motions of the Spirits, and Corroborates Nature. Upon this
Account it may justly claim the Privilege of being preferred to all other
Preparations, which rather cause than remove disorders.

It must be exhibited in infusion with Rhenish Wine, or in the form of a Syrup.
In substance it is both fallacious and hurtful. In adjusting the Doses of the
Infusion, we must have a particular regard to the quantity of the Wine, and not
to the Powder infused. For twenty Grains infused in three Ounces of Wine, are
no stronger than the infusion of five Grains in the like quantity. Rhenish Wine
is the best for infusing it in, by reason of its Acidity, and the easy
Admission it vouchsafes to the Antimonial Particles.

The same remarks are to be observed in the use of Crocus Metallorum, and
Mercurius Vitae.

As for Example.
Take of Vitrum of Antimony, or Crocus Metallorum, or Mercurius Vitae, four,
five, six, or eight Grains: infuse them in a sufficient quantity of Rhenish
Wine. Let them stand in a warm place all Night. In the Morning strain the Wine
through a Paper, and exhibit one Ounce, or at most an Ounce and a half, for a
draught. If ye please, ye may add two Drams of Cinnamom Water.

It Is a pretty enough Contrivance that some have of an Antimonial Cup, into
which they pour the Wine, and let it stand in some warm place for the space of
a Day. Then strain it off, and exhibit as above.

If a Syrup be more agreeable,

Take of Crocus Metallorum two Drams and two Scruples. Infuse it for three Days
in ten Drams of Wine Vinegar. Let it stand in some hot place, and shake the
Vessel frequently. Then strain it off and add ten Drams of Loaf Sugar. Stop the
Glass well, and clap it into hot Water, and the Sugar will dissolve. Some add a
Dram of the Essence of Red Poppy Flowers. Or,

Take four or five Drams of Vitrum Antimonii, infuse it in pure Wine Vinegar.
Let them stand in digestion for some Days, and shake the Vessel now and then.
After some time strain it, and add an equal quantity of Loaf Sugar. Make a
Syrup. Dose three or four Drams, and to those that are very robust six Drams.
Or thus,

Take Glass of Antimony in Powder half an Ounce, or an Ounce. Infuse it in half
a Pound, or a Pound of juice of Citrons, that has stood till it grew in some
measure clear: Set them in a warm place for digestion, and shake the Glass
frequently. Strain the Liquor, and with a sufficient quantity of Sugar boil it
into a Syrup; which may be prescribed thus.

Take of Mint Water six Drams, or an Ounce; Cinnamom Water two Drams; This
Emetic Syrup half an Ounce; Syrup of Tobacco two Drams. Mix for a Draught. The
Dose of the Emetic Syrup must be varied according to its Preparation.

Some exhibit these Antimonial Emetics in the form of a Conserve or Bolus. As,

Take of Vitrum Antimonii in Powder one Ounce; infuse it in a Pint of New Wine
or Juice of Quinces. Let 'em stand for digestion for some Days, then strain it
nicely through a Linen Cloth or Paper; and set the strained Liquor over a
gentle fire, to evaporate to the consistence of Honey, or a soft Conserve. Ye
may give about the bigness of a Pease or two.

These are the safest and most usual Vomits; next to them is Emetic Tartar,
which is an Antimonial Preparation, but may safely be given in Powder. It Is
true, the general Maxim is, that all Antimonial Vomits ought to be given in
infusion; but solid Emetic Tartar is in a manner the same with the infusion of
Antimony in Wine. For Tartar being the Natural Production of Wine, is
impregnated with the same Acid, that equally rejects the Grosser and Noxious
Parts of the Antimony, as well in a solid as a liquid form.

The best Preparation of Emetic Tartar is made from Vitrum Antimonii, thus,

Take Glass of Antimony two Ounces, beat it up together with an equal quantity
of Cream of Tartar, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Common Water, and
strain the liquor while it is hot; then expose it to the Cold Air, and 'twill
run into Crystals. Thus ye have Emetic Tartar both in a liquid and solid form.
The common Dose is two or three Grains, or five to robuster Persons. In Madness
and Melancholy distempers we are obliged to augment the Dose. The common form
of Prescription is, as follows.

Take of Emetic Tartar two, three, four or five Grains, Sugar refined six or
ten Grains. Mix and make a Powder. Ye may add two drops of distilled Oil of
Mint. Or, if ye desire it should move the Belly, two or three Grains of
Scammony prepared with Sulphur, thus,

Take two Grains of Emetic Tartar, two or three Grains of Scammony prepared
with Sulphur, and four or five Grains of white Sugar. Mix and make a Powder.
Which may be taken in a spoonful or two of Chicken Broth. The Sugar is added to
give the Medicine a Body, lest so small a quantity as two or three Grains
should be lost, or escape the view of the Patient.

If a Bolus be more Acceptable.

Take Conserve of Mint one Dram, Emetic Tartar two Grains, with a small
quantity of Syrup of Cinnamom, make a Bolus. Or, take Rob of Juniper half a
Dram, Emetic Tartar two Grains, Scammony prepared with Sulphur one Grain. With
a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Orange Peel, make a Bolus. The Sulphur of
Antimony called Auratum, is likewise an Excellent Vomit, if it be well
prepared; as thus,

Take of Antimony, Tartar and Nitre, of each equal quantities. Melt the
Antimony in a Crucible, then throw the Tartar and Nitre into it. Let the
Sulphurous and Mercurial parts be separated by Detonation; and afterward
separate the Regular or refined part from the Dross. Dissolve the Dross in
Common Water, and precipitate the Sulphur with a solution of Tartar. The
Precipitation is best performed by Tartar, by reason that it Mitigates the
Acidity. The Dose of this Sulphur is from five to six Grains. As,

Take Cream of Tartar half a Scruple. Sulphur of Antimony right prepared six
Grains, prepared Scammony two Grains, mix and make a Powder.

These are the safest and mildest Vomits, which may suffice for a Thousand
Cases. But sometimes when we meet with obstinat and inveterat distempers, we
have recourse to Mercurial Emer^^s.

Pure Mercury is a Metallin Alcali, which is easily fixed by the addition of
Acids, and set at liberty by Alkali's. But all Acids are not equally capable to
fix it. The Spirits of Nitre and Vitriol render it very fixed, whereas Spirit
of Salt leaves it more Volatile. Thus Mercury prepared with the former is not so
readily sublimated, as when joined with the latter. If ye dissolve Quicksilver
in Spirit of Nitre, the Acid of the Spirit fixes the Mercurial Alcali, so that
it remains at the bottom when ye draw off the Spirit. But if ye throw common
salt into it, the Mercury precipitates, which by separation and sublimation
yields a Powerful Corrosive. But after all, it is certain that liquid Mercury
cannot be Coagulated, but by Acids. For Alcali's and Urinous salts restore it
to its Natural freedom. Cinnabar is a mixture of Mercury with an Acid Sulphur
that fixes it; Now if ye add salt of Tartar, Urine, or the like, it disengages
the Mercury, and brings it to life again.

The Common Mercury of the Shops is not this Genuin Alcali that I Have thus
described, but Adulterated with Sulphur. It being liquid, is apt to mix with an
Acid, so that we never find it pure: This Acid Sulphur is the hidden cause of
Salivation, it attenuates and dissolves the viscid stubborn humors, and
evacuates them by the Salivary Glandules; While the Mercurial Alcali absorbs
the most fixed Acids in the Body, that would not yield to any other Medicine.

Crude Mercury is a mild enough Medicine, at least its sharpness is so
insensible, that it seldom procures either Stool or Salivation at first. I
prescribed Crude Mercury to a Woman subject to the Iliac Passions, that had
been constipated for a long time. I ordered her three Ounces to be drunk with
her other liquors, and continued the use of it ^ill she had four and twenty
Ounces in her Body. It produced no sensible effect till the fourth Day that she
began to spit; and the viscid humors that the Mercury had attenuated were
Copiously voided by stool. Thus Crude Mercury is inoffensive with regard to the
solid parts. It does not irritate either the Stomach or Guts, to contract
themselves and cast out what they contain. But only attenuates the viscid
humors that block up the Passages, and prepares 'em for a spontaneous
Evacuation.

To return to Mercurial Vomits; Mercury being of it self incapable to provoke
the Stomach, must be mixed with an Acid in order to become Emetic. The more it
partakes of the Acid, the more fiercely it operates. If the Acid Spirit in
which it is dissolved be drawn off with a gentle fire, and but once; it is a
dangerous Medicine and scarce fit to be used. But if the Acid be sufficiently
taken off either by a greater force of fire, or reiterated Destillations, it
becomes milder. The mixture of the Acid and the Mercurial Alcali make a
Vitriol-like Concrete, which provokes Vomiting and moves the Belly; for all
Cathartic Medicines taste like Vitriol.

The best Emeric of all the Mercurial Family is Turbith Mineral. There are two
ways of preparing it. The first was invented by Crollius, and it is this.

Take half a Pound of Mercury and Infuse it in a Pound of Rectified Spirit of
Sulphur. Draw off the Spirit with a strong fire; and repeat the Destillation
thrice. The fourth time add a little fresh Spirit, and continue to draw it off
till the bottom of the Retort and the Sand become Red hot. Then take out the
white Mass, or Caput Mortuum, and infuse it in Rain Water, or some Distilled
Water. Let it stand and digest till it sweeten, that is, till all the sharpness
of the Water be gone. Thus the white precipitat becomes yellow. Put this yellow
precipitat into a Glass with a long Neck, and let it stand for digestion over a
fire of Ashes for eight Days, that so the resi^ue of the Mercury (if any there
be) that is not fixed by the Acid, may be sublimated in the Head of the Glass.
Then take the Powder that lies at the bottom, and kindle fresh Spirit of Wine
thrice upon it.

Here the Spirit of Sulphur is preferred to that of Vitriol, which generally
retains some of its Mineral Particles, and by Virtue of their motions, if it
stand any considerable space of time, grows muddy and hot. Spirit of Salt and
Nitre are two extremes, from which that of Sulphur seems to be equally removed.
Therefore Crollius preferred it to all other Acids. He chose Distilled Waters
for sweetening the Precipitate, because Common Water is already Laden with
Salt, and therefore unfit to charge it self with Foreign Salts. This Turbith
Mineral ought not to be given in Powder, lest it offend the Gums and Palate;
Bolus's and Pills are Convenient forms.

Take of Crollius's Turbith Mineral five Grains, Venice Triacle, as much as
suffices to make a Bolus. Or,

Take the same quantity of Turbith Mineral, and with Juice of Spanish Liquorice
reduce it to the consistence of Pills.

The other preparation of Turbith Mineral, was first Communicated to the World
by Mynsichtius. It Is as follows,

Take Corrosive Sublimat Mercury and dissolve it in Common Water, then
precipitate with the Oil of Tartar per deliquium. Take this precipitat and
sweeten it often with a Distilled Water, or not Common Water, and kindle Spirit
of Wine upon it several times.

The Dose is from five Grains to six. It is a very Powerful Medicine in all
inveterat Distempers arising from an Acid. It absorbs the Acid Particles,
attenuates and evacuates the viscid humors.

Salt of Vitriol is a Nauseous Medicine, and hurtful to the Stomac. Its Emetic
Virtue seems to proceed from the oar of Copper of which it partakes. The Spirit
of Sulphur, and Chalybeat Minerals which are its other Ingredients, are known
to be no Vomits.

Vomiting ought to be avoided by those who are Subject to a Rupture; by
Childbearing Women, and such as are troubled with a down-falling of the Womb.

CHAP. II. Of Purging Medicines.
THE Humors evacuated by stool are Conveyed to the Guts, by the Passage of the
Choler, or that of the Pancreatic Juice, or through the miliar Glandules
inserted into the Coats of the Guts. The Mesaraic Veins cannot cast forth any
serum, by reason that all secretion must needs be performed by Glandules.

Our Purging Medicines are all prejudicial to the Stomac, except Aloe and
Rhubarb. They are endowed with a certain Virulency that offends our
Constitutions; and do equally assault both the Noxious and Nourishing Juices.
If they do not meet with Corrupt Humors, they make a prey of the good ones.
Accordingly we see that they weaken the Body, disorder the Spirits, and
sometimes produce very dismal effects. Which obliges us to add Correcters to
qualify and cicurate their Malignant Qualities.

The Animal Family produces no Purgatives. The Vegetable Boasts of a great
many, which are all endowed with a sharp Volatile Salt mixed with a viscid Oil.
Fixed Salts are the most proper Correcters of Vegetable Purgatives, by reason
that they open the resinous Textures, and remove the offending viscidity.
Sometimes Fermentation produces the same effect. The Mineral Purging Medicines
consist of a sharp Vitriolic Sulphur, which is admirably Corrected by adding
Nitre.

They all compass their end by twitching and vellicating the Coats of the Guts,
or the Orifices of the Choleric and Pancreatic Passages; or by squeezing the
Miliar Glandules, and so provoking them to an evacuation. Some Purging
Medicines enter into the Blood, and dissolve its Mass. If there be any corrupt
juices Incorporated with it, they carry them off. If there be none, they melt
down the laudable Blood into serum, and dispose it for secretion.

We are oppressed with a Numberless train of Purging Medicines, whereas one or
two might Answer all our demands. Some few indeed, besides the evacuating
Virtue, have a specific Relation to some Diseases, as black Hellebor to
Melancholy, Rhubarb to the disorders of the Kidneys, and especially
C^loquintida to all Acid Enormities. But by a modest Computation, five or six
might be picked out that might very well suffice for all the Indications in
Physic. These are, Jalap, Senna, black Hellebor, Aloe and Rhubarb, to which ye
may add Scammony and Coloquintida, for quickening Ingredients.

Jalap is a Root imported from Mexico. Its Purgative Virtue is owing to its
resinous Oily parts which are strongly six'd by an Acid. For if ye extract the
Resin out of it by Spirit of Wine, the remaining Caput Mortuum is robbed of its
Purging Virtue. This discovers the error of many Physicians who order Jalap to
be infused in Wine or Common Water, which are improper Vehicles for a resinous
Body. It purges gently without throws or gripings. The excrements it evacuates
are tinged with a yellow Color. It agrees best with moist Constitutions; and
is recommended by Borellus, as a specific in a Dropsy.

If it be well Concocted in the first Passages, it not only evacuates but
attenuates the humors. But the Resin of Jalap taken in solid Powder sticks to
the pleats of the Stomach and Guts, causes a great many disorders, and
sometimes a super-purgation. Whereas if it be dissolved with the Yelk of an Egg
in any convenient liquor, it is easily concocted, and operates without any
trouble. If Jalap be desired in a solid form, we prescribe thus,

Take Cream of Tartar from fifteen Grains to a Scruple, Powder of Jalap ten,
twelve, or fifteen Grains, and a drop or two of Distilled Oil of Annisseeds or
Mace. Mix and make a Powder.

If it want to be quickened, thus,

Take Powder of Jalap ten, fifteen or sixteen Grains, Cream of Tartar, or
Tartar Vitriolated, or the Salt called Arcanum Duplicatum, from twelve to
fifteen Grains. Prepared Scammony one Grain or two. Distilled Oil of Anisseeds
or Mace, or Cinnamon two drops. Mix and make a Powder as above. This is called
the Purging Vegetable for many uses, or Purgans Vegetabile Polychrestum.

The following prescription purges gently and does not Gripe.

Take Powder of Jalap from half a Scruple to fifteen Grains, Nitre depurated
half a Scruple (or four Grains of Nitre and the like quantity of Salt of
Tartar) prepared Scammony one Grain or two, Distilled Oil of Anisseeds or Mace
one or two drops. Mix and make a Powder. Or,

Take Cream of Tartar one Scruple, Resin of Jalap half a Scruple, Salt of
Tartar seven Grains, Distilled Oil of Anisseeds two drops.

If a Bolus be more acceptable than a Powder,

Take of Conserve of Clovegilliflowers half a Dram, Cream of Tartar fifteen
Grains, Powder of Jalap half a Scruple. Distilled Oil of Mace two drops. With a
sufficient quantity of Solutive Syrup of Roses make a Bolus. Or,

Take of the Pulp of Raisins two Drams, Powder of Jalap one Scruple, Scammony
prepared with Sulphur one Grain. With a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of
Fumitory make an Electuary.

For Pills prescribe thus,

Take of Extractum Catholicum twelve Grains. Resin of Jalap four Grains, the
extract of Trochisci Alhandal two Grains. Mix for Pills.

For a liquid form, thus,

Take of Spirit of Wine, or of any other rectified Spirit one Pint, of the
Roots of Jalap four Ounces, Citron Peel six Drams; Saffron five Grains. Let
them stand in a warm infusion, then strain the liquor and reserve it for use:
It Is called Essentia Citrata, and may be given from half an Ounce to six Drams.
Or,

Take of Hyssop Water one Ounce, Cinnamon Water three Drams. Powder of Jalap
fifteen Grains. Extract of Trochisci Alhandal two Grains. Syrup of Cichory with
Rhubarb half an Ounce. Mix for a Potion. Or,

Take Rosin of Jalap from half a Scruple to twelve Grains, Salt of Tartar from
six to seven Grains, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Roses, make a
Syrup. The Salt of Tartar Correct the resin, and prevents its sticking to the
pleats of the Stomach.

If an Emulsion be more agreeable,

Take Melonseeds peeled half a Dram, Resin of Jalap six, seven, eight, nine, or
fourteen Grains. Beat them up together, pouring in of warm Rose Water or Mint
Water, or any other convenient Water, one Ounce; add Cinnamon Water two Drams.
Make an Emulsion, and sweeten it with solutive Syrup of Roses or any other
grateful Syrup. Ye may add two Grains of Scammony prepared with Sulphur or one
Grain of the extract of Trochisci Alhandal, with eight Grains of Salt of Tartar.

Hartwigius prepared it with the Yelk of an Egg, thus,

Take Resin of Jalap seven, eight, or ten Grains (and for those who are more
robust, twelve or fifteen Grains) beat 'em up with the Yelk of an Egg. Then
pour upon them of Fennel or Mint Water half an Ounce, or as much as suffices
to make an Emulsion. Afterward add Cinnamon Water a Dram or two; with a small
quantity of sugar or Syrup of Cinnamom. It Is an admirable Purge and sometimes
evacuates both upwards and downwards.

Senna was first found out by the Arabians. Hippocrates, and the Ancient
Grecians knew nothing of it. It is a mild Purgative; more usual in Chronical
Distempers, than in acute, which are generally cured by Vomits. Three things
are diligently to be observed in using of it. First, that the leaves be well
separated from the stalks, which are apt to Gripe. Secondly, that they be not
infused too long, lest the thicker mucilage which is troublesome to the Stomac
and Guts be also extracted. For the Purging Virtue of Senna proceeds from a
Volatile mucilage attended by a thicker. The former is gentle and easy. The
latter griping to a high degree. Thirdly, that it be never exhibited without
the addition of Ginger and Tartar, which sharpen and attenuate the mucilage. It
is a proper purge for hot and dry Constitutions.

We prescribe it in Powder thus,

Take of Cream of Tartar and Leaves of Picked Senna, of each two Drams, Ginger,
Anisseeds, Cinnamom and Galandal, of each half a Scruple. Mix and make a
Powder. Which is a gentle Lenitive, and may be taken at Dinner in a spoonful of
broth. Dose; as much as will lie upon the Point of a knife. The infusion of
Senna is better than the Decoction, in which the Volatile mucilage evaporates,
and the thicker is too much extracted. If ye add Cream of Tartar to it, it must
always be boiled, else it will not mix with the Cream. Therefore in simple
infusions we only add Salt of Tartar, and for the most part black Hellebor.

For Decoction,

Take of the leaves of Picked Senna, Fearn of the Oak, of each three Drams,
Cream of Tartar one Dram. Boil them in a close Vessel with a sufficient
quantity of Cinnamom Water. Strain out three Ounces of the Liquor, and add to
it three Drams of Cinnamom Water, and half an Ounce of the Syrup of Borrage.
Mix for a draught.

For Infusion,

Take of the leaves of Senna two, three, or four Drams. Ginger or Anisseeds a
Scruple, Salt of Tartar from fifteen Grains to a Scruple. Infuse them in a
sufficient quantity of Cinnamom Water, or Fumitory, or Cichory Water. Let them
stand warm for a Night. In the morning give two or four Ounces of the strained
Liquor according to the Circumstances of the Patient, adding two, three, or
four Drams of solutive Syrup of Roses, or Syrup of the Juice of Chermes
Berries. The Salt of Tartar will render the Potion red, but it is very grateful,
and operates gently. But I prefer the following infusion.

Take of the leaves of Senna a Dram and a half, or two or four Drams (at most.)
Black Hellebor Roots, from half a Dram to a Dram, (or Rhubarb from a Dram to
two Drams) Annisseeds, from a Scruple to a Dram (or Ginger from a Scruple to
half a Dram) Salt of Tartar fifteen, twenty, or thirty Grains. Infuse them in a
sufficient quantity of Betony, Fumitory, Hyssop or Cichory Water, for a Night.
Add to two, three or four Ounces of the strained Liquor, three or four Drams of
Cinnamom Water, with half an Ounce of solutive Syrup of Roses, or Syrup of
Apples, or any other sweetening thing.

If ye design one Infusion for several Doses,

Take of Corents an Ounce and a half, beat them in a Marble Mortar, pouring
upon them a pint and a half of warm Water. Then infuse leaves of Picked Senna
three Drams, Cream of Tartar one Dram, Violet Flowers three little handfuls.
Let them infuse warm in a Glass well stopped. And when it is grown cold give
three or four Ounces every Morning and Evening, or every other Day. It is good
for dry Hypochondriac Constitutions, and such as are subject to a Constipated
Belly. But it ought not to be kept above eight Days. In Chronical Diseases, and
Inveterat quartan Fevers, the following Infusion may be given before the
invasion of the Paroxism.

Take of the leaves of Senna three Drams, black Hellebor Roots a Dram and a
half, Ginger half a Dram, Salt of Tartar two Scruples (if ye please, ye may add
some sweet Calamus Roots) chop and beat them small, and tie them up in a Bag.
Whch infuse in a Pint and a half of Water, or warm Ale. Set it in a warm place,
and let it grow cold by degrees; Let the sick Person take two or three Drams
every two or three hours.

I proceed to black Hellebor. It Is called so from its little black Roots, though
it have white Flowers. It is endowed with a Volatile sharpness, not unlike that
of Antiscorbutic Medicines. Upon this Account it is a specific for all Diseases
relating to the Nerves. It is never given in substance by reason of its extreme
sharpness; but only in infusion, or by way of Extract. The Ancients were wont
to infuse it in Vinegar; but in vain. For all Acids are so far from Correcting
Vegetable Purging Medicines, that they rather Imprison them and elude their
Operation.

The Warry Vehicles are best for Hellebor, which we generally infuse together
with Senna. Salt of Tartar is a proper Correcter for it. In a dry Scorbutic
Constitution we infuse it in whey, thus,

Take o^ black Hellebor Roots two Drams, Senna leaves one Dram (if ye please,
ye may add Polypody or Water Cresses) Infuse in a sufficient quantity of
Clarified whey for a Night. In the Morning strain out three Ounces, and add to
it a Dram of Spirit of Scurvy Grass and two Drams of Cinnamom Water. Mix and
make a draught for one Dose. Oft-times the Hellebor is tied up in a Bag.

As for the Extract, the most compendious way of making it is this.

Take of black Hellebor Roots sliced a convenient quantity; Infuse them in
Rhenish Wine. Let them digest till the Wine have assumed the taste and color
of the Hellebor, Then thicken it to the consistence of a Rob. Some add Salt of
Tartar. Some make this Extract with Spirit of Wine, but I should not dare to
use it.

In a Habitual Epilepsy the following Pills are very proper.

Take of Extract of black Hellebor half a Scruple, or fifteen Grains, sweet
Mercury half a Scruple, fifteen Grains, or a whole Scruple (according to the
Circumstances of the Patient.) Extract of the Troches called Alhandal, from one
to three Grains. With a sufficient quantity of the Essence of Mint, or Sage, or
Sassafras, make Pills.

For Cachectic Scorbutic Dispositions use the following Pill.

Take of Quercetanus's Tartar Pills and Extract of black Hellebor, of each
twelve or fifteen Grains. Prepared Scammony from one to three Grains. With a
sufficient quantity of the solution of Steel prepared with Salt; Make Pills for
one Dose.

For all Chronical Distempers use this Pill, viz.

Take of Ruffus's Pills d^ tribus, Extract of black Hellebor of each half a
Scruple. The Vitriol of Steel Calcinated till it become white five Grains,
prepared Scammony one Grain. With a sufficient quantity of the Essence of Gum
Ammoniac, make Pills; Which are of excellent use to Hypochondriac Persons.

Next to Hellebor comes Aloe. It is the Juice of an Indian Plant, and was
frequently used by the Ancients. It has some Gummy Parts and some Resinous. The
former evacuate very gently. The latter are endowed with a baumy astringent
bitterness, and Entitle Aloe to the Character of an admirable Stomachic. These
two parts are evidently distinguished by washing Aloe in Water; where the Gummy
part is washed away, and the Resinous remains. Yet some People are so foolish
as to prescribe washed Aloe for a Purging Medicine.

It Is no quick Purgative, and therefore scarce so proper for Acute, as for
Chronical distempers, where gradual and slow Purgations are required; and where
the altering Medicines must keep pace with those which evacuate* For a Person
subject to the Hypochondriac distemper, I Have ordered the following Pills to be
swallowed down once in two or four weeks.

Take of lucid Aloe two Drams, Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar one Dram,
Tartar prepared with Vitriol half a Dram. With a sufficient quantity of the
Essence of Gum Ammoniac; Make a Mass for Pills, of which take ten or fifteen
two hours before supper, and they will purge gently next Day. N. B. Gum
Ammoniac ought to be dissolved, not depurated or evaporated, lest it sustain a
loss of its better part.

The Extract of Aloe may be made thus,

Take a convenient quantity of the Juice of Succory, or Roses, or Violets;
Infuse lucid Aloe into it. Let it stand for Digestion, and 'twill Extract a
mucilage; strain this mucilage and thicken it to the consistence of an Extract.
Which may be given in Pills. Dose; one, two, or three Grains. Or thus,

Take of Extract of Aloes thus prepared half an Ounce, Extract of Gum Ammoniac
two Drams. The Vitriol of Steel Calcinated till it become white one Dram,
Troches called Alhandal twelve Grains. With a sufficient quantity of the
Essence of Steel, make a Mass for Pills.

Next to Aloe the most usual Purging Medicine is Rhubarb. Which, if it be
Genuine, is Imported hither from Sina. It enjoys a Volatile sharpness lodged in
a watery mucilage, which causes evacuation; but is so subtle that the least
heat drives it away. And when it is gone, the remainder is a fixed, bitter,
pacific substance; which is admirably fitted for removing Loosenesses,
comforting the Liver, and redressing the disorders of the Kidneys.

If it be given in Infusion, prescribe thus,

Take of the tops of lesser Centory one handful, choice Rhubarb two or three
Drams. Leaves of Senna one Dram. Salt of Tartar half a Scruple. Infuse in a
sufficient quantity of Wormwood Wine for a Night. Strain it in the Morning and
exhibit three Ounces.

For the Jaundice and other disorders of the Liver, we commonly prescribe a
large infusion for several Doses. As,

Take of Corents beaten from an Ounce to an Ounce and a half, choice Rhubarb
from half an Ounce to six Drams, Cinnamom two Drams. Infuse in a Pound and a
half of water. Let them stand for four and twenty hours in a close Vessel put
into hot water. It Is a very Pleasant Potion for several Doses.

It is also given in Powder; as for Dysenteries, Bleedings, etc.

Take choice Rhubarb and burnt Hartshorn of each half a Dram, Extract of Venice
Triacle four Grains (or instead of it, a Grain and a half of Laudanum Opiatum)
Distilled Oil of Cinnamom one or two drops. Mix and make a Powder.

Toasted Rhubarb, though commonly used in this case, is a medicine of no
efficacy. Rhubarb it self in Powder is infinitely better. As,

Take of choice Rhubarb (not toasted) fifteen Grains, Prepared Blood Stone half
a Scruple. Red Coral Prepared five Grains. Mix and make a Powder.

The following Electuary is a Sovereign Medicine for the Yellow Jaundice.

Take of Raisins bruised four Ounces, choice Rhubarb reduced to fine Powder
half an Ounce, with a sufficient quantity of solutive Syrup of Roses make an
Electuary. Of which, let the Patient take about the bigness of a Nutmeg.

Some make an Extract of Rhubarb with Spirit of Wine; but it is good for
nothing. Some make it with Water, which is better than the former, though not
extraordinary. Some make Elixyr Proprietatis with Rhubarb, and it is an
excellent Medicine.

The Remaining Purgatives are Scammony and Colequintida, which are seldom
exhibited alone, but added to other Medicines. They are very useful, where we
desire to abridge the quantity of a Purging Medicine. As for Example,

Take of Pills of Hiera with Agaric, Quercetanus's Pills of Ammoniac, of each
half a Scruple. Prepared Scammcny two Grains, Troches called Alhandal one
Grain. With the Distilled Oil of Mace make Pills. Or,

Take of the Mass for Pills of Hiera with Agaric, twelve, fifteen or twenty
Grains. Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar half a Scruple, Scammony Prepared
with Sulphur two Grains, Extract of Troches Alhandal, one Grain. With a
sufficient quantity of the Essence of Wormwood, or Sassafras, Make a Mass for
Pills. If ye please, ye may add half a Scruple of Extract of Wormwood. They are
of Universal use, as likewise what follows.

Take of Andernius's Extractum Catholicum, and of Crollius 's Extractum
Panchymagogum, of each half a Scruple, Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar twelve
Grains, Scammony Prepared with Sulphur, and Extract of Troches Alhandal, of
each one or two Grains. With Elixyr Proprietatis, or Tincture of Tartar. Make
Pills.

Scammony is used likewise in Powder. As,

Take of Tartar Prepared with Vitriol, twelve or fifteen Grains. Scammony
Prepared with Sulphur, two or three Grains. Troches Alhandal (or the Extract
made of 'em) one or two Grains. Oil of Aniseeds two drops. Mix and make a
Powder.

If a Bolus be more acceptable.

Take of the Powder called Hypochondriacus Laxativus one Dram, Prepared
Scammony one or two Grains. With a sufficient quantity of solutive Syrup of
Roses, Make a Bolus.

Scammony is the Basis of the Powder called Cornachini, which is sometimes
Lenitive and sometimes Emetic. It Is this,

Take Resin of Scammony half a Scruple. Antimony fixed and reduced to an
Alcali, by the Addition of Nitre, eight Grains. Cream of Tartar three Grains.
Mix and make a Powder. N. B. that Antimony fixed by Nitre is more proper than
Diaphoretic Antimony.

Scammony enjoys both a Resinous substance which evacuates, and a Gummy
substance which alters and melts down the humors. It Is a Medicine, that may be
safely exhibited to Children, if mixed with Saline Powders. As,

Take of Cream of Tartar fifteen Grains. Tartar Prepared with Vitriol half a
Scruple. Prepared Scammony two Grains. Troches Alhandal one Grain. Mix and make
a Powder. Or,

Take of the Pulp of Raisins a Dram and a half. Tartar Prepared with Vitriol,
or Sal-armoniac, twelve Grains. Resin of Jalap six Grains. Scammony Prepared
with Sulphur two Grains. With solutive Syrup of Roses, Make a Bolus.

Resin of Scammony is a Medicine that I do not much admire. Scammony it self in
Powder and right Prepared is best. I Prepare it with Clarified Juice of
Quinces, mixing them well together, and letting them stand for Digestion. This
Extracts a Mucilage which I take out and thicken. It may be used either by way
of Powder or Extract.

If an Emulsion be more Acceptable.

Take Prepared Scammony from half a Scruple to fifteen Grains, pour upon it
Rose Water sharpened by Oil of Tartar, per Deliquium; and make an Emulsion
according to Art. Ye may add a little Cinnamom-Water, and sweeten it with Sugar
or Syrup.

Coliquintida is a harsh Medicine, but if well Prepared produces many laudable
effects. The best Preparation is with Salt of Tartar. If it stand and digest
with Salt of Tartar for any considerable time, its sharpness Vanishes, and the
Bitterness only remains. Some use the Extract of it, and some tie it in a Bag;
but I prefer the form of Troches.

I shall conclude the train of Purging Medicines with sweet Mercury, or
Mercurius Dulcis. It Is added to other Purges, in order to qualify them for
Chronical Distempers. As,

Take of Crollius's Extract, called Panchymagogum, or of black Hellebor fifteen
Grains. Sweet Mercury from half a Scruple to fifteen Grains. Scammony Prepared
with Sulphur a Grain or two. Extract of Troches Alhandal one Grain, or a Grain
and a half. With the Essence of Mint or Sassaffras, make Mercurial Pills. Or,

Take of Conserve of Fumitory one Dram. Sweet Mercury from fifteen Grains to a
Scruple. Prepared Scammony five Grains. With the Conserve of Rasberries, Make a
Bolus.

CHAP. III. Of the Medicines that provoke Urine.
THE third sort of evacuating Medicines is Diuretic. Some of which are Volatile,
some fixed. The Volatile are such as these. Take of Parsley-Water two or three
Ounces. Restharrow, or Winter Cherry-Water one Ounce. Elixyr of Juniper Berries
(from similitude of taste called Malvaticum) six Drams or one Ounce, or an
Ounce and a half. Spirit of putrified Earthworms three-Drams. Volatile Spirit of
Tartar from half an Ounce to six Drams. Syrup of Ground Ivy, or Syrup of
Fennel, from three to six Drams. Mix and make a Potion. Of which exhibit a
spoonful at a time. Or,

Take of Ground Ivy-Water, Restharrow-Water, and Parsley-Water, of each an
Ounce. Elixyr of Juniper (called Malvaticum) an Ounce and a half. Rectified
Spirit of putrified Earthworms three Drams. Spirit of Sal-armoniac a Dram and a
half. Syrup of Ground Ivy one Ounce. Mix and make a Potion. Dose, two, three,
or four Spoonfuls. Or, add three or four drops of distilled Oil of Turpentin,
or six drops of Oil of Juniper, in the Room of Spirit of Sal-armoniac. Or,

Take of Strawberry-Water two Ounces. Tincture of Tartar two Drams. Syrup of
Ground Ivy half an Ounce. Mix and make a Potion. Ye may add Essential Salt of
Tartar, or dulcified Spirit of Salt, or Quintessence of Urine.

Amelungius's Nephritic Tincture, is a Powerful Diuretic. It Is made of Nitre,
Tartar, Hungarian Antimony, and a sort of Flint Stones that are speckl'd with
yellow spots. The Nitre is first dissolved in Simple Water, then the other
Ingredients are added, and after Digestion the Liquor is drawn off by
Distillation.

Michael's Carminative Spirit is likewise an excellent Medicine for this
purpose, which is drawn from Nitre, Tartar and Spirit of Wine Tartaris'd: But
above all Amber, with its Volatile Salt and Distilled Oil.

All the Aromatic Herbs, but especially fleabane, are good Diuretics. Camphyr,
Turpentin, Juniper, Human Urine, Earthworms, and their various Preparations,
are likewise of the same Family.

The Juice of the Birch-Tree, provokes Urine more effectually than any other
Medicine. It ferments like Wine, and becomes sour like Vinegar; and is an
incomparable Medicine for Nephritic Pains.

Next to it is the Infusion of Spanish flies, which I prepare thus.

Take of the Powder of Spanish flies one Scruple, Infuse them in three or four
Ounces of the best Rhenish Wine. Let them stand in a warm place for several
Days and Nights. Then strain it out through Paper. The Dose ten, fifteen, or
twenty drops to be exhibited in a draught of warm Broth. Sometimes this
Medicine causes Ulcers in the Bladder and a Pissing of Blood; but a large
draught of Milk with a little Salt of Tartar, will quickly remove these
Symptoms.

For a Diuretic Decoction. Prescribe thus,

Take of the Leaves of Strawberries and Pellitory of the Wall, of each a
handful and a half. Of the five opening Roots ten Drams. Winter Cherries and
Juniper Berries, of each six Drams. The Seeds of the Ash-Tree and Red Vetches,
of each three Drams. Cream of Tartar two Drams. Boil them in Parsley and
Winter-Cherry-Water. Strain out a pint and a half, in which dissolve Rob of
Juniper two Ounces. Fernelius's Syrup of Marshmallows one Ounce. Spirit of Salt
dulcified with the Spirit of Straw-Berries, as much as suffices to give it a
grateful sharpness. So much for Volatile Diuretics.

The fixed Medicines that provoke Urine are all the fixed Salts of Herbs, and
the Artificial Compound Salts, as Tartar Prepared with Vitriol, and the Salt
called Digestivum Hypochondriacum. Which is the Caput Mortuum, remaining after
the Destillation of Salarmoniac with Salt of Tartar. Gromwell-Seeds,
Violet-Seeds, and the Emulsions Prepared from them belong to this Class. The
forms of Prescription are these,

Take of Tartar Prepared with Vitriol a Dram and a half. Salts of Bean stalks,
broom, and Pigeons dung of each half a Dram. Mix and make a Powder for several
Doses to be taken in Wine. Ye may add the Distilled Oil of Turpentin, or of
Juniper Berries. As,

Take of the Salt called Arcanum Duplicatum, half a Dram. Salt of Broom, or
Pigeons Dung a Scruple; Distilled Oil of Juniper Berries or of Turpentin four
drops. Mix and make a Powder for two Doses.

Cream of Tartar, or Crabs Eyes, or Nitre, or Vitriol of Steel, or Volatile Salt
of Amber, may be added by turns.

The Natural Spaw Waters provoke Urine plentifully; as also the Spirit of Salt
and Dulcified Spirit of Nitre.

If the form of a Bolus be desired, prescribe thus,

Take Rob of Juniper one Dram. Crabs Eyes Prepared fifteen Grains. Tartar
Prepared with Vitriol half a Scruple. Mix and make a Bolus. Or, if an Electuary
be more acceptable,

Take of Conserve of Violets one Ounce. Rob of Juniper half an Ounce. Crabs
Eyes Prepared two Drams. Arcanum Duplicatum one Dram. With a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Ground Ivy, make an Electuary. Which sprinkle with a few
drops of the Spirit of Salt.

CHAP. IV. Of the Medicines that procure Sweat.
THE dissolution of the Blood and its swifter Circulation, cause the separation
of the serum, which is evacuated by the Glandules in the skin. The Medicines of
this fourth Class, are such as produce these effects. Some of which are Volatile
and others fixed. Of the first sort are the Spirits and Volatile Salts,
Extracted from Animal and Vegetable Productions, such as Spirit of Hartshorn,
Urine, Vipers, Human Blood, etc. And the Spirits Prepared from Vegetables by
Putrefaction. The Distilled Oils of Amber, Tartar, Guajacum, and such as are
drawn from the Bones and other Parts of Animals. All Resinous, Aromatic, bitter
and Attenuating Vegetables, and their various Compositions, as Venice Triacle,
Mithridate, Diascordium, etc. They are prescribed in these or the like forms.

Take of Volatile Salarmoniac fifteen Grains. Camphyr two Grains. Mix and make a
Powder. Or,

Take of Fumitory Water one Ounce. Spirit of Hartshorn together with its
Volatile Salt one Dram. Syrup of Carduus Benedictus, two Drams. Mix for a
Potion. Or,

Take of Elder Flower Water one Ounce. Spirit of Elder-Berries one Dram. Spirit
of Sal-armoniac, from half a Dram to a whole one. Camphyr two Grains. Syrup of
Carduus Benedictus, half an Ounce. Make a Potion for one Dose. Or,

Take of Carduus Benedictus Water, an Ounce and a half. Spirit of Sal-armoniac,
a Dram. Or Volatile Sal-armoniac, a Scruple. Distilled Oil of Cloves, two drops.
Syrup of Fennel, or Orange Peel, half an Ounce. Mix for a daught.

Take of Viper Grass Water, one Ounce. Cinnamom-Wated, half a Dram. Spirit of
Triacle Prepared with Cam^^^^, half a Dram. Vola^^^ Salt of Hartshorn, twelve
(...) Volatile Salt of Amber, six Grains. Syrup of Scor(...) Ounce. Make a
^o^ion.

As for the fixed Medicines that procure sweat, such are all Lixivial Salts,
well alkalis'd, and the fixed sulphurs of Metals and Minerals. Antimony, Steel
and Nitre joined together, make a Powerful Sudorific, or the Sulphur of
Antimony and Steel. The Bezoar stone is an ineffectual Medicine, by reason that
there is not one of a Thousand that is Genuin. The stone cut out of Human
Bodies is infinitely better, and a Sovereign Antidot in all Pestilential
Diseases. We prescribe such Medicines in these or the like forms.

Take of Diaphoretic Antimony, Hartshorn not burnt, and Salt of Carduus
Benedictus, of each twelve Grains. Mix and make a Powder, which is to be taken
in the Morning fasting, in a warm Vehicle. Or,

Take of Simple or Chalybeat Diaphoretic Antimony, one Scruple. Salt of Carduus
Benedictus, half a Scruple. Laudanum Opiatum, one or two Grains. Distilled Oil
of Cloves, two drops. Make a Powder for one Dose. Or,

Take of Hartshorn not burnt, fifteen Grains. Cinnabar of Antimony, half a
Scruple. Of the Golden Antidot (called Bezoardicum Solare) four Grains. Mix and
use as above. Or,

Take of unburnt Hartshorn, Nitre Prepared with Antimony, of each fifteen
Grains. Make a Powder as above. For a Bolus,

Take of Conserve of Elder, or Conserve of Juniper, from a Dram to two Drams.
Hartshorn not burnt, from a Scruple to half a Dram. Diaphoretic Antimony, half
a Scruple. Syrup of Rasberries, as much as suffices to make a Bolus. Or,

Take of Conserve of Elder, one Dram. Diaphoretic Antimony, one Scruple.
Extract of Carduus Benedictus, six Grains. With a sufficient quantity of the
Syrup of Fumitory. Make a Bolus.

If the Patient desire Pills.

Take of Extract of Carduus Benedictus, half a Scruple. Laudanum Opiatum, one
or two Grains. Distilled Oil of Aniseeds, or Rectified Oil of Tartar, as much
as suffices to make a Mass for Pills. Or,

Take of Extract of Carduus Benedictus, from half a Scruple to a Scruple.
Extract of Triacle, five Grains. With a sufficient quantity of the Oil of
Amber, make Pills. Or thus,

Take of the Extract of Woods, fifteen Grains. Extract of Saffron three Grains.
With stinking Oil of Tartar rectified, Make a Mass for Pills. So much for the
separat Prescription of fixed Sudorific's. But sometimes we join both the fixed
and Volatile together. As,

Take of Chalybeat Diaphoretic Antimony, one Scruple. Volatile Salt of Vipers,
five Grains. And if the Patient be Restless, add a Grain or two of Laudanum
Opiatum. Mix and make a Powder.

If a Potion be more acceptable.

Take of Scabious-Water, Elderflower-Water, Meadsweet-Water, of each an Ounce.
The Cold Saxon Cordial-Water, six Drams. Spirit of Triacle Prepared with
Camphyr, three Drams. Diaphoretic Antimony, a Dram and a half. Hartshorn not
burnt one Scruple. Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, half a Scruple. Camphyr, three
Grains. Syrup of Scordium, one Ounce; or an Ounce and a half. Mix for a Potion.
Or,

Take of Elderflower-Water, one Ounce. Hartshorn not burnt, half a Dram.
Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, five Grains. Syrup of Clove-Gilliflowers, two Drams.
Mix for a draught. Or,

Take of Elderflower-Water, one Ounce. Triacle of Andromachus, or
Fracastorius's Diascordium, one Dram. Volatile Salt of Vipers, six Grains.
Camphyr, one Grain. Syrup of Rasberries, half an Ounce. Mix for a draught. Or,

Take of Carduus Benedictus Water two Ounces. Quintessence of Urine, two Drams.
Fracastorius's Diascordium, one Dram. Syrup of Carduus Benedictus, half an
Ounce. Mix and make a draught.

Thus I have run over the Classes of the Medicines, that ^estore the due
Fermentation of the Blood, and Correct the ^uices of the Body. This may suffice
for the Vital Faculty.

SECT. IV. Of the Animal Faculty.
THE Animal Faculty lies under the influence of the Animal Spirits and Nerves.
The Nerves are immediately nourished and supplied by the Chyle; which, if it be
Faulty or Acid, Communicates a noxious quality to them. Their structure
consists of delicate fine fibers, some of which are distributed into small
Branches, and some gathered into a Body, as the Brain, the Membranes, Tendons,
etc. All motion depends upon the due Stretching of these fibers, and regular
incursions of the Animal Spirits. The Spirits are disordered by any accident
that either impairs their stock, or irritates them beyond their wonted pace.
This may be occasioned either by an External Cold, or a Vicious Acid Reigning
within. The Oily Volatile Medicines are at once qualified to subdue this
prevailing Acid, and Retrieve the Spirits. Such are the Herbs commonly called
Cephalic, as Rosemary, Mint, Sage, Marjoram, Lavender, etc. Likewise the
Sulphurs of Metals, Spirits and Distilled Oils, especially such as are drawn
from Amber, and the Parts of Animals. The Artificial Sal Volatile Oleosum, is
admirably conducive to the Nerves. But Sylvius, who first discovered it, was
not so generous as to gratify the World with the Secret. Though after all, it is
no difficult matter to Prepare it. The best is from Soot. It Is easily drawn
from Amber, thus,

Take of Quick Lime and Sal-armoniac, of each equal quantities, add to them a
third Part of Amber. Mix them and pour upon 'em a few drops of Tartaris'd
Spirit of Wine. Distill through a Glass Retort in Sand. Separat the Spirit that
comes over from the Oil, and Rectify it again. It Is a Noble Medicine for the
Indispositions of the Nerves.

Or, ye may make it with other Distilled Oils. As,

Take Cinnamom or Cloves, and pour upon 'em Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine. Let 'em
stand for Digestion, and the Spirit of Wine becomes Red. Then take the Spirit
thus Tinctured and Pour it upon equal quantities of Quick Lime and Salarmoniae.
Distill through a Retort, as above, and i^ yields a Urinous Spirit tinged with a
Golden or Bloody (...)

The Spirit of Hartshorn succinated is very proper (...) purpose: it is Prepared
thus. Take Volatile Salt (...) Volatile Salt of Amber, of each equal quantity
(...) Salt of Amber be depurated by repeated (...) ter, or Extractions with
Spirit of Wine. Mix those (...) Salts with rectified Spirit of Hartshorn, and
in order to procure a stricter Union distill several times.

If ye be obliged to an Extemporary Prescription, use the following.

Take of Mint, Fennel and Baum Waters, of each one Ounce. Essence of Castor
three Ounces. Succinated Spirit of Hartshorn two Drams. Spirit of Sal-armoniac,
one Dram. Laudanum Opiatum, two or three Grains. Syrup of the rindes of
Oranges, or of Cinnamom, six Drams. Mix and make a Potion. Dose a spoonful at a
time.

In exhibiting Sharp and Volatile Medicines, we ought to have a special regard
to the delicacy of the Nerves. Especially those in the Mouth of the Stomach,
which lie more open and exposed to the injuries of a fierce Medicine. Therefore
we see that Persons Obnoxious to Anxieties, Swooning, and such like disorders
of the Spirits, complain most of their Breast or Stomac. And Women, or
Children, whose Nerves are more delicate and fine than those of Men, are apt to
receive more sensible Impressions in the Stomac from an Active Medicine.
Besides, If the Stomac be offended, the other Parts will share in the Injury,
by reason of the sympathy maintained among 'em by means of the Nerves.
Sometimes one and the same Nerve Visits several Parts and Causes a mutual
consent, as the under Lip and the Mouth of the Stomach. Sometimes when two
Nerves are Contiguous, the one influences the other, as when a Stone in the
Bladder provokes the Intestinum Rectum. Sometimes the Parts are Connected by
Nervous Ligaments, and so are rendered sensible of one another's Circumstances,
as the Head and the Stomac, the Stomac and Kidneys, etc.

These Nerves are the source of motion. They serve to Convey the Animal Spirits
to all the Parts of the Body, in order to their Reciprocal Contraction and
Relaxation.

When the motion of any Member is irregular, it proceeds from one of these
three Causes.

1. Either the Animal Spirits are scanty and deficient, or Lazy and Inactive.
In this case we use the Oily Volatile Salts, and all Cordial, Cephalic and
Aromatic Medicines. Or,

2. The Nerves are relaxated and rendered flaccid by a prevailing lymph,
whether sharp or acid. This yields to the same Remedies with the former.

3. The Neighboring fibers are over-charg'd and forced to Enormous motions, by
the impetuous incursions of the Spirits. In this Case Pacific Medicines are
very proper. But they are generally suspected, unless very well Prepared. Opium
is the Head of 'em all; and may be Prepared either by Fermentation or Digestion
with fixed Salts.

Helmont Prepared it with Juice of Quinces, repeating the Fermentation thrice,
and then dissolved it in Spirit of Wine. Some set it to ferment with the Juice
of Apples, or any other Stomachic. Langelot Mixed it with Juice of Quinces, and
set them in a moderat heat to ferment. By this process (says he) the stinking
Sulphur is carried off, and the Gross Earthy Parts fall to the bottom, while
the light and frothy Parts are mounted higher: And betwixt these two we find a
Transparent Liquor, a little Reddish; which we separat and reduce to the
Consistence of an Extract; and then Circulate it for a Month or two with
Rectified Spirit of Wine. He extolls it for a Noble Medicine, but I never could
see any extraordinary effects produced by it.

The second and better way of Correcting Opium, is Digestion with Salt of
Tartar and Spirit of Turpentin. It Is a Powerful Medicine, reserved by some for
a Nostrum. Some Prepare it thus,

Take of Opium, Salt of Tartar, or Oil of Tartar, per Deliquium, of each an
Ounce. Let 'em stand for Digestion. Then pour upon 'em two or three Ounces of
Spirit of Wine. It yields an excellent Tincture, which is to be strained and
reserved for use. -- Conerdingius Prepared his Hysteric Laudanum, thus,

Take of Laudanum Opiatum, Prepared by fermentation, two Drams. Extract of
Zedoary one Dram. Extract of Castor, fifteen Grains. Of the Powder called
Diacalaminthes, one Scruple. Saffron half a Dram. Eastern and Western Bezoar
Stone, of each half a Scruple. With Distilled Oil of Amber, make Pills. Dose
six Grains, to be taken with Sugar. After this method, ye may give an
Extemporary Prescription. Thus,

Take of Extract of Zedoary, twelve Grains. Extract of Castor, fix Grains.
Laudanum, Prepared by Fermentation, four Grains. With a sufficient quantity of
Distilled Oil of Amber. Make six Pills for three Doses.

SECT. V. Of the Choice of Practical Authors.
IN pursuing my design of gathering the whole Practice of Physic unto one Body,
I have proposed Sylvius and Willis for my Pattern: Both of 'em joined together
are a fit Subject of imitation. Though, if considered separatly, either of 'em is
liable to Censure. The former, it is true, had a happy way of referring all the
Corruptions of the Humors to the vicious effervescencies of Acids and Alkali's.
But he stretched the Notion too far, in imagining a strife betwixt the
Descending Lymph and ascending Bile, in the right Ventricle of the Heart; and
in ascribing several effects to the conflicts of the Choler and Pancreatic
Juice, which perhaps were only owing to the fermentation of the Choler alone.
Moreover, he attributes a great many Sypmtoms to the Vapors arising from the
Combatant Juices in the first Passages, which properly proceed from the mutual
Correspondence of the Nerves. Upon the other hand Willis has set us in a
clearer light with reference to Convulsive Motions, and the Contractions of the
Muscles; but his Elastic Power will never be regarded, while the Convulsions
and Cramps of the Nerves are so probably accounted for, by assigning the
prevalency of an Acid, or some such grating substance, for their Cause.

These two Authors joined together are the flower of our Modern Writers, and as
such I recommend 'em to young Students.

As for Ancient Writers, Senertus may justly claim the precedence, or in Room
of him Forestus. Helmont is an Author that ought to be read by all serious
Practitioners. Since Paracelsus, we have none that surpasses him. But whoever
would profit by reading his Writings, must arm himself with ^atience, and
Deliberatly weigh every Period, as he proceeds. In the next place, he must be
equipped with a Competent Knowledge of Chemistry and Anatomy, else he does but
grope in the dark. And besides, what he Reads he ought to retain as a Paradox:
And not yield his assent, till maturer thoughts and succeeding Experience have
vouched for its Certainty.

The Authors that have wrote Practical Observations, are Borellus, Salmuth,
Tulpius, Rhodius, Bartholinus, etc. They ought to be read with Judgment and
Attention; Every Minute Circumstance of the Patient ought to be nicely
considered, in order to find out the true cause of the Distemper, and determine
the precise case in which any particular Medicine is Crowned with success.

AN ABRIDGEMENT OF ETMVLLERVS's Practice of Physic.
BOOK I.
SECT. I. Of the Animal Appetit, and the Disorders it is Obnoxious to.
THE most Natural method of describing the Diseases Incident to Men, Is to
follow the order of the Functions in the Body. Among which, those relating to
Nourishment do justly lead the Van. The first function is to receive Solid
Nourishment and Distribute it through the Body. This reception we are prompted to
by Appetit. Which is a desire of Solid Food, caused by the gnawing of a Volatile
Acid in the Mouth of the Stomac; and encouraged by such Medicines as promote
it. This Acid is varied according to the different Constitutions of Men, and
accordingly directs the Appetit to different Objects. It is likewise influenced
by the remains of preceding Food, and so sways the Appetit to customary Meats.
In like manner the Mother's Imagination will Tincture the Acid in the Child's
Stomac, with an invincible Aversion to some things. The least Apprehension or
Natural Sense turns it. The Infant's uneasiness from the Curdling of the Nurses
Milk, when she is with Child in the time of suckling, will revive upon the
sight of Cheese, and oblige him to avoid it for ever. So insensibly is the Acid
swayed, that without the direction of thought, it Naturally abhors it.

This Appetit, or desire of eating is liable to these disorders. 1. It is
either impaired and extinguished, or. 2. Depraved and apt to covet improper
Food. Or, 3. Increased to an Unnatural Degree. Of these in order,

CHAP. I. Of the Loss of Appetit.
THE place affected is the Mouth of the Stomac. The General Cause is the
Cessation of the uneasiness which the Acid ferment was wont to produce, by
Vellicating the Stomac.

The special Causes are Various. If the Nerves of the eight pair be disordered,
the Mouth of the Stomac becomes insensible, and so eludes the influence of the
Acid. These Nerves may be disordered upon their own Account, or by consent of
other Parts, as in Nephritic and Colic Pains. Or, perhaps the Nerves are
faultless, and the Spirits are stupify'd by the use of Narcotics, as Opium, or
Tobacco. Or, are diverted and employed upon other things, so as not to mind the
impulse of the ferment, as in the Case of Love, Grief, Madness, etc.

If the Nerves or Spirits be not faulty, the cause must be Lodged in the
Stomac. Sometimes the Acid is blunted by a superfluity of viscid matter in the
Stomac: Or, the Spittle is become viscid and takes off its edge, as in Hectic
and Hypocondriac Persons. (This last cause is effectually-remov'd by drinking
Wine, in which Elecampane Roots, Horse Radishes and Scurvy Grass have been
infused.) The hasty swallowing down of much meat, drinking new and fermenting
Liquors, Cloying the Stomac with fat Oily things, or acid and austere Fruits;
do all cause a bluntness of the ferment. The frequent use of Brandy, or
sulphurous Liquors, Corrects the sharpness of the acid and occasions an
inappetency. The fatness and redundancy of the Bile, whether in the Blood or
Stomac, may also vitiat the ferment. When this cause takes place, it is known by
a bitter taste in the mouth, and a gnawing at the mouth of the Stomac. And
Lastly, the suppression of wonted evacuations, as stopping of the Terms, or
sudden forbearing of Venery, etc. May concur to the same effect.

Sometimes the acid it self is deficient; If a Volatile Choler reign in the
Blood, or the Spirits are so disordered by a Fever, or otherwise, that the
alteration of the humors and particularly of the lympha is not regularly
performed; or if the heat of Summer exhausts the Spirits that should serve to
exalt the ferment. Immoderat drinking, especially of whey which enjoys a
temperat nitrous Salt, allays the acidity of the ferment. The frequent use of
Alcali's, as Chalk, Hartshorn, and all Chalybeat medicines, little stones
engendered in the Stomac, and the drinking of Urine (which is a specific in
hungry fevers) are frequently the causes of a weak ferment.

As for Prognostics. If it continue long in the beginning of a disease, it
weakens nature, and adds force to the disease. If it do not decline along with
the distemper, it portends a relapse. In Chronical Diseases and such as come by
Fits, it is the forerunner of the Paroxysm. In Children it is more suspected
than in adult Persons. If the Appetit seem to Answer in general, and yet flags
when Food is offered; Or, If after a loathing of meat, the Patient of a sudden
covet food and swallow it down greedily, it is a very bad Omen.

In the method of Cure, a particular regard must be had to the difference of
causes, (which may easily be distinguished without a long train of
Diagnostics.) Generally the peccant cause is the abounding of slimy humors, or
of Choler or Fat in the Stomac. Which is only removed by evacuating Medicines.
Of which Vomits are the best. One Vomit is of more efficacy in this case than
ten Purges. As,

Take of Mynsichtius's Emetic Tartar three Grains, fine sugar six Grains, make
a Powder. Or, if a liquid be more acceptable, exhibit the Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, minding heedfully the quantity of the Liquor, and not the Crocus.

When a viscid Matter is lodged in the Stomach, it is fit to add some
attenuating Ingredients. As,

Take of Hyssop-water one or two Ounces, Cinnamom-water two Drams, Vinegar of
Squills, and the Emetic Syrup (above prescribed) of each half an Ounce,
compound Spirit of Verdigrease from two Scruples to a Dram. Mix, etc.

If the Patient do not Vomit easily, exhibit purging Medicines; among which
Aloe is the best, but it ought not to be washed. It is a common Ingredient into
Pills, and operates but very gently. If there be occasion for a stronger
Purgative, Take the Pills of Hiera with Agaric, adding to them Gum-ammoniac, or
some attenuating Medicine. Thus,

Take of the Mass of Pills of Hiera, with Agaric, from twelve to fifteen
Grains, Extract of Wormwood (or Gum-ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar) eight
Grains, or half a Scruple; Scammonium Sulphuratum, one Grain; Extract of the
Troches Alhandal, from half a Grain to two Grains.

For those who are Obnoxious to Hypochondriac Fits, the following Pills are
very useful.

Take of the Pills of Hiera with Agaric half a Scruple, or twelve Grains;
Gum-ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar half a Scruple, Scammony prepared with Juice
of Roses two Grains, Extract of Troches Alhandal one Grain, with the Essence of
Steel make Pills. Or,

Take of the Pills of Mastic fifteen Grains extract of Wormwood twelve Grains,
Extract of Troches Alhandal one Grain. Make Pills.

This purging Powder is likewise very good for Hypocondriac Persons, and such
as are easily purged, viz.

Take of Tartarum Vitriolatum fifteen Grains, Scammony prepared with Sulphur
four Grains, Troches Alhandal one Grain, distilled Oil of Cummin-seeds two
drops. Make a Powder.

If a Potion be more agreeable,

Take of Hyssop-water, Mint-water of each half an Ounce; Tartarum Vitriolatum,
and Extract of Agaric, of each six Grains, Scammony sulphurated two Grains: Mix
for a Potion. So much for Purging Medicines.

After gentle Evacuations, we proceed to the use of such Medicines as
strengthen the Walls of the Stomac, and resolve the slimy Mucilage that sticks
to them. To this purpose all sharp, volatile, and aromatic Medicines are proper,
as the Stomachical Herbs, Spices, the hot Seeds, and Antiscorbutic's,
especially Horse-Raddishes. Those of a gentle astringent quality restore the
Natural Constitution of the Stomac, when vitiated by the use of Opium, strong
Liquors, Brandy, etc. As for Acid Medicines, I cannot much approve them. I
never saw any good Effect produced by them in this case, excepting Cream of
Tartar, and the dulcified Spirit of Salt, or of Vitriol. It Is true they are fit
to provoke the Stomac, and imitate Nature in prompting it to crave Food; but
the Business of a Physician, is rather to remove the Encumbrances that annoy
the Natural Function, than to supply an Artificial Appetit. The Essence of
Bread distilled through a Retort, is a sovereign Restorer of the ferment. These
Medicines may be prescribed thus.

Take of Wormwood, Mint, of each a handful; Roots of Acorus two Drams, Gentian
Roots half an Ounce, the four hot Seeds of each two Drams. Slice and chop 'em
small. And tie them up in a Bag to be infused in Wine. Let the sick Person
drink a Draught twice a Day, adding to every Draught six Drops of dulcified
Spirit of Salt. Or,

Take of Mint three handfuls, fresh Roots of Acorus, two Ounces; Roots of
Elecampane, or Horse-Radishes, from one Ounce to an Ounce and a half, Zedoary
Roots six Drams, Cinnamom three Drams, put them into a Bag, to be infused in
Wine.

Take of Mint three handfuls, Carduus Benedictus, one handful, Wormwood Tops,
and lesser Centory, of each half a handful, Elecampane, and Evans Roots, of
each half an Ounce. Mustard-seeds, or Rocket-Seeds, one Ounce, Cinnamom two
Drams, Cloves one Dram. Infuse as above.

If ye desire to make it a little loosening,

Take of Mint two handfuls, tops of Wormwood one handful, Roots of Aron, Roots
of Crude black Hellebor, of each half an Ounce, Roots of Elecampain, and the
Leaves of picked Senna, of each one Ounce, Aniseeds, Fennel-seeds, of each six
Drams, Galangal, Zedoary and Ginger, of each two Drams, Salt of Tartar three
Drams. Infuse as above.

When the Spittle is glutinous, and the Mouth tastes bitter, the Roots of
Horse-Radishes and Elecampane in equal quantities infused in Rhenish, or
Wormwood-wine, or Pepper infused in like manner, or Wheaten-Bread dipped in
Wine, or even a Draught of good generous Wine, are approved Remedies; or
Thonerius's Decoction, thus.

Take of Cichory-Roots, of the Herbs, Roman Wormwood, Carduus Benedictus, and
Rosemary, of each a handful; lesser Centory a handful and a half: boil them in
equal quantities of Wine and Water, till a third part be consumed. Dose half a
Pint Morning and Evening. Or Pachequus his Decoction of Agrimony, Wormwood, and
lesser Centory, in Water.

If ye please ye may add some temperat Acids: As,

Take of Mint-water two Ounces, Cinnamom-water from two Drams to six Drams,
Juice of Quinces, from one Ounce to an Ounce and a half, Syrup of Quinces,
either simple, or aromatis'd, from half an Ounce to six Drams. Mix and make a
Potion, of which the Patient may take at pleasure.

Take of Mint-water one Ounce, Cinnamom-water half a Dram, Spirit of Treacle a
Dram and a half, Laudanum Opiatum prepared by fermentation two Grains, Syrup of
Cinnamom half an Ounce. Mix, etc.

The Spirit of Mastic and Spirit of Bread, and the Mineral Acid Spirits
dulcified with Spirit of Wine, the dulcified Spirit of Vitriol given from
twenty to thirty drops in a warm Vehicle about two hours before eating, the
volatile Salt of Amber, etc. are proper to this purpose. But they ought to be
well qualified, or joined with vegetable Stomachic's, as in Elixir
proprietatis, which is a noble Medicine. For Example.

Take of Elixir proprietatis two Drams, Essence of Wormwood and Mint, or
Aromatic Calamus, of each a Dram. Mix, etc. Or,

Take of the Conserve of the Pulp of Citrons an Ounce and a half, Conserve of
Mint Vitriolated one Dram, the red Hepatic Powder two Drams, Spirit of Salt
coagulated, two Scruples, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Quinces
spic'd, make an Electuary.

Michael's Stomachical Elixir, is not improper in this case: As,

Take of Mint four handfuls, Roman Wormwood, Rosemary, of each two handfuls,
Sage, Pennyroyal, Baum, of each one or two handfuls, Acorus-roots fresh three
Ounces, (or dried one Ounce) Burnet or Elecampane-roots two Drams, round
Cypress-roots one Dram, Mastic six Drams, or an Ounce and a half or two Ounces;
of the four hot Seeds of each half a Dram, Mustard seed six Drams, of the
Shavings of Sassafras three Drams, Zedoary, Galangal of each a Dram and a half,
or two Drams, or three Drams; of Cubebs, Nutmegs, Mace, Cinnamom, Ginger,
Cloves, of each three Drams or half an Ounce; Coriander-seed one Dram; pour
upon 'em Spirit of Salt, or Philosophical Spirit of Vitriol, (which is almost
the same) as much as suffices for a grateful sharpness. Extract the Tincture
with Spirit of Mint. Strain it, and add as much of the compound Stomachical
Extract, as it will bear. Dose fifty or sixty Drops. For a Scorbutic and
Hypochondriac Constitution, it may be mixed with the Spirit of Scurvy Grass,
taking a Dram and a half of the Spirit, to three Drams of the Elixir.

Mynsichtius his Elixir Vitrioli, and the Essence of Amber, are much commended.
And likewise Alcali's sharpened with other Salts. As,

Take of the sharpest Tincture of Tartar, and Elixir proprietatis prepared
without the Acid, of each three Drams. Mix, etc.

Sal-armoniac is a good Stomachic, but it ought not to be joined with fixed
Alcali's which drive away the volatile part of the Ammoniac, and fix the
remaining Acid. It succeeds better when joined with Spices: As,

Take of the Flowers of Sal-armoniac, or depurated Sal-armoniack one Dram. The
Powder called Diatrion Pipereon, or Powder of Cubebs, or any other Aromatic
Powder, a Scruple, or half a Dram. Mix and make a Powder for three or four
Doses, of which the Patient may take one every Morning. Or,

Take of depurated Sal-armoniac one Dram, Ginger, and the Powder of Diatrion
Pipereon of each a Scruple, or fifteen Grains. Mix for three Doses. Or,

Take of dried Aron roots one Dram; prepared Crab's-eyes, Salt of Wormwood, of
each from a Scruple to half a Dram, distilled Oil of Cloves three Drops. Mix
for three Doses. Or,

Take of Aron-roots half a Dram, black Pepper a Dram and a half, Ginger half a
Dram, Flowers of Sal-armoniac two Drams, distilled Oil of Aromatic Calamus a
Scruple. Make a Powder. Or,

Take of the Conserve of Wormwood-tops, Conserve of Elecampane-roots of each
two Drams, candy'd Ginger six Drams, Powder of Diatrion Pipereon, three Drams,
Sal-armoniac one Dram, with the Syrup of Quinces make an Electuary.

Some use Sal-armoniac in Wormwood-wine. Tartar also and its various
Productions, are very proper. And the saline Stomachical Powders, such as
Michael's, which is made thus.

Take of the Powder of dried Aron-roots two Pound, the Salt called Arcanum
duplicatum one Pound, Salt of Wormwood, Arabian Costus, and Aromatic
Calamus-roots of each two Ounces, Cinnamom and Cloves, of each an Ounce and a
half, Mace, Long Pepper, Ginger, Cubebs, Cardamoms, Grains of Paradise,
Zedoary, and Coriander-seeds, of each one Ounce. Mix and make a Powder. Dose
from a Scruple to half a Dram.

If a shorter Process be more agreeable,

Take of the Powder of Aron-roots one Dram, Arcanum duplicatum two Scruples,
distilled Oil of Mint six Drops. Mix and make a Powder.

If Inappetency be caused by the Animal Spirits, or the Nerves, take the
Essence of Ambergrise and join it to other Stomachic's. Wine and all Spiritous
or Aromatic Liquors, especially the Essence of Baum and Pennyroyal, with a few
Drops of the Distilled Oil of Juniper Berries, are very proper on this
occasion. As also the Balsam of Peru, either taken in the Yelk of an Egg, or
exhibited in Sugar or Wine, or in the form of a Tincture extracted with the
Tincture of Tartar. And Paracelsus his Stomachical Electuary, as follows.

Take of Rob of Juniper six Drams, Powder of Ginger half a Dram, Aromatic
Calamus, Mace, of each two Drams. Cubebs one Dram, with a sufficient quantity
of Sugar make an Electuary. Or,

Take of Cichory-roots candy'd, Vipergrass-roots candy'd, of each one Ounce;
Conserve of curled Mint, Conserve of Roman Wormwood, of each an Ounce and a
half; Conserve of Cichory-Flowers, Conserve of Roses, Conserve of
Rosemary-Flowers, and Powder of Zedoary, of each one Ounce; of Aromatic
Cala^^us, Ginger, and the sharpest Cinnamom, of each a Dram; of Mithridat, or
Venice-Treacle two Drams. With a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Curled
Mint, make an Electuar. Or,

Take of the Conserve of Curled Mint, Conserve of Roman Wormwood, of each an
Ounce and a half, Conserve of Roses, or of Rosemary-Flowers an Ounce, candy'd
Cichory-roots half a Dram, Roots of Aromatic Calamus candy'd three Drams,
Powder of Zedoary six Drams; the Magistery of Coral prepared with the Juice of
Citrons, Powder of Cinnamom of each two Drams; Ginger, Cloves, and Tincture of
Coral, of each a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of curled Mint,
make an Electuary, upon which pour some drops of the dulcified Spirit of Salt.
Or,

Take of Conserve of red Roses two Ounces, Conserve of Mint one Ounce, Ginger
candy'd in the Indies six Drams, aromatic Calamus candy'd three Drams, the
Powder of Diatrion Pipereon, with Mosch, three or four Drams, with a sufficient
quantity of the Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers make an Electuary.

When a redundancy of fat and bilious Humors weaken the Appetite, Elixir
Proprietatis mixed with bitter Ingredients, is a proper Medicine. If Narcotics
have stupify'd the Stomac, we exhibit acid Remedies. If at any time the use of
Acids disorder the Appetit, as it happens frequently in Hypochondriac cases;
the absorbent Powders of Crab's-eyes, Chalk, etc. and Elixir proprietatis
prepared without an acid, or with the Spirit of Sal-armoniac, may supply their
room.

As for external Topic's, Liniments, Cataplasms, and Fomentations may be used,
and made of Wine, and Elixir of Mint, Bread, and the Aromatic Powders. Crato's
Oil and Plaster are not amiss. Or,

Take of expressed Oil of Mace a Dram and a half, distilled Oil of Cloves a
Scruple, the distilled Oils of Wormwood, Mint and Juniper of each half a Dram.
Mix for a Liniment.

Hartman's Stomachical Plaster, or Plaster of Tacamahac, mixed with Balsam of
Peru, is proper to be laid upon the Stomac. I have also seen many good Effects
produced by the application of a Vultur's Skin to the Stomac.

CHAP. II. Of the Depravation of the Appetite.
THE Appetite is depraved when it avoids the proper, and craves improper Food.
In the former Case, it avoids some particular Object through the prevalency of
prejudice, the Memory of a preceding Surfeit, or the confluence of vicious
Humors in the Stomac. Those who are troubled with a bitter Taste in their
Mouth, either through the use of Opium, or the height of a Fever, are averse to
Hopp'd Drink, by reason of the near resemblance between the taste of the Beer,
and that which then annoys 'em. As the exhibiting of bitter Resinous Purgatives
will occasion an Antipathy to Ale. Upon this account we take it for a good sign
in acute Distempers, if the Patient be able to drink Ale. Meat also is
formidable to feverish Constitutions, by reason that when eaten it is not
digested, and so melts into a bitter musty Crudity. These are the Causes of an
acquired Aversion to particular Meats, or Liquors. The Cure is performed by the
use of Elixir proprietatis, Womrwood, Mint, Quinces, Wine, and their various
Productions, together with some Acid Spirits.

The most remarkable Instances of depraved Appetites are what we call Pica and
Malacia. The former is a Longing for such things as are not fit to be eat, as
raw Meat, Coals, Leather, Lime, etc. The latter is a violent and infatiable
longing for usual Food, as Herrins, and such like.

The Part affected, is partly the Orifice of the Stomach, where the appetising
ferment is naturally seated; and partly the Fancy and Animal Spirits. For tho
the Vellication of the Stomac constitute a general Appetit, it is the Fancy that
directs it to a particular Object. Besides, such things are often times longed
for, as are not Objects of the Stomach, as the crackling noise of Cinders, the
smell of Leather, etc. which makes it to appear, that the Animal Spirits, and
the Organs of Sense, are depraved as well as the Stomach. That the Sense of
Smelling is vitiated, is evident from the Pleasure such Persons take in
smelling to stinking unsavory Objects. That the Sense of Tasting is likewise
corrupted, may be inferred from the Depravation of the Spittle, occasioned by
its Affinity to the Stomachical ferment; and is sufficiently exemplified by
their relishing and coveting the taste of such things, as at other times they
abhor. The like may be said of all the Senses.

The Cause is the Alteration and Depravation of the ferment of the Stomac. We
see that the various Modification of this ferment, in several Animals, creates
in 'em contrary and distinct Appetites: by virtue of this diversity of
ferments, Men, Dogs, Cats, Geese, etc. are prompted to covet their peculiar
Food.

The ferment is depraved by the corruption of Matter in the Stomac, which
renders it saltish, sharp, and in some measure corrosive, and consequently apt
to overact its part, by vellicating the Mouth of the Stomach, in an unwonted
manner, and prompting the fancy to pursue and entertain unusual Objects, after
the method of Melancholic Hypocondriac Fits, to which this Distemper is near
allied.

The occasional remote Causes are, the Suppression of the Terms, which occasion
the Stagnation and Corruption of the Blood, and by consequence of the Lymph,
which waters the Coats of the Stomach; Ulcers in the Throat distilling corrupt
Matter into the Stomac: The suppression of the Genital Liquor, or any wonted
Evacuation, and an hereditary Conveyance from Mothers liable to this Disease;
which is equally compatible to Men and Women, Maids and Mothers.

The things coveted and Longed for in a Pica, are such as are agreeable to the
vicious ferment, which is so fierce and keen, that it digests without any
trouble, or harm, a great many noxious and offensive Objects; providing their
quantity taken down, do not exceed the extent of the Appetit. It Is true indeed,
that if absurd and uncommon things are frequently eat, though in the mean time
they occasion no visible disturbance, yet they amass depraved Humors in the
Body, and so cause Dropsies, Cachexies, and many dismal Symptoms. As for
Childbearing Women, who are frequently obnoxious to irregular Appetites, if
they cannot be dissuaded by rational Motives, they must be furnished with what
they Long for, for fear of bad consequences happening to the Child in the Belly.

The Cure is performed by evacuating the Stomach, and tempering the ferment.
Vomits, and particularly Mercurius Vitae, are very proper, if occasional
Circumstances do not forbid 'em, such as a natural difficulty of Vomiting, the
first and last Months of a Woman's being with Child, etc. in which case let
Purges of Aloe, Extract of Hellebor, Coloquintida, and sweet Mercury be
exhibited. It will not be improper to mix both the Vomiting and Purging
Medicines with the things Longed for, that so the ferment eagerly joining them
may be carried off. If the whole Mass of Humors be depraved, Antimonial
Sudorifics are very convenient.

After Evacuation, let the vicious ferment be tempered by moderat Acids, and
palatable Stomachics, such as the Juices of Quinces, of Lemons, Citrons,
Pomgranats, and Oranges; the Water of the Sprigs of Vines, mixed with Spirit of
Treacle; Capers pickled in Vinegar, and mixed with Carminative Seeds; Essence
of Orange-peel mixed with Essence of Saffron (in a suppression of the Terms;)
the Decoction of Parsley-roots with Chiches, and especially Wine in which Mint
and Wormwood are infused.

Take of the Vitriolated Conserve of Mint four Ounces, powder of Zedoary a Dram
or two, with Syrup of Quinces, make an Electuary, of which let the Patient take
a convenient quantity thrice a Day.

Take of Mint-water, Baum-water, of each an Ounce; Cinnamon Water prepared with
Quinces six Drams; Juice of Quinces an Ounce; with a sufficient quantity of
dulcified Spirit of Salt make a Potion. Dose a Spoonful now and then.

Let Syrups or sweet things be sparingly used. Treacle and Mithridate are
sometimes very useful. When other things fail, we must have recourse to Steel
and absorbent Powders. Bleeding is of no direct use in this Disease, tho in a
suppression of the Terms, or Plethora, it may be serviceable by removing the
occasional Cause.

CHAP. III. Of an Immoderat Appetit, and Dog Hunger.
AN extraordinary Appetit returning by intervals, and attended by Swooning, is
called Bulimus. If Victuals be speedily swallowed down without Chewing, and
frequently Vomited up, or at least so speedily digested, that the hungry
Appetit is not discontinu'd, it is called a Dog-Hunger.

The Cause of 'em both for the most part is a Volatile, disengaged Acid, called
by the Ancients Melancholy, that gnaws and provokes the Mouth of the Stomac.
Accordingly we find that Acids augment, and viscous Anti-acids impair the
Appetit. It Is true, a volatile Urinous Alcali, such as the Bile, abounding in
the Stomac, may sometimes increase the Appetit, and in that case Acids perform
the Cure. If the Nervous Membrane of the Stomach be over sensible, and too
easily provoked, an extraordinary Appetit may likewise ensue thereupon.

Worms in the Stomac, or Guts, may vellicate the Membrans, and so create an
Appetit; and if the Digestion withal be easy and quick, it argues that there is
an acid Matter in the Stomac besides Worms. It Is but very seldom that a fames
Canina is periodical, neither is it followed by Fatness, by reason of the rough
unpliable Crasis of the Blood. Long Fasting, and any immoderat Evacuation of
Blood or Chyle, may be listed into the number of its External Causes.

In a Bulimus the Causes are somewhat meeker, attended by a dullness or want of
Spirits. When it succeeds to Chronical Diseases, or when the Swooning Fits
happen while the Belly is full, it is dangerous. If a Dog Hunger be attended by
Vomiting and Loosenesses, it degenerates into Gachexies, Dropsies,
Consumptions, etc.

The Cure consists in tempering and evacuating the Acid. The former Indication
must be first satisfied; for if we attempt to evacuate the Acid in its vicious
State, it will grow fiercer, and more offensive. The tempering Remedies are
fixed and volatile Alcali's, absorbent Earthy Powders, and fat Oily Medicines.
The first kill the Acidity, as appears by mixing Salt of Tartar with Spirit of
Vitriol. The second suck up the acid Particles, as is evident by the Experiment
of Vinegar and Crabs Eyes. The last cramp and fetter the Acid.

Of the first sort are the Vegetable fixed Salts, Salt and Spirit of Urine,
Spirit of Hartshorn, Onyons, Garlic, etc. Of the second are Crabs Eyes, Coral,
Pearls, Chalk, Boodstone, Bole-armenic, Sealed Earth, Steel prepared without
Acids, and mixed with Opiats. Of the third sort, are the expressed Oil of Sweet
Almonds, Linseed, etc. distilled Oils of Aniseed, Caraway-seed, and especially
of Cloves, the Yelks of Eggs boiled hard, or the Oil of Eggs, hot Bread dipped
into Oil, etc. But if the Disease be attended by Vomiting, the Oily Ingredients
ought to be avoided, or their use discontinu'd, when the Hunger relents.

Take of the Filings of Steel, and prepared Coral, of each half a Dram,
prepared Crabs Eyes a Scruple, prepared Mother of Pearl, and Bone of Carp of
each a Scruple, Saffron half a Scruple, Laudanum Opianum two Grains: Mix for
two or three Doses to be exhibited in fat Broth.

Besides the abovementioned Ingredients, some recommend the drinking of Wine,
others Cockles, River Crabs, Pork, Brains fried with Butter, Rice boiled with
Milk and Butter, Fistic-Nuts, Sweet-Almonds, etc. Sweet Generous Wines, in
which Mint and Sage are infused, or the Spirits of those Herbs, or the Essence
of Wormwood, Pennyroyal, Baum, etc. mixed with distilled Oils, are much
approved.

Narcotics stupify the Mouth of the Stomach, and upon that score are useful.
But this Cure is only palliative. Treacle and Mithridate are the best of 'em.

The Acid being thus prepared, let Vomits be exhibited, or Purges, such as this.

Take of the Pills of Hiera a Scruple, choice Rhubarb in Powder half a Scruple,
with Syrup of Roses: Make ^ills Or,

Take of the Extract of Aloe prepared with tartaris'd Water, prepared red
Coral, of each half a Dram, Gum-ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar a Scruple,
Extract of Steel two Scruples, Extract of Troches Alhandal, half a Scruple,
with Essence of Myrrh make thirty Pills. Dose ten or fifteen.

A Bulimus is cured by generous Spanish Wine, or Frontignac, or a Medicinal
Wine, with Cinnamon, Nutmegs, etc. infused in it. Bread dipped into it and
applied to the Nostrils, or eaten, is much approved. Treacle dissolved in Wine
is likewise very proper.

SECT. III. Of the Disorders of Thirst.
THIRST proceeds from the Vellication of the Gullet, Throat, Palate, Tongue, and
adjacent parts, occasioned by sharp saline Particles. The Liquor it demands is
naturally designed for a Vehicle to the solid Food and Excrements. It Is
disordered by way of Increase, Diminution, or Depravation.

The two last are very uncommon. It Is true there are some few Instances of a
want of Thirst, among Children and Splenetic Persons; and wherever it is found,
it must proceed from a redundacy of moisture about the Stomac and Throat, or
the stupidity of those parts. Either of which Causes is removed by the use of
Elixir proprietatis, Tincture of Tartar, Tartar vitriolated, Arcanum
Duplicatum, Sal-armoniac mixed with Spices, Salt of Carduus Benedictus, etc. If
it be caused by the inadvertency of the mind, and delirous Disposition of the
Spirits, as in Fevers, it is a bad sign, but yields to the general Cure of the
Disease.

As for the Depravation of Thirst, or a particular aversion to some Liquors,
and violent inclination to others, it is either a Symptom of a Fever, or
accompanies a Pica or Malacia, and requires the same Cure as its Companions.

CHAP. I. Of Immoderat Thirst.
IT remains now to take a View of Immoderat Thirst, the only disorder of that
Nature that requires consideration in this place. The part affected is the
Throat, Gullet, and Mouth of the Stomach. The cause is either positive, or
privative. The positive cause is a sharp Salt vellicating these parts, which,
if it be locked up in a viscous Vehicle, is not so easily diluted as otherwise.
This Salt is of an Alcalin nature, contrary to that which causes immoderat
Hunger. The privative cause is the Defect of Saliva, whose Office it is to water
those parts, and dilute the Salts.

The remote external Causes are Purging Medicines, Pepper, Salt, Spices,
Arsenic, sublimat Mercury, talking loud, sleeping with the Mouth open, etc. The
internal remote Causes are the prevalency of a bitter Oil in the Choler,
depraving the Lymph; an Oily sharpness in the Saliva occasioned by Catarrhs,
extravasation of Serum, or Scorbutic glutinous Lymph; the Deficiency,
Glutinosity, and Saltish sharpness of the Saliva, as in Fevers, Phthisicks,
Hectics, etc. To which we may add the disorder, diversion, or paucity of the
Spirits, which hinder the due secretion of the Spittle, as in the Instances of
Weakness, Fatigue, Anger, Pain, etc. The heat of the Blood in the Lungs, and
dejection of the Appetit in the Stomac, have likewise a great hand in causing
Thirst. Sometimes Thirst is attended by a Feverish heat; at other times it is
quite free of it, as in Scorbutic, Hydropic, and Catarrhous cases.

In general a sudden Thirst without any visible cause, prognosticates some
Disease or other. If the Tongue be dry, the Mouth beset with a tough Phlegm,
and the Body oppressed with heat, and yet the Person be insensible of Thirst,
it is an Argument of a Delirium, or great disorder among the Animal Spirits, or
of the stupidity of the Tongue, and adjacent parts, and is justly looked upon
as a malignant Symtom. If in drinking the Liquor makes a noise as it falls into
the Stomac, it is an Argument of the Disorder of the Stomac. In Fevers it
disappears together with them. But in Chronical Distempers, it is not so easily
shaken off.

As for the method of Cure, the irritating Cause must be first removed by
Medicines varied according to its Nature. Such are partly austere Acids, partly
temperat Medicine^ which correct the sharp, or urinous, or oily, or saline
Particles. The Acids are Wood Sorrel, Prunes, Citrons, Quinces, Oranges,
Pomgranates, Rasberries, Barberries, Corants, Cherries, and all their Juices;
and especially Tamarinds, which not only abate the Thirst, but open the Body.
The Juice of Houseleek, Vinegar, Strawberry-water; Tinctures of Roses, of
Viclets, and of Dasies; Cream of Tartar; Spirits of Vitriol, of Sulphur, of
Salt, or the Spirit distilled from equal Quantities of Sulphur, Antimony and
Vitriol, dropped into the ordinary Drink. The temperate Remedies are Milk, Whey
clarified with Citrons, Emulsions of Seeds, Raisins, Liquorice, ande.

The second Indication of Cure is to augment the quantity of Serum and Spittle
by exhibiting Liquids altered with Wine or Cinnamom, or mixed with acid
Spirits. Simple cold Water, though commonly used, is very noxious. Besides, it is
not convenient to throw in too large quantities of Liquors for fear of loading
the Stomac, therefore Gargles and Mucilages applied to the Tongue and Throat
will not be improper. As for the Forms of Recipe's these following will suffice.

Take of the Decoction of the Leaves and Roots of Wood Sorrel one Pound, fresh
Juice of Wood Sorrel three Ounces, Syrup of Bay Berries and Pomgranats, of each
six Drams. Mix them.

Take of the Decoction of Barley one Pound, Juices of Citrons and of Quinces, of
each two Ounces; Tinctures of the Flowers of Dasies and Roses of each two
Drams, Syrup of the Juice of Citrons, an Ounce and a half; Spirit of Salt as
much as suffices. Make a Julep.

Take of the Flowers of Dasies six Drams, sprinkle 'em with Spirit of Sulphur,
and infuse 'em in two Pound of Barly-water, till it extract a Tincture: strain
the Liquor, and add three Ounces of the Syrup of Rasberries.

Take of Tamarinds two Ounces, bruised small Raisins, an Ounce and a half, boil
them in Water, and infuse in the strained Liquor while it is yet hot an Ounce of
fresh Citron-peel. When it is cold strain it out, and add half an Ounce of the
Tincture of Roses. Make a Julep.

Take of Barly-water, a Pound and a half, Cinnamom-water an Ounce, purified
Nitre, or Nitrum Antimoniatum, from a Dram to a Dram and a half. Mix them for a
Potion. This and all Nitrous Potions are proper for such as do not agree with
Acids.

In Scorbutic, Phthysical and Hydropic Cases the Saltness of the Lymph and
Spittle is admirably corrected by Whey mixed with Juice of Citrons, or with the
Juices of Scurvygrass and Wood Sorrel. Spirits of Salt and of Nitre are
likewise very proper. Emulsions prepared from the cooling and milky Seeds, and
the Decoction of China with Raisins and Liquorice are likewise conducive to the
same purpose. Acids in this case are improper. But Liquorice and Fennel-Seeds
boiled are much approved. As,

Take of Barley a handful, small Raisins bruised an ounce and a half, Anniseeds,
Fennel seeds, of each a Dram and a half, Liquorice-roots six Drams: Boil them
in fair Water till the fourth part be consumed, adding toward the end a Dram
and a half of Cinnamon. Strain out the Liquor, of which the Patient may drink
at pleasure.

Gargles of Water; Small-beer or Water impregnated with Nitre, or the Juice of
Houseleek; or Mucilages of Quince-seeds, Fleawort-seeds, etc. extracted with
Rose Water, or Phlegm of Vitriol, and mixed with the Juice of Houseleek;
applied to the Tongue and held in the Mouth, are very useful; especially when
the Tongue is black, dry, and rough.

Some healthy Persons are molested with Thirst every Morning, for whom
Wormwood-wine is very proper. Others are thirsty through Labor, Fatigue, and
Exercise, for whom the Spirit of Wine is very convenient.

SECT. III. Of the Diseases relating to the Chewing Faculty.
HAVING dispatched the Disorders of the Appetit, which is the first Spring of
Nourishment; I am now arrived at the manner of receiving Food: It is first
received by the Mouth, Chewed and impregnated with Spittle; which being of a
fermentative Nature not unlike that of the ferment in the Stomach, predisposes
and prepares it for Digestion. Now if the Power of Chewing be deficient, or
disordered, it is neither impregnated with Spittle, nor cut small so as to be
fit for Digestion. The Disorders of this Nature are such as respect either the
Muscles employed in that Motion, the Jaw-bones, or the Teeth. Of these in order.

CHAP. I. Of the Contorsion of the Muscles of the Mouth, or a Dog Cramp.
THE Temporal Muscles, and those common to the Cheeks and Lips, are the
Instruments which move the under Jaw Bone, in order to join it with the upper
in the Act of Chewing, If they are seized with Convulsions or Cramps, the under
Jaw Bone is inseparably united to the upper; if they be Paralytic, it falls
down by its own weight, and they are not able to fetch it up. But these Cramps
and Palsies never happen but when the whole Body is equally affected, and then
they yield to the general Cure.

If one part or side of these Muscles be seized with Convulsions, or Palsy,
while the other is sound, the Mouth stands awry inclining to one side. In which
posture one of the Eyes cannot be duly shut, neither can the Person pronounce
the Letter O with a full Mouth, or Spit but at one side of the Mouth. If it be
a Palsy, the part affected is loose, soft, and follows the Motion of the sound
Muscles, and the under Eyelid falls down; whereas if it be a Cramp, or
Convulsion, the part is hard, painful, and draws the sound Muscles to it.

As for the Causes of Convulsions and Palsies they are accounted for elsewhere.
This Contorsion is a fatal Symptom in acute continual Fevers, or after an
universal Apoplexy or Epilepsy.

The Cure is accomplished by Purgative Medicines, volatile and aromatic
Sudorifics, decoctions of Woods, Castor given inwardly, or its Essence apylied
outwardly, or its Extract rolled in the Mouth. Or,

Take of Nutmegs two Drams; Roots of Pellitory of Spain, and of Angelica, Seeds
of Staves-acre, Mustard-seeds, of each a Dram; Cumin-seeds and Cubebs, of each
half a Dram; Pepper half a Scruple; Mastic, a Dram and a half; with Wax make
Tablets to be rolled in the Mouth. The Mouth may be washed with Spirit of Wine,
in which Castor is dissolved, or the Decoction of Pellitory-roots with
Rocket-seeds. Platerus was wont to cure the Convulsive distortion of the Mouth
by Opiats mixed with Aromatics; as Mithridat, Syrup of Poppies, etc. If the
Case be Paralytic, Blistering Plasters may be applied to the Ear, or Nap of
the Neck.

As for the Disorders of the Jaw bones. If they are disjoynted by external
Violence, Yauning or Gaping, they are easily set right by a Cuff under the
Chin. If they are encumbered by Tumors or Inflammations in the Throat, if their
motion be cramped by the swelling of the Glandules behind the Ears, or the
settlement of a tartarine thick Humor upon the conjunction with the Bones of
the Temples, the regular motion is retrieved by the respective Cure of those
Causes. If the Antagonist Muscles, that bring up and pull down the under
Jaw Bone be reciprocally contracted, through Cold, Worms, etc. there insues a
gnashing of the Teeth: Which in Fevers and adult Persons, is an unlucky
Symptom; and is cured by the external Application of Balsam of Peru, and the
removal of its Causes.

CHAP. II. Of the Loss, Corruption, Blackness, Looseness, Numness, and Chilness
of the Teeth.
THE Teeth are nourished not only by the Arteries and Veins inserted into their
Roots; but likewise by the Gums. When they are incapable through Age, or
otherwise, to receive Nourishment they fall out, or are ground away by
continual use.

The Causes which promote this their decay, are the abuse of Stupifying, or
Narotic, over cold, or over hot Medicines, or of Viscous and Corruptible
things, which stick to the sides of the Teeth, and corrupt their Nourishment,
such as Sugar, Sweetmeats, Figs, Cheese, Milk, etc. The Scurvy, Salivation,
handling of Mercury, external Violence, etc. The Cure consists in removing the
Causes. If Mercury be the cause, Leaves of Gold or Solar Preparations are very
proper.

Sometimes the Teeth are corrupted through the acidity of their own direct
Nourishment, or of that received sideways from the Gums. External Injuries are
apt to produce the same Effect. At first there appears a black Spot in the
Tooth, then it becomes a Hole, and the Tooth grows hollow; the corrupted Matter
lodged within corodes the Tooth, causes pain, and sometimes reaches the Gums
and Jaw Bone, creating Ulcers, which degenerate into Fistula's. Sometimes the
corrupted Matter degenerates into Worms. Sometimes the Teeth stink and infect
the Breath, by reason of corrupted Meat sticking in their Chinks, or in the
hollow Tooth.

If the Corruption be confirmed, it cannot be Cured without drawing the Tooth.
The Juice of Sun-spurge mixed with Sal-armoniac and Flour, and put into the
Hollow-Tooth, will render the Operation easy; the Juice of Celandin the
greater, or a bruised Grasshopper, are proper for the same purpose. Or,

Take of Gum-ammoniac, Henbane-seeds, Juice of Henbane, of each a Dram and a
half; with the fat of Green Frogs and Wax make an Ointment, to be applied to
the Tooth before it is drawn.

If the Corruption be not too far advanced, a stop may be put to its further
progress by applying an actual Cautery; and afterwardsfilling the Tooth with
Gold-leaf beat up with Myrrh and Wax; or with Turpentine; or with the Decoction
of Ginger in Oxymel; or with Coral and Camphyr. Or,

Take of prepared red Coral, bone of a Cuttle, and burnt Hartshorn, of each two
Scruples; choice Myrrh, half a Dram; Camphyr, five or six Grains, with the
mucilage of Tragacanth make Pills, to be put into the Hollow-Tooth. Some choose
potential Cautery's instead of actual ones, as Aquafortis, or the Spirit of
Salt.

If the Teeth stink let 'em be washed with Water, in which Sal-armoniac is
dissolved. If they are infested with Worms, wash 'em with the Decoction of
Savin in Wine, or apply the Spirit of Sulphur with Cotton, or let the fumes of
burnt Henbane-seed be received at the Mouth.

Sometimes if the Gums be flaccid, loose, or otherwise disordered, the lateral
Nourishment they afford to the Teeth, is viciated, and sticks like an Excrement
upon their surface, and either grows hard like a friable Stone, or blackens and
disorders the Teeth. Hence we see that whatever affects the Gums, as the
Scurvy, Mercurial Salivation, etc. is followed by a blackness, and sordid
color of the Teeth.

If this Symptom be recent and not confirmed, let the Teeth and Gums be rubbed
with the following Powder.

Take of burnt Hartshorn, three Ounces; Coral, a Dram and a half; Roots of
Florentine Orris, two Scruples; burnt Alum and Salt of Tartar, of each a
Scruple, make a Powder to be sprinkled with Spirit of Scurvy Grass, adding some
drops of the distilled Oil of Cloves.

If the Excrement be stiff and confirmed, let Spirit of Salt mixed with Honey
be applied to the Gums and Teeth. Or, Take a Polypody-root, and soak it for the
space of four and twenty Hours in Wine sharpened with Spirit of Sulphur. Then
dry it for a Powder for the Teeth. Let the Teeth and Gums be washed every
Morning with Human Urine, and after eating with Plantan and Houseleek-water, in
which Sal-armoniac and Salt of Tartar are dissolved. The Powders of hard
stones, such as Flint, Pumice-stone, etc. are not so convenient, unless it be
in a very inveterat case; because they consume the Gums.

As touching the looseness of the Teeth, it is occasioned either by their own
intrinsic fault, of which above, or the relaxation of the Fibers of the Gums,
which frequently proceeds from the sharpness of the Saliva, or Serum, as
appears by the aptness of the Scurvy, Toothache, and Mercurial Salivation, to
cause it. Opiats also, used for the Toothach, sometimes cause a looseness of
the Teeth by relaxating the Fibers of the Gums.

If it be inveterat it may run to that height, that the Gums are exulcerated,
corrupted and disposed to a Gangrene. Sometimes if the Texture of the Gums is
very solid, and relaxating Causes assault it, it shoots up a loose flaccid
sordid sort of Flesh that 'twines about and covers the Tooth.

The Cure consists in corroborating the flaccid Gums by Astringents, cleansing
the Ulcers (if any there be) and preserving them from further Corruption.
Tincture of Lac, with Myrrh, is a noted Medicine for this Effect. Spirit of
Salt with Honey of Roses, is also a powerful cleanser.

Take of the Flowers of Holyhocks, half an Ounce; prepared burnt Hartshorn, two
Drams; burnt Alum, Nutmegs, of each a Dram. Make a Powder to rub the Gums
with, after cleansing the Teeth, and washing the Mouth with the following
Gargle.

Take of Sage-leaves, two handfuls; Flowers of Holyhocks, one handful;
Polypody-roots half an Ounce. Boil them in fair Water. To a Pound of the
strained Decoction, add Honey of Roses, two Ounces and a half; Antimonial
Nitre, three Drams; burnt Alum and sealed Earth, of each a Dram. Mix, etc.

Take of the Leaves of Sage and Scurvy Grass, of each three handfuls; boil them
in Milk. To a Pound of the strained Liquor add fresh Juice of Scurvygrass two
Ounces; Syrup of Columbines four Ounces. Mix for an Antiscorbutic Gargle.

Take of crude Alum a Dram and a half; Flowers of Columbines and Sage-leaves,
of each two Drams; Roots of Florentin-Orris, three Drams; choice Myrrh, two
Scruples. Sprinkle 'em liberally with Spirit of Scurvygrass, adding a few Drops
of the distilled Oil of Cloves. Make a Liniment for the Teeth.

For a Scorbutic Excrescence of the Gums, Spirit of Scurvygrass mixed with
burnt Alum, is very proper; or the Decoction of small Houseleek with Alum and
Honey; or a mixture of the Scum of Quicklime Water with Lac, Vitriol and
Rose Water; are much approved.

If the Excrescence be over luxuriant, we must have recourse to the Decoction
of Verdigrise and Alum mixed with Vinegar, or the Ointment Aegyptiacum mixed
with Honey of Roses; or the following Powder.

Take of burnt Alum and Sal-armoniac, of each a Scruple; Mastic and
Frankincense, of each half a Dram. Make a Powder to be rubbed upon the Teeth,
after washing the Mouth with the Decoction of Sage, Tormentil and red Roses.

The Numness of the Teeth proceeds from the Acidity of the Lymph, and is cured
by chewing fresh Purslain, or Cheese; or applying the White of an Egg boiled
hard; but especially by warm Urine.

The chilness of the Teeth, or their aptitude to shrink and ache at the
approach of any cold thing, is cur^d by applying Treacle, or Spirit of Wine, or
chewing hot Bread, or the Yelk of an Egg roasted.

SECT. IV. Of the Diseases that hinder Swallowing.
THE Food received and prepared in the Mouth, must be forwarded by the Tongue
to the upper part of the Pharynx, and thence conveyed downwards to the Stomach,
by the successive contraction of the Muscles of the Gullet. This we call
Swallowing. The Disorders it is obnoxious to, are such as tend either to impair
or deprave it.

Those of the former sort are occasioned by the Palsy of the Sphincter and
M^s^les of the Throat; The Convulsion, or Contraction of the Gullet, caused by
Hypocondriac, Hysteric, and Epileptic Fits, Worms, want of Spittle or Moisture,
violent Exercise, astringent Liquors, etc. Or the narrowness of its Passage,
caused by Tumors, Obstructions, and Inflammations either of it self, or the
adjacent parts: Or the Inflammation, Excoriation, Ex^lceration and Tumor of the
upper Orifice of the Stomach; or its queasyness and aversion to Food; or Wind
irritating its Muscles to contract themselves and deny admission to the Food.

The Depravation of the Swallowing Faculty discovers it self three ways. 1.
When Liquors can be taken down, but no solid thing. 2. When solid things are
easily received, but such as are liquid are thrown up by the Mouth and
Nostrils; by reason that the Epiglottis does not duly cover the opening of the
Windpipe. 3. When some things both solid and liquid are easily taken down, and
some are not. Of which more under the Head of a Queasy Stomac.

In acute Diseases or Wounds, the Convulsion of the Gullet is fatal; as also
its relaxation for want of Spirits. If any external thing taken down stick in
the Gullet, it occasions Imposthumes, Ulcers, etc. and together with the
corrupted Matter works it self out either upwards or downwards, or cuts out a
new Passage through the neighboring parts. Or if it reach the Stomach, may
either be voided by Stool without any harm, or cause Obstructions in the
Pylorus, Looseness in the Guts, etc. according to its Nature and Bulk.

The Cure vary's according to the quality of the Causes. If the Head of the
Gullet is Paralytic, let the Decoction of Sage and Rocket-seeds in Wine, or the
Infusion of Thyme and Lavender-flowers in Aqua-Vitae with Castor, or the
Essence of Castor mixed with Spirit of Venice-Treacle and Aqua Anhaltina, be
held in the Mouth. Let the Juice of Sage with Nutmegs and Castor, or Turpentine
dissolved with the Yelk of an Egg in the Water of Primroses, or some drops of
the distill^d Oils of Amber, Sage, Anniseeds, etc. be gradually taken down. Let
the Neck and neighboring parts be anointed with Spirit of Earthworms, and
distilled Oil of Cloves, Amber, etc.

If the Muscles of the Gullet be seized with Convulsions, let Cephalic and
Opiat Medicines be used both internally and externally. If want of moisture and
extreme dryness cause their contraction, Let the mucilage of Quinces extracted
with the Water of Frogs-Spawn be held in the Mouth, and insensibly swallowed.

Hysteric and Hypocondriac Contractions of the Pharynx, are cured by Chalybeat
and absorbent Remedies. Pins, Bones, pieces of Glass and such like pointed
things swallowed down and sticking in the Gullet, ought to be brought back if
possible by Sneezing, Coughing, or taking down liquid Vomits, and drinking in
the mean while Oily soft Liquors; or by the help of Instruments made for the
purpose.

SECT. V. Of the Hindrances of Chylification.
THE Food conveyed by the Mouth and Gullet into the Stomac, is there dissolved,
partly by the heat of the Stomac and adjacent Bowels, and partly by the salin
and spirituous Juice in the Stomac; which likewise encounters the alcalin Salts
of the Food, when dissolved, and by means of a fermentation works it into a
volatile temperat milky substance, which we call Chyle.

That this ferment in the Stomac is an acid salin substance, is sufficiently
made out by the acid Belchings that attend even those who are well; by the
evident virtue which Acids have of promoting, and fat oily Anti-acids of
impairing the Appetit. The original of this ferment is the Lymph deposited by
the Glandules of the Stomach into its Cavity, where it meets the remains of
Food, impregnated with Spittle, and rendered acid by delay; and combines with
'em in the form of an acid ferment.

CHAP. I. Of Diseases Incumbring, or Extinguishing Chylification.
IF the Food be not sufficiently elaborat in the Stomac, and in due time
converted into Chyle; it remains unfit for nourishing the Body, as being
nothing but a heap of crude Matter. Sometimes it melts into a fixed Viscous
acid, that falling short of its due thinness and volatility, is the source of
all Chronical Distempers; which by the Ancients were imputed to the unequal
Disposition of the Bowels, or the cold Constitution of the Stomac complicated
with the heat of the Liver. This we call the acid Crudity of the Stomac. At
other times it degenerates into a Cruditas Nidorosa, a putrid Matter smelling
like something burnt or roasted.

The causes of these Disorders are the deficiency, confusion, or flatness of
the Spirits, through Weakness, Passions, Pains, and want of Exercise; the
corruption or fixation of the acid ferment occasioned by vicious Acids, sweet
things, and such as tend to an acid Crudity; or its dullness and inactivity,
occasioned by the oily Salt of the Choler abounding in the the Stomac, eating
of fat Food, as Eggs fried with a large quantity of Butter, and such like,
which produce a Cruditas Nidorosa; the fixation and viscidity of the Relics
of preceding Digestions in the Pleats of the Stomac, following the preposterous
administration of fixed absorbent Powders in Fevers; eating of disagreeable
and unwonted Food, which renverses the Seminal Crasis of the ferment, and
requires a new proportion of digestive Salts; (whereas the Food that the
Appetit calls for, and is by custom well acquainted with, meets with a more
welcome reception from the ferment, that is in some measure allied to it by
virtue of the remains of food of the same Nature lodged in the Stomac; the
Relaxation, Exulceration, Excoriation and Obstruction of the Stomac; Its
Sympathy with the Kidneys in Nephritic Pains, etc. These Causes relate to the
Stomac, and its ferment.

The Causes relating to the Object or Food received; are gormandizing, or
over-charging the Stomac and ferment; variety of contrary Meats which are not
equally digested, one part remaining crude, while the other is already
transformed; departing from the usual Measures and Seasons of Eating, or
anticipating Meals before the former be digested; crossing the Natural Appetit
by pressing such things as are loathed, and denying that it longed for;
abstaining from Bread, or using such as is not sufficiently fermented and
impregnated with that volatile Acid that so notably promotes Digestion; hard,
viscous, and oily Food, or such as is not easily dissolved or mixed with watery
Vehicles; excessive Drinking, which over dilutes the ferment, relaxes the
Fibers of the Stomac, and causes the Food to float unsteddily; Eating of solid
Foot without a sufficient quantity of moisture for its Vehicle; neglect of
Chewing, etc.

The particular Causes of an acid Crudity are the redundancy of acid Humors in
the Body, the frequent use of Acids, whether open or occult, or of Spices and
such like sharp things, as are apt to exalt an Acid.

Those of a musty Crudity are the recoyling of the Bile and Alcalin Humors; the
deficiency of Acids, as in acute Fevers; the undue stay of Food in the Stomac;
or the contraction of the Pylorus stopping its passage; using fat oily fixed or
Chalybeat Ingredients; soon perishing Fruits; in a word whatever is apt to
corrupt, or contract a Nidor.

The Symptoms of an impaired Chalification are; a heavy pain about the Stomac,
and distention of the Breast, after eating; frequent Belchings whether insipid,
putrid, sulphurous, or resembling the very taste of the Food, though five or six
Hours after eating. Sometimes, especially in Hypochondriac Persons, the Face is
inflamed, and respiration is difficult while they lie on their Backs. In a
Morning their Mouth is beset with a viscous Phlegm. The Urine is sometimes thin
and watery, at other times thick and muddy. Sometimes a Vertigo happens attended
by all the Symptoms of the Hypochondriac Illness, which takes its rise from the
Stomac.

The Signs of an acid Crudity, are Heart-burning, acid Belchings; much Wind;
the Constipation of the Belly, and the thickness and viscidity of whatever is
vomited up, whether Naturally or by Art. Those of a musty Crudity are these. In
the Morning they perceive an uncouth ashy Taste, like that of rotten Wood;
afterward a gnawing in the Stomac, and loathing of Meat, with a Bitterness in
the Mouth; their Belchings resemble the taste of rotten Fish, or fried Eggs;
the Belly is open and loose, and what they vomit is either insipid or bitterish.

As for Prognostics. An acid Crudity is the forerunner and cause of
Intermitting Fevers, Hypocondriac Illness, Scurvy, Cachexies, Colic Passions,
Arthritic and Nephritie Pains, Melancholy and fore'd Eruptions in the Skin. In
a word it is the source of all the Chronical Dstempers, which by the Ancients
were referred to the Obstructions of the Bowels, Mesentery, Liver, ^pleen, etc.

Chylification is the Work of Nature, not to be compassed by Art. Wherefore the
Cure consists only in removing the offensive Crudity, cleansing the Stomach,
and gently whetting the Appetite.

In the first place Antimonial Vomits mixed with attenuating Ingredients are
required. Then Stomachical Purges of Hiera with Agaric, Aloe and Mastic. Or,

Take of the Pills called Aleophanginae, a Scruple; Tartar vitriolated, six
Grains; Scammony sulphurated, two Grains; Extract of Troches Alhandal (a Noble
Medicine for cutting pituitous Humors) a Grain and a half, with the Tincture
of Tartar make Pills.

Take of Quercetanus's Pills of Ammoniac a Scruple; Extract of Steel, half a
Scruple; Extract of Troches Alhandal, two Grains; distilled Oil of Mace, two
Grains: With Elixir Proprietatis, or Essence of Sassafras, or Essence of Mint,
or Spirit of Mastic, make Pills. Or a Purging Medicine may be made of Salts,
Thus,

Take of Tartar vitriolated, Cream of Tartar, of each half a Scruple, Scammony
sulphurated four Grains; Troches Alhandal, two Grains; Distilled Oil of
Anniseeds, two Drops, make a Powder. If a Liquid Form be desired,

Take of Wormwood, or Hyssop-water, Mint-water, of each half an Ounce; Tartar
vitriolated, Extract of Agaric, of each half a Scruple, Extract of Troches
Alhandal, one Grain; Scammony sulphurated, two Grains; solutive Syrup of Roses,
half an Ounce. Mix for a Potion.

Of Alterative Medicines Galangal and Ginger are much the best. Next are the
Carminative Seeds, Anniseeds, Caraway-seeds, Cumin-seeds, the four lesser hot
Seeds; Acorus-roots preserved; Nutmeg, not by it self, but in conjunction with
Stomachic Simples; among which Mint and Wormwood lead the Van. Next to them are
Myrrh, Zedoary, Rosemary, Sassafras, Quinces, dulcified Spirit of Salt (an
incomparable Remedy) Spirit of Mastic mixed with that of Mint. Elixir
Proprietatis is an excellent Stomachic, but for acid Crudities, it ought to be
prepared without an Acid, and mixed with Spirit of Sal-armoniac. For musty
Crudities let it be prepared with an Acid, and mixed with Spirit of
Scurvygrass. Mynsichtius his Elixir of Vitriol; Michael s Stomachical Elixir
mixed with the Asthmatic Spirit, or with the Spirits of Mastic and Scurvygrass;
Essence of Baum mixed with the Philosophical Spirit of Vitriol; as likewise
those of Pennyroyal, Mint, Rosemary, Sassafras and Myrrh, are all very proper.
Wormwood-Wine is likewise useful. Or,

Take of curled Mind, wild Calamint and Wormwood, of each a handful;
Elecampane-roots, Acorus-Roots, of each an Ounce; Galangal, three Drams;
Cinnamom, three Drams; Mace, one Dram, ('it is very oily, and therefore a small
Quantity will suffice) Anniseeds three or six Drams. Cut, bruise, and tie them
in a Bag; to be infused in Rhenish Wine in a warm place for twelve Hours. Let
the Patient take a Draught of the Infusion before Eating, adding to every
Draught fifteen drops of dulcified Spirit of Salt.

The Rob of Juniper Berries with Ginger, Mace and Sugar, may be used by way of
Electuary.

Sal-armoniac given in Wormwood-wine; Arcanum Duplicatum, or essential Salt of
Tartar mixed with Aromatic Powders; the Infusion of Aron and Elecampane roots
in Wine; Chocolat and Thea, are all of excellent use.

As for musty Crudities, Vomits, and gentle Purges of Rhubarb and Tamarinds are
proper. Then precipitating Earthy Powders followed by Acid Juleps. As,

Take of Arcanum Duplicatum, two Scruples; prepared Cuttle-bone, a Scruple;
Powder of Nutmegs, six Grains. Mix for two or three Doses.

Take of Mint-water, an Ounce and a half; Cinnamom-Water, two Drams; Juice of
Quinces, six Drams; Syrup of the Juice of Quinces half a Dram. Mix for a
Potion. Dulcified Spirit of Salt, Spirit of Mastic, Elixir Proprietatis, Ivory,
Coral, Cream of Tartar, Quinces, etc. are all proper Ingredients.

Acid Crudities are removed by absorbent Powders, and volatile Aromatics, such
as Scurvygrass, lesser Centory, Wormwood, Rhubarb, and especially Ginger;
volatile Spirits of Mint, Sage, Scurvygrass, that of Sal-armoniac mixed with
Vegetable Spirits, Spirit of Tartar, Hartshorn, etc. Elixir Proprietatis
prepared without an Acid, together with the fixed Salts of Wormwood, Carduus
Benedictus, etc. the digestive Hypocondriac Salt, Hartshorn, Ivory, Crab's-eyes,
etc. Above all River-Crabs together with the Shells, are much approved. All
Acids must be avoided, and after the Acid is vanquished, Purgatives administered.

Besides internal Medicines, external Applications are proper for promoting
Chylification. As,

Take of the Oil of Mint prepared by Infusion and boiling, two Drams; expressed
Oil of Nutmegs, a Dram; distilled Oils of Mint, of Mace and of Cloves, of each
half a Scruple. Mix and anoint the Region of the Stomach. Balsam of Peru is
very proper for the same purpose.

Take of Tacamahac, three parts; Gum-Caran, one part; soften 'em with Balsam of
Peru, or distilled Oil of Mint, and make a Plaster to be applied to the Stomac.

A Sponge dipped in Wine impregnated with the Vehicle of Stomachic Simples, and
applied hot to the Stomac, is also much approved.

CHAP. II. Of Wind in the Stomach and Guts.
WHEN the Work of Chylification is disturbed, Wind often times molests and
distends the Stomach; which if it break upwards with a noise is called
Belching; if it be discharged both upwards and downwards, it is called a dry
Cholera.

Wind is somewhat different from Vapors and Exhalations, either of which is
resolved by heat, and thickened by cold; whereas it undergoes no such
alteration. Nay, it is neither heat nor cold that is directly concerned in
giving it a Being; it is only the vicious fermentation of a Preternatural Acid
within a thick viscous Body. Thus we see that Spirit of Nitre poured upon a
Metallin soluble Body, boyls up into Wind and Noise. The like will happen in
the distillation of Tartar; or the effusion of Vinegar or Juice of Citrons upon
Corals, or Crab's-eyes. In like manner Bread or new Wine, if fermented, will
rise up with a windy noise; but if fermentation be neglected, no other process
of boiling, macerating, distilling, etc. is able to produce that effect. And
once more; if Apples be exposed to the Sun, so as to undergo a fermentation by
virtue of the heat, their Skin will chop and break to give way to the Wind, and
no other management whatsoever can compass that end.

Thus it is made to appear that Wind is not pre-existent in the Liquors or
Humors themselves; but newly created by virtue of the imprisonment of acid and
urinous Salts within a viscous Body, which they endeavor to attenuate and
break through, when dissolved and put into motion by the addition of a ferment.
Now that the Vehicle is viscid, is sufficiently made out by the tenacious gross
Humors that are voided upwards by Vomiting.

The Part affected is the Cavity of the Stomach, and its upper Orifice. The
immediate Cause is already explained. To which we may add a violent compression
which obliges the Wind, in pursuit of a larger space to move in, to break forth
and forsake its narrow Habitation; just as Air condensated displays its Elastic
force, and seeks to enlarge its Bounds, driving before it the contiguous
interfering Bodies with a notable noise.

The remote Causes are the eating of viscous Food, and retention of acid
Crudities. Flatulent Meats may be very apt to encourage a Windy noise, but
without the fermentatation of an enclosed Acid they cannot of themselves
produce it. Therefore it is, that the same Meats will occasion such disturbances
in acid Constitutions, that are digested by other Persons without any disorder.

Some flatulent Distentions are natural, produced by the oily Bile and acid
Mucus of the Stomac and Guts, when their Cavities are Empty, and projected by
Nature to keep their walls from joining, and continue the openness of their
Pores. As to the Differences of Belchings, some are Acid, as in Hypocondriac
cases, and after long fasting; some musty, of which above; some answerable to
the natural quality of Food received, as those caused by eating Onyons,
Radishes, etc. some quite insipid; and lastly, tho very rarely, some are
attended by a prodigious stink. Now the cause of flatulent stinks must be
fetched from the Chemical Experiment of dissolving fat Sulphurous Substances
with Alcali's, and precipitating with Acids. As Antimony calcined with Nitre
and Tartar in the Preparation of Crocus Metallorum, then dissolved in Water,
and precipitated with Vinegar yields a most noysom Smell; so the oily Salts of
the Bile first resolved and then precipitated by Acids, are endowed with the
like Quality.

The Signs are these. If the Wind cannot force its passage the Breast or Belly
is distended and perplexed; if touched, it rebounds as it were; the respiration
is very difficult, especially when the Persons lie on their Backs; they are
molested with violent Pains, and tossing from side to side, they perceive a
sort of flatulent noise within; Just before the Wind breaks forth, they
complain of a vast Perplexity in their Breasts, but when it gains its Passage,
are benefited by it. Sometimes these flatulent Distentions reach the Neck and
Back, and occasion a Swelling about the Mouth of the Stomac, which prevents the
breaking of Wind downwards, and reaps no advantage by those which pass upwards.
And Eating augments this Distention.

As for Prognostics. They are usually the Symptoms of a Hypocondriac Illness;
and if they happen upon the recovery of a Disease portend its relapse. If they
continue long they threaten Dropsies. If they stink horridly, they are very
malignant and contagious.

The Cure is performed by attenuating and discharging the viscid Matter,
discussing the Wind, and moderating its force. In the first place let
Antimonial Emerics be exhibited; and next to them, the Stomachical Purgatives
prescribed in the last Chapter. After the first Passages are cleared the oily
volatile salin Simples are equally proper for tempering the Acid and attenuating
the viscous Humor. As for Example.

Take of Fennel and Mint-water, of each an Ounce and a half; Carminative-water
prepared with Wine, an Ounce; Spirit of Anis, Essence of Orange-peel, of each
three Drams; distilled Oil of Mace, five drops; Syrup of Orange-peel, six
Drams. Make a Potion to be taken by Spoonfuls.

Chamomil, with the four hot Seeds both larger and lesser boiled in Wine, or
their distilled Oils, or their Spirits mixed with that of Sal-armoniac, Castor,
or its Essence prepared with Spirit of Sal-armoniac, Myrrh, Treacle,
Orange-peel, Amber-grise, Cinnamom, and all Oily Volat-Salts, are proper for
the same purpose. As for Example.

Take of Coriander-seeds, half an Ounce; Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds, of each two
Drams; Zedoary, Ginger, Galangal, and Sal-armoniac; of each a Dram; ^owder of
Diatrion Pipereon, a Dram and half; aromatic Oil of Sugar, two Drams. Make a
Coarse Powder.

Balsam of Sulphur is of very good use, as likewise the aromatic compound
Waters of the above mentioned Simples; but above all the Carminative Spirit de
Tribus, that is, the Spirit distilled from Tartar and Nitre; mixed with Spirit
of Wine tartaris'd, and rectified.

Take of Mint-water, two Ounces; Roman Chamomil water, an Ounce; Zedoary-water,
half an Ounce; Carminative Spirit de Tribus, a Dram and a half; Essence of
Opium, a Scruple; Syrup of Orange-peel, an Ounce. Mix for a Draught.

Take of Elixir proprietatis prepared without Acids, three Drams; Essence of
Castor, two Drams; Essence of Opium, a Dram. Mix. Dose forty drops.

If Wind be accompanied with Flushings in the Face, and a notable heat, there
is nothing comparable to the Spirit of Nitre dulcified with Spirit of Wine, and
impregnated with the virtue of Carminative-Simples, after Sylvius's Method.
Sylvius's extemporary mixture is very serviceable in this case; viz.

Take of Fennel and Mint-water, of each two Ounces; rectified Spirit of Wine,
or Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae, or Sylvius's Carminative Spirit, an Ounce; Spirit
of Nitre, twenty drops; distilled Oil of Mace, six drops; Laudanum Opiatum
three Grains; Syrup of Mint, an Ounce and a half. Mix. Dose two Spoonfuls.

As for inveterat acid Belchings five or six Pepper-corns taken every Morning
fasting are very useful; as likewise absorbent Earthy Powders mixed with
Aromatics; Essence or Juice of Wormwood taken at Meals, and the Powder of
Coral, Cuttle-bone, and Ostiocolla, mixed with Spirit of Wine impregnated with
Juniper. If the Wind proceed from a thick stubborn Mucilage, exhibit the
Asthmatical Syrup mixed with a double quantity of Michael's Elixir for the
Stomac.

Externally let the place affected be fomented with the Oils of Chamomil, and
of the Carminative-seeds; or with a mixture of Anis-water, Spirit of Wine
camphoris'd, and Treacle; or covered with a Plaster of Tacamahac, Balsam of
Peru, and Treacle.

It Is also proper to inject Clysters of Man's Urin, in which the Carminative
Ingredients have been boiled.

SECT. VI. Of the Diseases that hinder the Retention of Food in the Stomac.
CHAP. I. Of Vomiting and Loathing of Meat.
HAVING thus accompanied the Food from its first entry into the Mouth, till its
arrival in the Stomac, we are now to view the Causes that disturb its Repose.

That Sense which with respect to external parts is called Pain, is Christened
Irritation among the Internal Membranes; as the upper Orifice of the Stomach is
said to be irritated when any Object grates upon, or displeases it. Now the
natural result of Irritation is, that Crowds of Spirits are summoned in by the
angry part, and upon their arrival it contracts it self. Thus the Mouth of the
Stomac being extremely sensible, contracts it self upon the least Irritation,
the natural consequence of which is a loathing of Meat, or denying admission to
it when swallowed; or, if it happen to force its passage, the imprisoned Wind
belches out at the new opened Gate. But if this contraction be continued to the
Pylorus, or lower Orifice of the Stomac, its Fibers being stronger than those
of the upper, throw up the Contents, with force sufficient to master the
Passage, and hence insues a direct Vomiting. So that Loathing and Vomiting
differ in this point, That the one is a contraction of the upper, the other of
the lower Orifice of the Stomac.

Vomiting is said to be Essential, when the Irritating cause is lodged within
the Stomach. Such Causes are, a Wound, Inflammation, Ulcer, Gangren, or
Schirrus of the Stomac or Pylorus; sharp Scorbutic Salts conveyed thither in
company with the Spittle, or deposited by the Arteries; the vicious
effervescency or recoyling of the Gall and Pancreatic Juice; clotted Blood,
corrupt Matter, or any Humor dislodged of its proper Habitation, and hurried
into the Stomac; the Assumption of sharp Irritating Medicines, Vomits, Purges,
Poison, etc. or of fat things (which relaxat the Fibers of the upper Orifice,
and struggle with the acid ferment;) Crudities, Worms, etc.

If the Cause be seated elsewhere, the Vomiting is caused by consent, by reason
either of the Stomac's being one continued piece with the affected part; or of
their mutual commerce maintained by the Nerves. Thus the Disorders of the
Bowels, Guts, Midriff, Head, Kidneys, Womb, Liver and Spleen, are frequently
the causes of Vomiting. A Schirrus or corruption of the Sweetbread, stagnation
of the Seminal Juice in Widows and stale Maids, and in a word whatever disturbs
or inflames the Animal Spirits, will produce the same effect.

Vomiting is ushered in by Anxiety and Trouble in the Breast, Swiming of the
Head, trembling of the Under-Lip, plentiful evacuations of Spittle, and
Convulsive Motions of the Stomac. An Essential Vomiting ought to be carefully
distinguished from that which is Sympathical. If, when the Stomac is emptied by
Vomiting, there remains still a propensity to Vomit; if the Stomac continue
heavy and blown up, and nauseat Food; if acid or musty Belchings ensue, we take
it for an essential Vomiting. If it be incorrigible and obstinat, ushered in at
first by a pain in the Breast, and after a Day or two a Loathing; in a word, if
no fault can be fastened on the contained Humors, it proceeds from a
Callosity, Schirrus, or such like default in the Stomac. If it come in a
surprising manner without the precedent Si^ns of Trouble in the Breast,
Loathing, weak Stomac, etc. It Is a shrewd Argument that it proceeds by consent
from the disorder of some other part, that is not yet come to light.

If it be caused by a viscid Humor, it is hard to cure it. If the Chyle and Food
be frequently thrown up, with a feverish heat, it is an ill circumstance. Long
and continual Vomiting in Malignant Fevers, especially if the Matter be livid,
blackish, or fetid, is very dangerous. In benign Fevers, vomiting in the
beginning, or height, is good. If it follow Wounds or Bruises of the Head, it is
frequently mortal. The Periodical Vomitings of Hypochondriac, Scorbutic, and
Splenetic Persons, are of a good Character. If the Matter vomited, be a mixture
of Choler and Pituita, it is a Friendly Symptom, but either of them apart is
more noxious. The vomiting of Worms, Excrements of the Belly, Clysters, etc. is
much suspected.

Before we launch into the method of Cure, 'twill not be improper to take
Notice of the following Cautions: 1. That Critical Vomits, or those which
happen in the beginning of Benign Diseases, or those of Women with Child in
their first Months, ought not to be stopped, unless they exceed measure. 2.
That in Scorbutic Cases, absorbent mitigating Ingredients are more proper than
hot, sharp Aromatics. 3. That a Vomiting of Blood ought to be curbed betimes,
for fear of exhausting the Spirits. 4. In case of Worms, it ought to be
encouraged, and the Body kept soluble. 5. That in all Vomitings it is convenient
to keep the belly open by gentle Purges and Clysters: But withal, the quantity
of the Liquor for Clysters must be small, lest the Colon being distended, it
should press, or irritate the incumbent bottom of the Stomac. 6. By all means
let Sleep be promoted. 7. All Vomitings occasioned by assumption of Poison,
ought to be encouraged and continued till the Poison be rooted out: For which
end fat and tempering Liquors are very Proper; for that all Vegetable and
Mineral Poisons are endu'd with an excessive Acrimony. As touching Animal
Poisons, indeed the case is altered. 8. That Inappetency, Loathing, and such
like Infirmities of the Stomac, ought to be obviated betimes by Vomits, lest
delay remove the opportunity.

The General Indications of Cure are these. The Remote Causes must be removed;
the exquisite sense of the Stomac and fierceness of the Spirits abated by
Opiats; the Stomac gratified with agreeable Aromatics, and fortified by
Astringents.

The first Indication must be satisfied according to the variety of the Causes.
Gentle Vomits and Purges are convenient, if vicious Humors in the Stomach, or
Poison, are blamed as the Cause.

For the second Indication Laudanum Opiatum is an incomparable and universal
Remedy. Mithridat, Venice Treacle, and especially Diascordium, are entitled to
the same Character. As for Example,

Take of Treacle half a Dram, Laudanum Opiatum a Grain, distilled Oil of Mace
two Drops, with Juice of Quinces make a Bolus.

The third Indication is answered by sweet-scented, Aromatic, Stomachic
Remedies. Such as are Quinces, Mint, Wormwood, Baum, Zedoary, Orange Peel,
Mastic, Camphir, Cloves, Nutmegs, and especially Cinamom; their Waters,
Spirits, Essences, Extracts and distilled Oils. The Astringent Ingredients are
Quercetanus's Syrup of Coral, Syrup of dry Roses, Juice of Pomgranats, Vinegar
with Zedoary infused, Elixir of Vitriol, and especially the Spirit of Vitriol
of Steel, and [Juice of Quinces. Sealed Earth beat into a Pultise, with Spirit
of Vitriol, or of Nitre, hardens into a Stone; which if powdered and put into a
moist place, melts into a Styptic Liquor, of admirable use for all Astringent
Indications.

Take of Mint-Water two or three Ounces, Cinnamom-Water six Drams, Juice of
Quinces an Ounce, rectified Spirit of Vitriol five or six Drops, Distilled Oil
of Cinnamom three Drops, mix. Take a spoonful now and then, adding sometimes
one, two or three Grains of Laudanum Opiatum: or if the Person be very weak, a
Scruple of the Essence of Ambergrise; or in a case of Extremity, four or five
Grains of Alum.

Venice Treacle mixed with Vinegar, or formed into a Bolus, with Spirit of
Vitriol, is much approved. In malignant Fevers Salt of Wormwood, with Juice of
Limons; when the Stomach is stuffed with thick Humors, Spirit of Salt, or of
Nitre with Treacle; and when the Stomach is inflamed, or corroded, the Muci^age
of Fleawort and Quince-seeds, with solutive Syrup of Roses, are very convenient.

Externally, Let Aromatic and Corroborating Ingredients be boiled in Vinegar,
and the warm Decoction applied with a Sponge to the Stomach; or let toasted
bread, soaked in Vinegar, and covered with Aromatic Pouders, be applied to the
Region of the Stomach. Spirit of Wine Camphoris'd, is very effectual in
Fomentations. A Bag may be quilted with Mint, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace and
Cinnamom, sprinkled with Triacl'd Spirit of Wine, and Distilled Oil of Mint,
and applied. Some commend the application of a bag of Saffron.

Liniments are composed of Venice Treacle, Balsam of Peru, or Oils of Mastic,
Wormwood, Quinces, etc. Or,

Take of Expressed Oil of Nutmegs two Drams, Distilled Oils of Mint, Cloves and
Mace of each half a Scruple, Distilled Oil of Cinnamom five Drops, make a
Liniment, and anoint the Stomach and Breast. Plasters may be made of Tacamahac
and Gum Caran, with Aromatic Oils, after the Example of Crato's. Cataplasms are
likewise proper, as,

Take of the sharpest Yest four Ounces, Powder of Mint an Ounce, of Zedoary six
Drams, Nutmegs three in number, Mace, Cloves and Cinnamom of each two Drams,
Aniseeds, Cuminseeds and Fennelseeds of each three Drams. With a little vinegar
of Roses make a Cataplasm to be applied to the Stomach.

When the Irritating Cause is transferred from other parts to the Stomach,
Purging, Bleeding, and such like Diversions are very proper. As Women with
Child are sometimes cured of vomiting by Blood-letting. When we are obliged to
stop an Artificial vomiting, it is convenient to exhibit Milk boiled with Bread,
or Bread soaked in Generous Wine; Inject Clysters of Milk with Treacle;
administer Opiats, and apply outwardly as above.

If the Assumption of an harsh Purge dispose one to vomit, there is nothing
better than to chew fresh Citron Peel, or smell to toasted Bread dipped in
vinegar, and cover it with Powder of Cloves.

CHAP. II. Of a Vomiting of Blood.
THis Symptom may be caused by the suppression of the Piles or Terms in Maids
or Women with Child: Opening of a Vein or Artery; as that of the Vas breve,
through the Obstruction of the Spleen, which emptys its Blood into the Stomac; or
any of the Pancreatic Veins, occasioned by the sharpness of its Juice, which
Veins deposit their Blood into the Duodenum, and then it is voided both upwards
and downwards. Sometimes the healing up of a sordid Ulcer may occasion it, by
reason partly that the Blood was formerly evacuated in the form of corrupt
Matter, and partly that the Ferment of the Ulcer may have corroded the Vessels
in the Lungs. It succeeds frequently to Amputations, the Blood being then
crowded into Fewer Channels.

The Signs are these. Arterious Blood is fluid and reddish. If the vomited
matter be of an obscure color, and clotted, resembling the Liver, it comes
from the Veins. If it incline to a black color, be voided with a biting pain,
and tended by an austere taste, it is not Blood, but an acid corrupt humor, or
Atra Bilis. If it proceed from the rupture of the Vas breve, it is ushered in by
a beating pain in the left side of the Back, under the short Ribs.

The Vomiting of Atra Bilis is fatal, as likewise a Voiding of Blood any way in
the Small Pox, Measles, or other Eruptions. If the Piles succeed to Vomiting,
it is a good sign; as also if it come by Intervals in Splenetic and Chronical
Diseases. If it be Critical, all is well.

The Cure consists in removing the Causes, diverting the Blood from the Stomac,
fortifying the broken Vessel, attenuating and throwing off what is already
extravasated. Blood-letting in the Arm or Leg, or opening the Hemorrhoid
Vessels, must be premised in Cases of Ploethora's, or Suppressions of Blood. As
for Astringents, the Syrup of the Juice of Comfrey Roots and Plantane Leaves
(not clarified) mixed with Sugar, is recommended by the Honorable Mr. Boil,
and mightily esteemed in England. Water of Nettles, mixed with Spirit of
Vitriol, is extolled by Hartman and several other Authors. Or,

Take of the Conserve of Roses two Ounces, Prepared Bloodstone a Dram and an
half, Adstringent Crocus of Steel (that is, Vitriol of Steel dissolved in
Water, and precipitated with Oil of Tartar, per deliquium) a Dram, white
Henbane-seeds two Scruples; with Syrup of Purslain make an Electuary.

Take a convenient quantity of the Earth of Vitriol of Steel, well calcined and
dulcified, dissolve it in Spirit of Salt, draw off the Spirit in a Fire of Sand
till the residue come to the consistence of Honey. Upon which digest Rectified
Spirit of Wine for some time, and strain the Tincture for use.

Take of Plantane and Tormentil-water of each an Ounce, innamom-water and
Vinegar of each six Drams, Prepared Red Coral half a Dram, Troches of Amber a
Dram, sealed Earch half a Dram, Mummy six Grains, Laudanum Opiatum one Grain,
Syrup of Comfrey one Ounce Make a Potion.

If the Breast be perplexed, the Pulse weak, Respiration difficult, the Stomac
blown up, the Face Pale, and liable to sudden Flushings, and the Person apt to
swoon, it is a sign that the Blood is congealed in the Stomac. In which case
Crabs Eyes, Coral and Diaphoretic Antimony, and especially Sperma Coeti, are
proper. After the stagnating Blood is attenuated, the remaining Clots may be
carried off by Rhubarb, or a Gentle Vomit. If the obstruction of the Spleen
occasion the recoyling of the Blood in the Vas Breve upon the Stomac, Chalybeat
and opening Remedies are most convenient.

Externally apply Treacle with Saffron and Vinegar of Rasberries to the Stomac.

SECT. VII. Of Pains of the Stomac.
SOmetimes the Breast, or the whole Cavity reaching from the Mouth of the
Stomac to the Midriff, Liver, Spleen and Sweetbread, is siez'd with a
Prodigious Uneasiness and Confused Pain causing the afflicted Person to toss up
and down the Bed. This we call Anxiety. If this Pain be particularly fixed to
the Pit of the Breast, attended by a seeming Compression, with a sense of
Biting and Gnawing, it is called Cardialgia, or Pain in the Stomac. The former
is wandering, arising from the least irritation, and is fitly resembled by the
Anxiety following the Assumption of a Vomit. The latter is fixed, arising from
a Convulsive Contraction, and is of the same Nature as the Pain we are
afflicted with, when we swallow any thing too hard or overbulky.

All Anxieties, excepting such as arise from Suffocation, or the disturbance of
respiration, are owing to the Constriction or uneasiness of the upper and more
sensible Orifice of the Stomac, as appears by their following the assumption of
a Vomit, attending Hysteric Constitutions, and being abated by Belching; their
Accompanying Agues, and Disappearing after Vomiting, and their being caused by
Eating of heavy Suppers. The blame is usually cast upon the Heart, but very
unjustly; for the Heart is an indolent muscle; and if it be irritated, is
siez'd with Convulsions, or what we call a Palpitation; which does not
Accompany Anxieties of the Breast.

The Remote causes are, sharp Poisonous things taken into the Stomac, Corrupt
Food, Wind, Vicious Humors, or Foreign ferments Translated thither,
Inflammations and such like disorders of its Membrans, Convulsions of the
Nerves or Adjacent Parts, and in a Word, whatever provokes the Mouth of the
Stomac to Contract it self.

Anxieties are usually Companions to other Diseases, whose peculiar cure must
be taken care of. In General Aromatic, Discussing Ingredients together with
Vitriol, and Nitrous Medicines are very proper.

The Pain of the stomac was by the Ancients called Cardialgia, by reason of the
frequent Swoonings, Prostration of strength, and Cold sweats that attend it;
tho in the mean while the Heart is not at all afflicted. The left Orifice of
the Stomac is its seat, as being the most sensible tender Part of the whole
Body, richly stored with Nerves, that maintains a near Corr^spondence with all
the Nervous systeme. This Pain is caused by the Preternatural fermentation of
the Bile and other vicious Juices; it is attended by Inflammations; sometimes
it is seated in the back of the stomac, and sometimes glides along the Gullet to
the very shoulders, or resembles the Compression or Squeezing of the Throat.

The remote causes are whatever offends the left Orifice of the stomac, or
provokes it to Contraction. Nephritic Pains, Contorsions of the Backbone,
Depression of the Cartilago Ensiformis, Stones in the Gall Bladder, or
Duodenum, Tumors in the Mesentery and Sweetbread, Hysteric Passions, and
Suppression of the terms, may occasion it by consent. The Boiling of the Juices
in the first Passages, In Intermitting fevers, frequently produces this
symptom, which is removed by Clysters. Wind in an empty stomac, an Acid viscid
matter gnawing and piercing the upper Orifice, (which generally quickens about
an hour or two after Eating) Green or Rusty Bile Tinctured with a Corrosive
acid from the Sweetbread, Corruption or Acidity of the Victuals; Tumors,
Stones, or Ulcers in the stomac; assumption of sublimat Mercury, Arsenic;
Coagulation of Milk, or new Cheese in the stomac occasioned by its mixture with
an Acid, Worms in the stomac, swallowing of Leeches (cured by salt Water)
pieces of Glass, Pins, etc. Are frequently the Authors of the same disorder.
Sometimes it is Periodical, according to the successive return of its causes.

The Symptoms of Anxiety, and Pain of the Stomac are, an Inexpressible sort of
uneasiness about the Pit of the Breast, unquietness, tossing, difficult
Respiration and Swooning, ushered in by Giddiness, and followed by cold Sweats
and a pale Chilness in the Outward Parts. If the Pain seize the bottom of the
Stomac, it ought to be carefully distinguished from the Cholic, by observing if
it creeps upwards, or descends to the Loins and Kidneys; If it accompanies
other Diseases, or comes by it self; the former are signs of a Pain in the
Stomac, the latter of the Cholic.

If Anxiety and Pain of the Stomac proceed from Worms or Wind, it is not very
dangerous, tho the Symptoms may seem dismal. To children it prognosticates
Epilepsies, and to Adult Persons Chronical Diseases. If it arise from curdled
Milk, or a green, rusty, sharp, viscous humor, it is dangerous. If it owe its
being to a Viscous, Pituitous Matter, it is not so violent. If followed by
Convulsions, it is much suspected; as also if it accompany Acute Fevers.

The cure is performed by removing the offending cause, and abating the Pain.
If it depend upon another Disease, it yields to its cure. If it be Essential,
or accompany Fevers, there is nothing equals Antimonial Vomits, which prevent
an Infinity of dismal circumstances. After Vomiting, Purges are proper. But by
reason of their offensiveness to the Stomae, let 'em be mixed with Opiats; a
useful contrivance fot such as are liable to Gripings, or over-purgations; or
stuffed with sharp, Scorbutic, Hypocondriac Humors.

Take of Tartar vitriolated fifteen Grains, Scammony sulphurated two or three
Grains, Laudanum Opiatum one or two Grains, Extract of Troches Alhandal one
Grain, Distilled Oil of Caraways two Drops. Make a Powder.

Take of Quercetanus's Pills of Ammoniac twelve Grains, Magistery of Jalap five
Grains, Scammony sulphurated, and Laudanum Opiatum of each a Grain; with
Essence of Castor make Pills. Four or five Grains of Fulminatory Gold may be
added.

Take of Aloes half an Ounce, Myrrh two Drams, Mastic a Dram, Oriental Saffron
half a Dram, Rectified Flowers of Antimony a Dram; with solutive Syrup of Roses
make a Mass. Dose from fifteen to twenty four Grains. This is the composition
of Poterius his Catholic Pills.

If it be caused by Wind, or the Steams of the Choler and Pancreatic Juice
fermenting in the Duodenum, let Carminative Clysters be injected; As,

Take of Leaves of Mint, Wild Marjoram, and Penny Royal, of each a handful;
Chamomil Flowers, half a handful; Angelica Roots half an Ounce; Bayberries
three Drams. Seeds of Anis, Carrets, and Fennel, of each a Dram. Boil them in
Water and Man's Urine. To Eight or Nine Ounces of the strained Liquor add of
Lenitive Electuary and Electuary of Bayberries four or six Drams, Distilled
Oils of Anniseeds, and Fennelseeds of each half a Scruple, Yelks of Eggs, in
number one. Make a Clyster to be injected warm. It Is proper to add Salt of
Tartar, by reason that at once it whets the Clyster, and attenuats the viscid
humors.

Blood-letting is inconvenient, excepting the case of a Plaethora, or some
notable suppression of Blood.

The second Indication is satisfied by Opiats, as thus: Take of Chamomil water
three Ounces, Cinnamom-water one Ounce, Elixir of Mint, or of Citrons, or of
Oranges, six Drams, Distilled Oil of Chamomil six Drops, Laudanum Opiatum from
three to six Grains, Syrup of Hysop six Drams, Syrup of Canel an Ounce. Mix
them. Dose two or three spoonfuls. It Is a Catholic Mixture for all Pains of the
Stomac. The Spirits of Salarmoniac, Anniseeds, Hartshorn, Tincture of Tartar,
Carminative Spirit de tribus, or, if the Pain be attended by a burning heat,
dulcified Spirit of Nitre, may be conveniently added.

The Remaining Specifics are varied according to the Causes. If Wind be deemed
for the Cause, Chamomil is a noted Specific, by reason of its Anodyn and
Aromatic Virtues. Its Water, its Essence extracted with a Carminative Spirit of
Wine, its Decoction, its Oil drunk with Wine, or applied outwardly with Oil of
Nutmegs, are all of excellent use. Next are the Decoctions of Sassafras,
Hyssop, Dill, Rosemary and Mullein Flowers; The Tincture and Distilled Oil of
Orange or Citron Peel, Spirit and Distilled Oil of Anniseeds, Spirit of
Salarmoniac, Elixir of Mint, etc. If it be attended by a Notable Heat, to these
Aromatic Ingredients we may add Acids, as the Juices and Syrups of Quinces,
Citrons and Pomegranats, Spirit of Nitre dulcified with a triple quantity of
the Spirit of Anniseeds.

If the Anxiety or Pain proceed from Acid sharp Humors, or green rusty Choler,
Absorbent Pouders are proper; as, Take of Prepared Red Coral, Cinnabar of
Antimony, Chalybeat Diaphoretic Antimony, of each Eight Grains, Laudanum
Opiatum a Grain, Distilled Oil of Cloves one Drop, Make a Powder to be
exhibited in Chamomil-water, mixed with Essence of Castor.

If it arise from a Viscous Mucilage, Cream of Tartar and Gum Ammoniac are
proper Ingredients. If it be caused by Sublimat Mercury, let Milk mixed with
Oil of Sweet Almonds, or Oil of Tartar, per deliquium, be exhibited: Let
Prepared Crystal, Venice Treacle and Fresh Butter, be dissolved in
Barley-water, and given to drink; and the Stomac fomented with the Decoction of
Henbane Leaves in Red Wine. Some recommend sealed Earth, with Syrup of Comfrey
for internal use. Pins, Pieces of Glass, and such like sharp things swallowed,
and pricking the Stomac, are removed by drinking Oil of Sweet Almonds and
Broth; or eating a thick Pultise of Rice and Milletseeds.

If the Pain be occasioned by Worms, give Elixir Proprietatis without the Acid,
and Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, or Tartaris'd Essence of Wormwood. As for Old
Persons, who are frequently troubled with a Pain of the Stomac, attended by a
notable Weakness, and Propensity to swoon, the following Pills are of wonderful
Efficacy; Viz. Take of Ambergrise two or three Grains, Mosch and Oriental
Saffron of each a Grain or two, Opium four Grains. Make Pills.

As touching External Applications, Ointments are composed after this manner:
Viz. Take of the Distilled Oil of Chamomil a Dram, Oils of Mace and of Cloves
of each fifteen Drops, Balsam of Peru half a Dram. With Expressed Oil of
Nutmegs make a Liniment, and anoint the Breast and Stomac, applying afterward
a hot Brick.

Plasters are very useful, especially such as are made of Tacamahac, or Gum
Caran, with Venice Treacle, or Balsam of Peru, and Distilled Oil of Amber. The
Stomac may be likewise fomented with the Decoction of Wormwood, Mint, Hyssop,
Marjoram, Chamomil Flowers, Fennel seeds and Juniper Berries, in Wine, or
Vinegar and Water; or a Bag quilted with the same Ingredients and Spices, and
sprinkled with the Oils of Amber and Mint, may be applied hot to the Stomac.

Anodyn Cataplasms are also very useful, especially in Scorbutic Cases; as,
Take of the Leaves of Henbane and Mallows, roasted under Ashes, of each three
Ounces, Meal of Barley and Vetches, reduced to a due consistence, with the
Decoction of Vetches, of each two ounces; the Mucilages of Tragacanth, of
Fleawortseeds and of Quinces, of each two ounces. Make a Cataplasm.

Women's Pains of the Stomac arising from the Faults of the Matrix, are
frequently cured by the application of Pomatum and Goats Tallow. As those which
proceed from Wind by applying a Bag of Bran, tosted Milletseeds and common Salt.

The Disease which we call the Heat of the Stomac, is near akin to those last
described. It Is seated in the Left Orifice of the Stomac, and is only a sense
of Heat and Sulphurous Fumes passing through the Gullet, caused by the
Fermentation of an Acid, with a Fat Oily Alkali in the Stomac. The Remote
Causes are over-acid, or over-fat Victuals, Choler abounding in the Stomac, or
forced thither by Anger, or such like occasions, or an Hypocondriac Acidity
prevailing in the Stomac.

The Burning, or Heat, is frequently accompanied by bitter and musty Belchings;
and if it come without a manifest Cause, portends a Chronical Distemper. The
Specifics that compass its Cure are Absorbent Pouders, such as Chalk, and Cream
of Tartar, the Powder of Burnt Bricks, Bole Armenic, etc. Nutmegs are possessed
of a temperat Oil, fit for moderating the Acrimony of the Humors. The Conserve
of the Fruit of the common Briar, Syrup and Conserve of Oak-Buds, Juice of
House-leek and Nitre dissolved in Elder-flower-water, are much approved.

Take of Prepared Chalk two Drams, Nutmegs, burnt Ivory, of each a Dram;
Mineral Unicorn, Red Coral and Crabs Eyes, of each two Scruples. With four or
six Ounces of Sugar dissolved in Purslain-water make Tablets.

Take of the Conserve of Oak-Buds an Ounce, Prepared Chalk two Drams, Nutmegs
one Dram. Make an Electuary.

If the Evacuations be needful, Tamarinds are most proper. When a stronger
Purgation is desired, Rhubarb, Pills of Ammoniac and Elixir Proprietatis, are
likewise convenient. In an Inveterat case, we have recourse to Vomits.

SECT. VIII. Of Disorders hindering the due Separation of the Chyle from the
Excrements in the Guts.
THE Victuals having made a sufficient stay in the Stomac, repair to the Guts,
under the form of Chyle; which wants to be further prepared by being rid of its
Curd, or gross Excrements, before it enter the Vasa Lactea. This separation of
the good and bad is performed by the Gall, and Pancreatic Juice. The former is
an Oily sulphurous Body, which tinctures the Chyle, and predisposes it for
being converted into Blood. It defends it from Corruption, destroys any remains
of Acidity, and ferments with the Pancreatic Juice, which is a temperat Acid.
Thus they jointly attack the Chyle, attinuat its parts, and precipitat the
Coarser in order to expulsion, while the more refined are received by the Milky
Vessels, and conveyed to the Blood.

If this fermentation and separation be irregularly performed, the Body is
exposed to an infinity of Diseases. In a word, all Chronical Distempers are
owing to the lameness of this performance, and that of the first Digestion.
From these two Juices, viz. the Gall, and Pancreatic Juice, together with the
Pituita, composed of the Saliva and remains of the Chyle in the Stomac, Sylvius
fetched the Causes of a great many Diseases; not only Agues, but all Chronical
Distempers, and Symptoms of the lower Belly. For the least disorder in that
Triumvirat, obstructs the due purification and conveyance of the Chyle, which
cannot but produce many Inconveniences in the Body.

Now each of these Juices is accountable for its own faults. If the Gall be too
copious, it renders the Chyle too Oily, and ought to be purged out. If too
sharp, or saline, it ought to be tempered by dulcified Acids. If too fat or
oily, it ought to be sharpened with volatile Aromatic Salts. If it be lazy, or
do not flow into the Duodenum, it ought to be stirred up, and a passage opened
to it by spirituous volatile Medicines. As for the Juice of the Sweetbread, if
it be too rank, it ought to be carried off. If too acid, or austere (its
austerity causes Constipation of the Belly, Gripings, and Suffocations of the
Womb) it ought to be tempered by Alcali's, both fixed and volatile; as fixed
Salts, Earths, Chalybeat and Antimonial Medicines, Castor, Galangal, Ginger,
distilled aromatic Oils and Spirits, etc. If it be too flat or deficient, it
ought to be retrieved by dulcified mineral acid Spirits, Juice of Quinces, etc.
If the Chyle it self be depraved in the first Digestion, its softer coarse
parts that stick to the Guts, viz. the mucus that defends them from the
sharpness of these two Juices, is likewise disordered, and ought to be put to
rights. If it be too copious, purge it off with Coloquintida. If too viscid,
attenuat it with volatile Salts; if deficient, repair it with viscous Food. But
for so much at it is a difficult Task to trace the peculiar faults of every
Juice apart, we shall touch at such Medicines as are equally calculated for
redressing all their Disorders. Those are the temperat salin Ingredients, as
Arcanum Duplicatum, the Carminative Spirit; Spirit of Nitre dulcified with a
triple quantity of the Spirit of Aniseeds, together with Opiats: As for Example,

Take of Carduus Benedictus, Endive and Mint Waters, of each an Ounce; Sal
Ammoniac, six drams; dulcified Spirit of Mint, a scruple; prepared Crabs Eyes,
a dram; Diaphoretic Antimony, a scruple; Laudanum Opiatum, three grains; Syrup
of Orange-peel, half an ounce. Mix and give a spoonful now and then.

SECT. IX. Of Disorders relating to the Expulsion of the Excrements by Stool.
THE Chyle having dropped its Excrements in the Guts, pursues its Journey to the
Blood. These Excrements ought to be voided in due time. The hindrances of their
regular Evacuation, are such as either impair, enlarge, or deprave it.

CHAP. I. Of the Diseases which impair the Evacuation by Stool.
ARTIC. I. Of Costiveness.
THE Causes of Costiveness respect either the Excrements, or the Guts. Of the
former sort are the paucity of Excrements for want of Victuals: Their hardness
and dryness occasioned by neglect of drinking, excessive sleep and rest;
swallowing Cherry-stones, or Gooseberryskins; eating Chestnuts, Eggs boiled
hard, Crust of Bread, and Medlars: Their viscidity and glutinosity, caused by
viscous Victuals, or an acid, austere Constitution of Body, and want of
Exercise: Their Condensation and Coagulation caused by the austere acidity of
the Pancreatic Juice, and defect of the oily bilious Alcali; all which makes
'em unfit for observing the Peristaltic Motion of the Guts, and dispose 'em to
stagnat.

The Causes relating to the Guts, are Obstructions, or fleshy Excrescences in
the Guts; their Compression, as in Women with Child; their Inflammation or
Gangrene; their growing together after the Corrosion of a Dysentery; the
Paralytic Relaxation of their Fibers, which in Apoplexies eludes Clysters;
Their Convulsive Contractions, occasioned by Colic or Nephritic Pains, which
are frequently augmented by strong irritating Purgatives, but removed by smooth
Laxatives. Now all these Causes hinder the Guts to perform their wonted Office,
of forwarding the Excrements by their Peristaltic Motion.

Sometimes a Costiveness is followed by a loathing, vomiting, gnawing, shooting
Pains in the Belly, uneasiness, watchings, giddiness, and Headache. If it be
inveterat it may occasion a bleeding at Nose. If the Excrements be lodged in
the Colon, they creat an uneasiness, resembling the splenetic Illness, which
frequently imposes upon Physicians. The disorders of the Head, and Hypocondriac
Symptoms are enlarged by Costiveness, which to young Persons threaten an
Epilepsie. If attended by an Iliac Passion, Colic Pains, or a Palsy of the
Guts, it is very dangerous. To Childbearing Women it renders Delivery difficult.

The Cure consists in softening, watering, and attenuating the Excrements; or
in removing the Causes which straiten the Capacity of the Guts, reviving their
Sense, and appeasing their Irritations.

For the former purposes, Oil of sweet Almonds, with solutive Syrup of Roses,
Salt of the tendrels of Vines mixed with Spirit of Salt, soft potch'd Eggs with
Butter, drinking liberally, and especially Raisins, are of good use; Rhubarb
and Aloes are not to be used, unless mixed with Antimonial Ingredients.

Take of the Pulps of Raisins, and Tamarinds, of each an ounce and a half;
Crystals of Tartar, three drams; Powder of Jalap roots, two drams; Scammony
sulphurated, a scruple; laxative Antimony, half a dram. With solutive Syrup of
Roses, make an Electuary. The Decoction of Prunes, or of Senna, with Raisins,
is likewise very effectual. Clarified Whey, mixed with solutive Syrup of Roses,
or impregnated with Tamarinds by Decoction, is an incomparable Medicine for
opening the Belly. It injoys a volatile oily Alcali, which tempers the austere
acidity of the Juice of the Pancreas (the frequent cause of Costiveness) and
moderates the acrimony of scorbutic Salts.

The Decoctions of emollient Herbs in Broth, or that of Figs in Barly-water,
are likewise useful. Some instead of Sugar use Manna for the Conferves of
Roses, and Violets, and mix 'em with the Pulp of Raisins and Cream of Tartar,
with very good Success.

If the Excrements be very hard, and a glassy Pituita beset the Guts, there is
nothing better than Gum Ammoniac. As, take of Mint-water, an ounce; Gum
Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, a dram; solutive Syrup of Roses, half an ounce;
make a Potion for two Doses. If the Operation be difficult, add Tartar
vitriolated, and Scammony sulphurated.

The Tincture, or Essential Salt of Tartar is much approved. But in Cases of
Extremity, we must have recourse to Quicksilver; two or three ounces of which
may be exhibited in Broth, or Oil of sweet Almonds; or it may be infused for a
Month in Wine, shaking the Wine often, of which a spoonful or two is a Dose.
Fulminatory Gold reduced to Pills with Extract of Hellebor, or Syrup of Roses,
is looked upon by some as the last Refuge. But it ought not to be dulcified or
robbed of its Salt, otherwise it becomes diaphoretic. I choose to join it with
Antimonial Nitre, which provokes the Guts to Expulsion; and find it very useful
both in this case, and that of Childrens Gripings. Strong Purgatives ought to
be avoided, by reason that they promote the Contraction of the Guts, and
consequently the induration of the Excrements.

As for External Assistance; Emollient Clysters of the Decoctions of softning
Herbs, mixed with Lenitive Electuaries, Honey, Manna, yelks of Eggs, and softning
Oils, are very proper. Some choose to inject the Decoction of Raisins in Veal
Broth. Turpentine Clysters are very convenient, when Costiveness is caused by
Nephritic Pains. Common Oil, or the Oils of Linseed and Rapeseed are sometimes
more effectual than any other Ingredients. As,

Take of Rape Oil, in which a dram of, Troches Alhandal has been boiled, eight
ounces; with an ounce of Honey of Roses, and the yelk of one Egg; make a Clyster.

If Emollient Clysters prove ineffectual, and the Excrements be notably
hardened, let Sal Gem be added to 'em As for Example,

Take of Chamomil Leaves and Flowers, three handfuls; Elder and Mullein
Flowers, of each a handful; boil them in Water. To nine ounces of the strained
liquor, add of Sal Gem, a Dram; Honey of Roses, an ounce; make a Clyster. If
Wind molest the Guts, add of the distilled Oils of Cumin and Caraway-seeds, of
each half a Scruple. If Sal Gem be insufficient, add a dram of Coloquintida
tied in a Bag to be boiled with the other Ingredients; still observing this
Caution, that when such, sharp Ingredients are added, Oils, and such like
things ought to be omitted, for these cramp the others. And in the last place,
if Coloquintida it self be insufficient, in the room of it add two, three, or
four ounces of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum; but withal, it is still to be
remembered, that if the Guts be irritated, or molested with Contractions, the
simple softning Clysters are only proper; and that the use of such sharp
Ingredients is to be nicely confined to the case of the insensibility and
relaxation of the Guts.

Next to Clysters are Suppositories made of Salt, Honey, Powder of black
Hellebor, and a small quantity of Sal Gem. Sylvius, and other Authors, are very
diffuse in commending Suppositories of Alum, either mixed in Powder with
Tragacanth dissolved in white Lilly-water; or a piece of Rock alum cut into
the form of a Suppository, and anointed with Oil of sweet Almonds. But during
the use of Clysters and Suppositories, it is proper to exhibit some laxative
inwardly, lest an ineffectual Provocation of the Guts should creat an
Inflammation. It Is likewise convenient in the mean while to foment or bathe the
Belly; and after bathing, to anoint it, thus;

Take of the Leaves of common Mallows, Marshmallows, Plantane, and Wormwood,
of each a handful; Chamomil and Melilot Flowers, of each half a handful; Seeds
of Fenugrec, Linseeds and Cucumberseeds, of each a scruple. Boil them in Wine
till two parts be consumed. Foment the Belly with the Decoction.

Take of the Oils of sweet Almonds, Violets, Lillies, Roses, Chamomil, and
Spikenard, of each half an ounce; Goose fat an ounce; with a little of the
Plaster of Bayberries, make a Liniment; with which anoint the Belly after
fomentation.

If the motion of the Intestines be much impaired, let the Ointments be
sharpened with Bull's Gall, and Sal Gem; or apply a Plaster of Bull's Gall,
and Oil of Coloquintida to the Navel. Zivet, especially in Colic Pains, used
the same way, is a valuable Secret. The Ointment of Soubread softened with Oil
of Coloquintida, is very useful for the same purpose. As also Elaterum, or
Scammony, or Aloe, mixed with Oil of Coloquintida. Some mix Goose fat with a
roasted Apple, and apply it to the Belly. Others apply Oil of Poplar with Hiera
Picra to the Soles of the Feet. Some choose to anoint their Fingers with Rape
or Linseed Oil, and so thrust 'em into the Fundament; and they say it is a very
effectual Method.

Coughing and sneezing are recommended by Platerus, as fit means for forwarding
the Excrements. Meibomius gives an instance of a Prince that was wont to cause
his Servant to whip him to Stool.

ARTIC. II. Of the Iliac Passion.
THE Iliac Passion is an extreme Costiveness, pain about the Navel, and voiding
of the Excrements upwards, caused by the inverted peristaltic Motion of the
Guts. If the Inversion of the peristaltic Motion commence from the Pylorus, it
creates Vomiting; if from the Guts, which are a Continuation of the Membran of
the Stomac, it produces the same Symptoms. For the most part it takes its rise
from the Ileum, though sometimes it begins at the Rectum, or Colon; as appears by
their Inflammations, and other observables in dead Bodies.

The Causes are Ulcers of the Guts, extreme Costiveness, or acid austere
Excrements irritating their Fibers, and causing Obstructions, especially about
the Caecum; a Rupture; The Corrugation of the Guts by a Gangrene, mistaken by
some for a twisting of 'em round one another, a thing inconsistent with their
ligation to the Mesentery; The running of one Gut into another, caused by Wind
distending one beyond its natural Capacity, while the other retains its wonted
bulk, apt to be swallowed up by the larger; (This entrance of one Gut into
another, may be promoted by Persons unquietness and tossing in the extremity of
their Pain; Convulsive Contractions of the Guts, Coalition of their Sides,
Corrosion of their Valves, and Inflammations caused by over-acid Juices, and
attended by Fevers, which, if a Gangrene ensue, become malignant.

The signs of an approaching Iliac Passion, are extreme Gostiveness, retraction
of the Anus, a loathing, vomiting, and intolerable Pains in the small Guts; and
if a Hiccough ensue, it threatens Death. If the Anus be much drawn back, so
that a Clyster-pipe cannot enter, it is a sign, that the gross Intestines are
affected. If otherwise, the small Guts are only touched. If the greatest Pain
be seated in the Epigastrium, the Ilium is most oppressed. A shooting burning
Pain in one particular part of the Belly, a Lipyria Fever, Thirst, and ardor
of the Stomac, are signs of an Inflammation. If the Pain be over, and followed
by cold Sweats, difficult Respiration, Swoonings, and sometimes Convulsions,
it is a sign of a Gangrene. In fine, the common Symptoms of an Iliac Passion are
hardness of the Belly, suppression of Urine, loathing, vomiting, first of the
Contents of the Stomac, and next the Excrements; a stinking habit of Body,
frequent Swoonings, insufferable griping Pains in the Guts, a prodigious
anxiety, and sometimes vomiting of Clysters.

Inflammations or Gangrenes are Mortal. If the upper Gut descend into the
lower, it is a fatal Symptom. If the lower ascend into the higher, it is curable.
If the Disease proceed from a Rupture, or hardened Excrements, it is not
desperate. If Sleep succeed to the taking of Opiats, it is a hopeful
Circumstance. The Hiccough, Deasness, Convulsions, or Doatings, are bad
Consequences. If the E^^rements be vomited, and if the Sweat, Breath,
Belchings, and Wind voided downwards, stink much; it is a dangerous case.

The Cure consists in removing the Irritation, and retrieving the natural
peristaltic Motion of the Guts. In general, the following Rules will direct us;

1. If the Excrements be hardened, they must be softened with Clysters betimes,
else we labor in Vain. 2. All Purgatives are improper, till such time as the
Guts and Stomac are appeased, and restored to their natural Motion, 3. Though the
Symptoms disappear, we ought not to think our selves secure, till large
quantities of humors be voided downwards, eitheir by a natural or artificial
force. 4. The weakness and dejection of the Parts, which is caused by the stink
attending this Disease, ought be always accounted for by exhibiting Confection
Alkermes, Spirit of Triacle camphoris'd, Cinnamom Water, Ambergrise, etc. 5. In
case of a Gangrene, Opiats are very noxious; as likewise in that of
Obstructions, till such time as the Belly be well opened. When the Disease
proceeds from a violent Irritation, and is attended by a furious everlasting
Vomiting, Opiats may be mixed with Stomachical Medicines, while the Person is
yet strong. 6. Whatever is used, whether outwardly, or inwardly, must be warm,
as well in the time of Recovery, as that of the fit.

Now, as to particular Cases. If the small Guts only be inverted, emollient
Clysters, quickened, if need be, with Coloquintida, Sal Gem, or Antimonial
Infusions; or those of the Carminative Seeds boiled in Child's Urine and Water;
or of the Decoction of Sheeps Guts and Caul; or in case of an Inflammation,
those of Nitre and Barly-water; are proper. But if the motion of the gross
Intestines be likewise inverted, all such Clysters promote the Irritation.
Wherefore we are obliged in such cases to endeavor the Cure by temperat,
softening, laxative, lubrical Potions; as the Decoction of emollient Herbs in
Broth, mixed with the Oil of sweet Almonds; or the Oil of sweet Almonds new
drawn, given to the quantity of three Ounces in Broth, with Sperma Gaeti. Or,

Take of the Decoction of Raisins, with Tamarinds, half a Pound; Oil of sweet
Almonds, two, or three Ounces; Syrup of Apples, an ounce and a half.

The Decoction of Rapes, or that of Chammomil Flowers with fresh Butter; or the
juice of rotten Apples, is of good use. Some apply the Pulp of Apples with
Saffron to the Belly. In a word, the same Method is to be followed in curing
this Disease, as we recommended in the last Article.

When all other Medicines are ineffectual, we have recourse to leaden Bullers,
and Quicksilver. But in case of an Inflammation, Rupture, Gangrene, or descent
of the upper Gut into the lower, the former are very noxious; and even in other
Cases they are frequently either insufficient, or hurtful. Wherefore
Quicksilver claims the Preference. Before we use it, the Body ought to be
prepared with lubrical things, such as Oil of sweet Almonds, or Sperma Caeti.
Then exhibit three, four, and sometimes eight ounces of purified Quicksilver,
together with Oil of sweet Almonds, and Mint-water. If it do not succeed at
first, let it be frequently repeated. And in the mean while inject emollient
Clysters, foment the Belly with softening ^^coctions, or set the Person into a
Bath. If the Mercury after frequent using do not pass, make the Clysters
sharper; anoint the Belly with Ointment of Soubread, and Oil of Coloquintida,
and apply the Plaster of Hemloc with Gum Ammoniac to soften the Excrements. If
the Mercury disturb the Mouth, Throat, and Gums, Gargle 'em with Honey of Roses,
and Syrup of Violets. After the Body's opened, it is likewise proper to exhibit
the lunar Bezoar, and diaphoretic Antimony for carrying off the remains of the
Mercury.

Besides the above mentioned Emollient, and temperating Potions, some commend
salt of Wormwood, with Juice of Limons; or the Spirit of Turpentin; or when the
Guts are free of Inflammations, Venice Triacle dissolved in Wine; for removing
the Irritations; or the following Recipe's;

Take of Mint-water, two ounces; Cinnamom and Zedoary Waters, of each half an
ounce; Salt of Wormwood, half a dram; Laudanum Opiatum, two or three Grains;
Syrup of Buckthorn, six drams. Make a Potion.

Take of Fennel, Mint, and carminative Waters, of each an ounce; Spirit of
Salarmoniac anisated, a dram and a half; Essence of Opium, a dram, Syrup of
Mint, six drams; mix and exhibit in the beginning of the Disease.

Take of prepared Amber, Diaphoretic Antimony, Cinnabar of Antimony, of each
half a Scruple; Laudanum Opiatum two grains; Camphyr, one grain; make a Powder
Mineral Bezoar, and volatile Salt of Hartshorn are likewise proper Ingredients.

If the Disease be caused by an Inflammation, let blood both in the Arm and
Leg; let the Person abstain from eating; let Clysters of Nitre, Milk, and
mucilage of Fleawort-seeds be injected; and exhibit a Potion of Mint-water,
Spirit of Venice Treacle camphoriz'd, Salt of Wormwood, and Syrup of Buckthorn.
Externally, anoint with the Ointment of Marshmallows, six drams; Oil of
Chamomil, half an ounce; distilled Oils of Juniper, and of Turpentin, of each a
dram and a half, mixed. After anointing, lay a hot Brick upon the Belly.
Sometimes a Gangrene of the Guts causes a retraction of the Yard and Testicles,
and it always ends in Death. If the Disease proceed from a Rupture, let sharp
Antimonial Clysters be injected, and the Intestines reinstated in their proper
Places. If it proceed from an Ulcer, emollient laxative things are only to be
used.

As for outward Applications, it is usual to anoint the Belly with Distilled Oil
of Chamomil mixed with the fat of Geese or Ducks, for softening the Excrements;
or mixed with Ointment of Soubread and Oil of Coloquyntida, for provoking to
Stool. Cow dung applied to the Belly is sometimes very effectual for mitigating
the Pains. Some recommend the hot Caul of a gelded Lamb, others the Blood of
Bats, or the castcoals of Serpents boiled with Oil of Roses, for External
Application. Cataplasms of sheeps dung boiled with milk, or rotten Apples with
Saffron, or Baths of the Decoction of Chamomil and Melilot-flowers, and
Juniperberries, are proper for the same purpose.

CHAP. II. Of the Diseases which Enlarge the Quantity of Excrements voided by
Stool.
ART. I. Of a Looseness.
WHen the Excrements are more frequently, or copiously vomited, than they ought
to be, we call it a Diarrhaea, or Looseness, which varies according to the
Color and consistence of the Excrements it discharges. If it be a critical
Looseness, caused by the Translation of Morbific Matter, or suppression of some
wonted Evacuation, change of Season, or Diet, etc. it is of no great importance.
That which we have now before us, is a preternatural Looseness, which is
sometimes malignant and contagious, attended by cold Sweats, great Anxiety, and
propagating it self by the Breath; Sometimes more Benign. Sometimes it comes
alone, at other times it is the Symptom of some other Disease, of which nature
are the Loosenesses which attend the Beginning, or Increase of Malignant
Fevers, or those peculiar to Phthisical consumptive Persons, which we style,
Melting, by reason that they drain the nourishing Juice. Sometimes we meet with
Periodical Loosenesses, especially among Cacochymical Persons, which return
every Quarter of a Year, Month, etc.

The Radical Subject of a Looseness is the Mass of Blood, which deposits it
Recrements either in the Form of Serum, through the Glands of the Guts, or in that
of Gall, or Pancreatic Juice; not that it is actually stuffed with so much
Filth as is evacuated, but it degenerates and corrupts, as the Looseness
advances. If the Bilious Particles prevail, and give the Excrements an high
Tincture, it is called a Bilious Diarrhaea; If the Pancreatic Juice, or Serum,
it is entitled Serous: If Gross, Viscid, Indigested Humors be voided without any
notable Tincture, it is a Pituitous Looseness.

The Cause of Loosenesses is a sharp Volatile Humor, sometimes Acid, sometimes
Alcalin, that either irritates the Guts, or ferments with the Natural Acid of
the Blood, melting down its Mass into Serum, much after the manner of
Artificial Purgatives. This Humor is an Enemy to the Acid of the Stomac, and
always depresses its Appetit. Nay, ofttimes a depraved Acid in the Stomac is
the occasional cause of a Looseness. Hence, whatever weakens the Ferment of the
Stomac, promotes the other, and what cures the other fortifies the Stomac.
Sometimes the Internal Corruption of the Humors, independent of the Stomac
occasions it, which frequently molests such as are of a thick Texture and unfit
for a free Transpiration, by reason that the Serum not finding an easy Passage
on the Surface of the Body, retires to the Intestines to procure a vent.
Melting Consumptive and Habitual Loosenesses proceed from the Deficiency of the
Acid in the Stomac, and Acrimony of the Bile, imparted to the Chyle. All
Corruptible things, or such as are apt to ferment, do of course dispose the
Humors to a Looseness.

The Signs are, a Loathing and Dejection of Appetit, immoderat Thirst,
Weakness, Suppression of Sweat, and Urine; a Noise, and some sort of Griping in
the Guts immediately before going to stool. If it come to a great height, it is
attended by Anxieties of the Breast, Swoonings and Cold Sweats, especially upon
the Forehead.

If a Looseness accompany Spotted Fevers, or invade the Person in the
Beginning of an Acute Fever, it is very dangerous, by reason that it weakens
the Patient, disturbs the Concoction and Separation of the Febril Matter, and
is the Effect of the Feverish Colliquation; and upon that account ought always
to be stopped, or at least curbed. If a Looseness be followed by Vomiting, it is
a good sign. In a word, it is accounted dangerous, or favorable, according as
the Stomac is in good or bad case. If the Excrements be much degenerat from
their natural condition, as very gross, white, green or Saffron colored; If
frothy, gluy, pale, slippery and scantly; Especially if they be black, rusty,
fat, livid, or foetid, they portend danger. If the Patient begin to void large
quantities of Urin, and sweat plentifully, we look upon the Looseness as
Declining. If a melting Looseness follow Acute Fevers, Consumptions,
Phthisics, Hectics, etc. it is very dangerous.

A Critical Looseness ought not to be stopped, unless it exceed Bounds.
Symptomatical and Epidemical Loosnesses are those which require the greatest
attention. The Indications of Cure, with relation to them, are these following:
1. The sharp Ferment ought to be curbed by moderat and thickening Medicines. 2.
The Blood ought to be purified by Sudorifics. 3. The Irritating Cause tempered
by Absorbents. 3. The Fury of the Spirits, and Sense of Irritation, abated by
Opiats. 5. The Corrupt Humors gently evacuated. 6. The Stomac ought to be
restored to its due strength and vigor. In order to obtain these Ends, let us
take notice of the following Remarks.

1. It Is impossible to cure a Looseness without having regard to the Stomac.
Therefore let Wine, and the Preparations of Wormwoad, Mint, Quinces, Cinnamom,
etc. and the External Fomentations and Inunctions recommended above, be used in
this Case. Let all Cold Drinks be prohibited, and as little of any Liquor
allowed as possibly can be done. 2. All Purgatives are improper against
Symptomatical and malignant Loosenesses. They ought rather to be appeased than
provoked. 3. In all Malignant, Contagious, Epidemical Loosenesses,
Alexioharmacal Ingredients, such as Spirit of Venice Treacle, Bezoardic
Tincture, with Opium, sealed Earth, fixed Antimonial Preparations, etc. are
much the best. If the Looseness proceed only from an Irritation of the Guts,
they are not so needful. 4. It Is not proper to purge in the beginning of any
Looseness whatsoever. The best way is either to suffer it to go on a little, if
it do not exceed measure, or first to check the Boiling Humors, and then, if
need be, to wash off the Dregs with Rhubarb and Tamarinds, or Gentle Clysters.
5. If a Loathing, Giddiness, Anxiety of the Breast, and Disorders of the Stomac
accompany a Looseness in the beginning, let a Vomit be exhibited. 6.
Astringents, as such, are not properly any part of the Cure of a Looseness.
After the Cure of a tedious Looseness is finished, they may be useful for
strengthening the Fibers of the Guts. But to what Purpose should the Irritating
and Floating Humors be bound up? It Is better they should take their Course than
be thrown upon a Nobler Part. It Is true, Tormentil, sealed Earth, Sugar of
Lead, and such like things, are very useful; but it is not upon the account of
their Adstringent, but Absorbing and Correcting Virtue. 7. It Is the Ridiculous
Humor of some to avoid Wine. Whereas nothing is more Friendly to the Stomac, or
more proper against a Looseness.

Of All the Medicines used against Loosenesses, Opium is the Head. It Is a
Powerful Controuler of all Tumultuous Motions. It Is exhibited in Vinegar. Or
rather, Recent Diascordium may supply its Room, being given from a Dram to two
Drams. Some extol the use of two Eggs boiled very hard, sprinkled with
Rose-Vinegar, and Powder of Mace and Nutmegs. Others recommend a Quince filled
with Wax and Roasted; Goats Tallow melted and mixed with Flower, Extract of
Tormentil dissolved in Cinnamon or Mint Water together with a Grain or two of
Laudanum, the Juice of Austere Fruits such as Medlars and Quinces mixed with
the Juice of Arsmart, The Rob made from the Juice of unripe sorbe Apples, the
Conserve of Quinces mixed with Distilled Oil of Cinnamon and Laudanum Opiatum,
The Decoction of Masticwood, (or in the Room of it, that of Mastic it self with
Mace and Cinnamon mixed with Gelley of Hartshorn for Ordinary Drink, or Water
impregnated with the fumes of Mastic) The Decoction of Juniper Berries, or that
of Hartshorn and Stag's Pizzle, or the Decoction of Gum Arabic and Sugar in
Ale, The Golden Earth found in Gold Mines dissolved with the Spirit of the
Vitriol of Steel, Whey or Vinegar impregnated with Steel, Crocus of Stee^,
Dulcified Gaput Mortuum of Vitriol exhibited in an Acid Vehicle, Coral, Crystal
mixed with Hysteric Laudanum and Chalybeat Bezoar (against a Bilious Looseness)
Blood Stone, Sugar of Lead, Plantan, Purslain, Tormentil and Columbin-Waters,
and the Juices of Quinces and Pomgranats. These are all specifics in this
Disease.

Take of Plantan-Water, three Ounces, Cinnamom-Water an Ounce, Fracastorius's
Diascordium two Drams, Prepared Red Coral two Scruples, sealed Earth a Scruple,
Syrup of Myrtles an Ounce. Make a Potion. Give a spoonful now and then. Vinegar
of Wine, or of Roses, and Diaphoretic Antimony may be added.

Take of Mint-water two Ounces, Cinnamom-water two Drams, Extract of Tormentil
eight Grains, Astringent Crocus of Steel and Hysteric Laudanum of each six
Grains, Syrup of Quinces half an Ounce. Mix for one Dose. Dulcified Spirit of
Nitre may be added. Or to temper the sharpness of the humors, an Emulsion may
be made from sweet Almonds and White Poppy Seeds with the Decoction of
Hartshorn, and mixed with absorbent Powders.

Take of Vitriolated Conserve of Mint, an Ounce and a half; Diascordium, half
an Ounce; Sealed Earth a Dram: Chalybeat Diaphoretic Antimony, and Extract of
Tormentil Roots, of each half a Dram. With Syrup of Masterwort make an
Electuary. Dose two Drams twice or thrice aday.

When a Looseness is attended by Gripings, black excrements, thirst and
inappetency, give what follows. Take Conserve of Mint and Diascordium, of each
two Ounces; Rhubarb a Dram; Red Coral, two Scruples; With Syrup of Coral make
an Electuary. Of which let the Patient take a Convenient quantity frequently.

In malignant Epidemical Loosenesses, Alexipharmacal sudorifics ought to be
mixed with proper specifics, as Spirit of Venice Treacle with Spirit of Mastic,
Sealed Earth, and Volatile Salt of Vipers, etc. Or thus,

Take of Sealed Earth and Diaphoretic Antimony, of each fifteen Grains; Powder
of Mace, four Grains; Volatile Salt of Vipers, six Grains. Mix for one Dose.

Take of Mint and Scordium Waters, of each an Ounce and a half; Cinnamon Water,
three Drams; Vinegar of Wine, six Drams; Venice Treacle, a Dram and a half;
Mineral Bezoar, half a Dram; Syrup of Quinces, three Drams. Mix for a Potion.

In the mean while, let the Stomac be fortified by the Juice of Quinces,
Dulcified Spirit of Salt, or a Draught of Generous Wine. In case of a Tenesmus
inject Milk-Clysters frequently. If a Looseness be caused by Poison, give
twelve Grains of Emerald with Conserve of Quinces.

The External Remedies against Loosenesses are, Venice Treacle, mixed with
Balsam of Peru and the Distilled Oil of Mastic, sprinkled with the Distilled
Oil of Mace and Applied to the Belly; or the Crust of Tosted Bread soaked in
Vinegar and Covered with Cloves and Nutmegs in Powder; or a Cataplasm of yest,
Powder of Mint Leaves, Zedoary Cloves, Galangal, Ginger and Rose Vinegar,
applied to the Navel. Fomentations of the same place with Decoctions of
Aromatic Ingredients, or Inunctions with Distilled Aromatic Oils incorporated
with Expressed Oil of Nutmegs (applying after Inunction a hot Brick) are also
proper.

If there be a necessity of cleansing the Intestines, either in the Beginning
or Declension of the Disease, give half a Dram of Rhubarb with eight Grains of
Nutmegs, and three Grains of Hysteric Laudanum; Or give the Decoction of
Tamarinds. But these things are most proper in the Declination of the Disease;
or if in the beginning, it must be, when the humors are hurried into the Guts
from other Parts, or the first Passages are very foul, as when a Looseness
proceeds from Summer Fruits.

If the Great Intestines are the Seat of the Evil, Clysters of Milk are proper,
as also when the Person goes frequently to stool and voids but little, which is
a sign of the Acrimony of the humor. In that case Emollient Clysters of
Chalybeat Milk, Yelks of Eggs, Turpentin and Honey of Roses are very useful. If
the Anus be excoriated, foment with Milk in which Emollient-Herbs are Boiled.

If a Looseness be occasioned by over violent Purgation, let Laudanum Opiatum,
Wormwood, Rue, Essence of Venice Treacle mixed with Anodyns, and Diaphoretic
Powders, such as Sealed Earth, Sugar of Lead, Blood stone, Diaphoretic
Antimony, etc. Be exhibited: Let Venice Treacle be applied to the Navel, or the
Belly be fomented with Wine, in which Wormwood, Mint and Spices are Boiled. If
the Person be Gripped, or Molested with a perpetual Itch of going to stool,
inject a Clyster of warm Milk in which Venice Treacle is dissolved.

If a Looseness proceed from an Error in the use of External things, as Summer
Fruits, etc. It ought not to be stopped unless it overbear, or cause an
inappetency and weak Concoction, in which case we exhibit the absorbent Powders
with Opiats in the same method as above.

If a Looseness proceed from the transferring of the morbific matter, to which
Catarrhous Persons are obnoxious in the Nightime, and which the Ancients
fancied to flow from the Brain; it is cured by aversion and derivation, by
Issues and Blistering Plasters.

If a Looseness be caused by the spontaneous course of humors, it is cured as a
common Looseness, or by Chalybeat Medicines and Bathing. But these last sorts
of Loosenesses require no Cure, unless they prove exorbitant.

ART. II. Of the Disease called Cholera.
A Cholera is a Disease in which the vicious humors are impetuously thrown out
both upwards and downwards, with a violent Pain in the Stomac and Belly,
distention of the Hypocondria, Heartburnings, Thirst, Perplexity of the Breast,
a swift and sometimes small pulse, frequent swoonings, unquietness, tossing, a
Coldness in the outer Parts, Cold sweats especially upon the forehead,
prostration of strength, and at last Convulsions and Hiccoughs.

This disease is called a wet Cholera, in opposition to that called dry, i^
which nothing but wind is voided upwards and downwards. It differs from a
Diarrhaea only Gradually, the symptoms being the same, but only mere fierce.
The Causes are the same, but more Exalted and Virulent. The Seat of the illness
is the Duodenum and Pylorus, where the Enraged matter irritates the Choleric
and Pancreatical Passages, through which the Blood being overcharged with
Heteregeneous particles endeavors to discharge 'em.

The occasional Causes are the same as those of a Looseness. The Corruption and
Acrimony of Food in the Stomac, the Assumption of sharp Caustic Medicines, such
as Antimony, Arsenic Mercury, etc. And the Internal malignity or depravation of
the humors. It Is an acute disease and quickly finishes its Course. If the
Excrements be Livid, Fetid, Black, or Corrosive, if it accompany malignant
Fevers, especially in the Beginning, and if the Stomac be very much
disordered, it proves fatal. It observes a Tertian Period in its Exasperations;
And frequently relapses after an apparent Cure.

As touching the Cure; Alexipharmacal Medicines are absolutely necessary: If it
proceed from corruptible and fermenting things taken inwardly, such as Summer
Fruits, etc. we must not be over-forward in stopping it, especially, if such
things be voided as ought to be so. Far less is it allowable to give
Purgatives, for they increase the Tumult. Opiats indeed ought never to be
omitted. If the Patient be extreme weak, give 'em in small Doses, and
frequently; otherwise very large Doses are required. We mix 'em with Bezoars,
and diaphoretic Antimony. All cold drink must be avoided. Wine is very proper.
Watery diluting Decoctions are likewise very necessary for eluding the edge of
the Salts. In the declination of the Disease, the Stomac ought to be
corroborated with proper Remedies.

The Remedies prescribed in the last Article are all convenient here;
especially the Juice of Mint, Sal Prunel, Tincture of the golden Earth made
with Spirit of Salt, (a notable astringent) prepared Crystal, Emerald,
Chalybeats, etc. If the Disease be caused by Poison, Oil of sweet Almonds,
Milk, fresh Butter, and absorbent Powders, especially prepared Crystal, and
sealed Earth: If it proceed from the abuse of Summer Fruits, besides gentle
discussives and cleansers, the fixed Salts and Earths, mixed with Opiats, are
proper. If it arise from a malign ferment, the Juices and Syrups of Pomgranats,
red Corants, Barberries, Syrup of Coral, Spirit of Vitriol of Steel, sealed
Earth mixed with Spirit of Vitriol, Solar, Jovial, Martial Bezoar, Bezoardic
Tincture, and such like, are convenient.

Opium, Diascordium, Conserve of Mint, Spirit and Extract of Venice Treacle,
and especially Camphyr, are the most noted general Specifics against a Cholera.
The forms of Recipe's are the same as above. As,

Take of Venice Treacle, a dram; sealed Earth, two Scruples, mix for a Bolus,
to be taken in a spoonful of Vinegar of Wine.

Take of the Conserve of Mint, a dram; sealed Earth, prepat'd red Coral, and
prepared Crystal, of each half a dram; Laudanum Opiatum, two grains. With
Quercetanus's Syrup of Coral make an Electuary.

Take of Purslain Water, three ounces; Cinnamom Water, half an ounce; Spirit of
Venice Treacle, and Diascordium, of each two drams; Confection Alkermes, one
dram; unburnt Hartshorn, half a dram; Syrup of Coral six drams. Make a Potion
to be given by spoonfuls.

Take of Mint Water, two ounces; Cinnamom Water, Bezoardic Vinegar, and Spirit
of Venice Treacle camphoris'd, of each half an Ounce; with Syrup of the Juice
of Citrons make a Potion.

The external Remedies mentioned in the last Article, are proper in this.
Spirit of Wine camphoris'd, mixed with Venice Treacle, is a noble Epithema for
the Stomac, if applied hot with several folds of Linen.

If a Cholera proceed from an Error in Diet, it sometimes happens, but very
rarely, that a gentle cleansing Medicine would not be amiss; Such as are Whey
altered with solutive Syrup of Roses, or Pulp of Tamarinds, gentle Infusions of
Rhubarb, etc. But Milk Clysters, with Venice Treacle, or Diascordium dissolved
in 'em, are always useful.

If a Cholera be caused by the violence of purging Medicines, Laudanum Opiatum,
or Treacle, or Confection Alkermes dissolved in warm Wine, is a Sovereign
Remedy. Essence of Venice Treacle mixed with that of Opium, and given to forty
drops twice or thrice a day, is very successful against a Cholera caused by
Emetics.

ART. III. Of a Lienteria.
A Lienteria is a Looseness, by which the Meat is sent out before it be
altered. The Causes are an Ulcer in the Stomac, or a sharp scorbutic Salt
conveyed thither with the Saliva, and by the Glandules of its Membrans, or
corrupted Victuals, irritating the Stomac to an early contraction, and
evacuation of what it contains: The Laxity of the Pylorus, occasioned by much
drinking; and the Deficiency, Laziness, and Depravation of the Stomachical
ferment leaving the Meat undigested.

The use of Signs is to distinguish the Causes. If the Stomac be irritated,
there is a gnawing heat in the Stomac, accompanied by Vomiting. If the ferment
be weak, the Appetit is dejected, the Breath fetid, and the Cavity of the
Stomac and Guts molested with Wind and Noise. A Chronical Lienteria exhausts
the Strengh, and tends to a Consumption. If it follow other heavy Distempers,
or accompany a Scurvy, or seize Women with Child, it is very dangerous.

The Indications of Cure are to corroborat the Stomac and Pylorus, by Medicines
prescribed in the first Section of this Book; and mitigat the irritating
Acrimony of Humors, by such Remedies as are used against a Cholera, Looseness,
etc. Gentle Vomits are proper, if the Stomac be stuffed with pituitous
Excrements. But such as are fat and oily ought to be avoided, for they relaxat
the Fibers of the Stomac. If Vomiting be not convenient, gentle astringent
Purgatives are allowable, such as Rhubarb, or the Pills of Aloe; or those of
Mastic. But by all means, let strong Purges be prohibited. If there be any
suspicion of Poison, or if the Lienteria proceed from Summer Fruits, and such
corruptible things, let Alexipharmacal Medicines be exhibited.

As for corroborating Medicines, see the Chapter of Vomiting, and that of a
looseness. The Antiscorbutic Tincture of Coral, Alum used as above, and Eggs
boiled hard, with Nutmegs and Rose Vinegar, Spirit of Salt, etc. are of noted
virtue for that purpose. The Irritation of the Stomac is cured by Opiats mixed
with Spices, and absorbent Powders, as in a looseness.

Externally we apply as above directed, in the Chapters of Inappetency,
Vomiting, etc.

ART. IV. Of the Looseness, called Caeliaca.
A Caeliaca is a Looseness, by which the Chyle is voided together with the
Excrements. The Stomac is not faulty, Chylification being duly performed there.
But the blame must either be cast on the Bile that is stopped in its Passage to
the Guts, or degenerat from its saline Acrimony, and so unfit for separating
the Chyle; or on the milky Vessels, through which the Chyle ought to pass, as
having their Orifices covered with slime, or shut by the Contraction and
Corrosion of the Intestines by loosenesses, etc. Sometimes the obstruction of
the Glandules of the Mesentery, will also cause a Caeliaca.

If the Bile be defective, the Excrements are white, pale, and parti-colour'd,
without any sign of Separation. If the obstruction of the milky Vessels cause
the Disease, the Excrements are tinged yellow; and the Chyle, tho voided at the
same time, is but loosely mixed with 'em, as having been separated in the Guts,
but disappointed of its Passage.

If the Bile be lazy, or its Passage stopped, we use the Medicines prescribed
for the Jaundice. If the milky Vessels are blocked up, we endeavor to remove
the slime that besets 'em by attenuating, opening Ingredients. Astringents are
not proper. Mint, Wormwood, the opening Roots, Rhubarb, Fennel, Aniseeds, Gum
Ammoniac distilled with Verdigrese, Sulphur, and Oxymel, etc. are fit for
opening the Obstructions. After which the Tincture of Tartar, or the Tincture
of the dross of Regulus Antimonii, or Chalybeat Tinctures, mixed with the
Spirit of Salarmoniac, or that of Urine, or that de tribus, are very convenient.

CHAP. III. Of Depravations relating to the Expulsion of Excrements by Stool.
ART. I. Of a Desentery, Tenesmus, Hepatic Flux, and Ieching of the Anus.
A Dysentery properly so called, is a voiding of Blood and purulent Matter,
with throws, and gripings. In which sense it is distinguished from the painless
evacuation of thin, watery Blood from the internal Hemorroid Veins, called by
the Ancien^s, the Hepatic Flux; and likewise from the natural discharge of
Blood, independent of the Guts, caused by its redundancy in the Body, as after
Amputations, suppression of the Terms, etc. or by its Acrimony opening the
Vessels, or the obstruction of the Bowels hindering its Circulation.

The Cause is some sharp acid, that irritates the Guts, provokes 'em to
Contractions, assembles the Blood by virtue of its Provocation, and corrodes
the Orifices of the Blood Vessels. This may proceed from the Corruption of
Matter in the Guts; Summer Fruits, Sugar, Honey, new Wine, which become acid,
and ferment with the Bile; Mercury, Coloquintida, Antimony, Lead, the coarse
Powder of an Adamant, Worms, etc. which vellicat the Guts, and amass sharp
humors in 'em. If the acidity and sharpness be owing to these Causes, the
Dysentery is benign and free of Contagion. But the cause of an epidemical
malignant contagious looseness, is a corrupt, volatile acid, not lodged in the
Guts, but immediately reigning in the Blood, perverting its texture, opening
the Vessels inserted into the Guts, and provoking 'em to convulsive
Contractions; from whence ensue a malignant Fever, Gripings, and bloody
Stools. So that tho previous Excoriations may take place in benign Dysenteries,
there is no occasion for 'em in the contagious malignant sort. It being a
sufficient cause of bloody Stools, that the caustic ferment is a mortal Enemy
to the Guts, like to that of Antimony, or Arsenic, that perpetually thwarts and
provokes 'em to Convulsions. Upon which they squeeze out their blood together
with their nutritious Juice, that they are not then in a Capacity to receive;
and which is by some taken for the Mucus of the Guts, whereas the large
Quantities that are voided do sufficiently evince the contrary.

The signs are these. The sick Person is seized with unsufferable griping Pains
in the Guts, followed by frequent stools, at first of whitish matter,
afterward of Blood and slime mixed together. When he goes to Stool, he is
grievously tortured, and the Guts and Bowels seem to descend. If the Dysentery
be malignant, it is wonderfully contagious; propagating it self not only by the
Breath, but by using the same Clyster-pipe. A malignant Fever, and all its
dismal Symptoms accompany it. If in the progress of the Disease, pure Blood be
voided, it is a sign of the corrosion or opening of some large Vessel in the
Guts, or Mesentery. If a Dysentery be unseasonably stopped, the Guts are
inflamed, and gangrened; the Throat beset with Wheals and Pimples; the
Intestinum Rectum sometimes molested with a Tenesmus and do vnfalling, the
Appetit dejected; upon which ensue Nauseating, Vomiting, the Hiccough,
Watchings, and at last fatal Convulsions.

If the great Guts are affected, the Pain is heavy and obscure, seated toward
the sides of the Belly, and quickly followed by Stools; the Excrements, Slime,
and Blood, are but indifferently mixed, and the Stomac less disordered, than
when the small Guts are the seat of the Evil; for then there is a notable
propension to Vomit, the pain is more pricking and shooting, placed above and
below the Navel, and not so quickly followed by Evacuations; and the Matter
when evacuated, is exactly mixed, without any signs of distinction.

There are three degrees observable in a Dysentery. The Symptoms of the first,
are bloody and slimy Stools. In the second, the slime gives some signs of an
Excoriation; and in the third, of an Exulceration. When the Guts are
excoriated, it is either the Crust that covers 'em, or part of their thick
Tunicle, or at most, the Caruncles or inflamed Glandules of the Guts, that is
voided.

If a Dyfentery be attended by a Vomiting, Hiccough, and malignant Symptoms; if
the Excrements are green, black, or fetid; if the Looseness began from a green,
black, corrosive Bile; or an acid, salin, tenacious Pituita; it is a dangerous
Case. Convulsions and Doatings usher in Death. The voiding of Caruncles is a
fatal sign. The Indolency of the Guts signifies a Gangrene. If the Anus be so
contracted that nothing can enter, it bespeaks a fatal tumor in the Intestinum
Rectum; if it hang out and open, so that Clysters are not retained, it is
Paralytic. A Fever succeeding to a Dysentery, is a sign of the Inflammation or
Corruption of the Intestins. A Dysentery is frequently fatal to Women with
Child, unless it be very benign, and not long before the time of Delivery. If a
bitter taste in the Mouth, and bilious Vomits happen in the beginning; if a
Lienteria, Hiccough, wheals in the Throat, or spots in the Face, happen after
it has continued some time; and if the Intestines are ulcerated, Death is at
hand. If the Person belch or fart, it is a good sign. If the great Guts are the
proper seat of the Evil, there is less danger. Splenetic and gouty People are
sometimes benefited by a Dysentery.

Now in order to form a distinct Idea of the Cure, let us first give ear to the
following Cautions;

1. That by all means we ought to distinguish malignant Dysenteries from such
as are benign; those from an internal Cause, from others externally occasioned.

2. Notwithstanding the Clamors of some Authors, Narcotics are very proper,
especially in the beginning; but they ought to be mixed with convenient
Specifics, and given in very large Doses; for Persons under this Disease can
bear Opium wonderfully.

3. In malignant Dysenteries laxative Medicines are very nocive; but in benign
ones they are approved, in the beginning, if the Constitution of the Patient be
Cacochymical, or if the Dysentery proceed from Summer Fruits. Rhubarb and Whey
are fittest for this purpose, but Narcotics ought to be mixed with 'em; and
likewise exhibited by themselves, both the preceding and following Nights.

4. Vomits are very dangerous; yet if the Chyle be corrupted, and the Stomac
much oppressed, if the Person vomit easily, and have sufficient Strength to
undergo the Trial, they may be ventured on. But withal, in a malignant
Dysentery they are absolutely noxious, unless an overviolent Purge or Poison
have occasioned it.

5. Sudorifics are always proper in Epidemical Dysenteries, and ought never to
be omitted. They are much preferable to Purgatives, or any other Medicines
whatsoever.

6. Astringents are very offensive at first. After the use of gentle abstergent
Laxatives in benign, and that of Alexipharmacal Sudorifics in malignant
Dysenteries, they may be given in the declension of the Disease, but not before.

7. Blood-letting is to no purpose in most cases. Nay, even in the case of a
suppression of the Terms, it ought to be cautiously attempted, if the Dysentery
be malignant.

8. All Clysters whatsoever, tho never so softening, irritat the Guts in some
measure, and promote a Tenesmus; upon which account they ought to be very
cautiously and sparingly used. They are most proper in the declination of the
Disease, when the great Intestines are affected, or stuffed with sharp Humors,
and when the Dysentery is benign.

9. A peculiar regard must be always had to the Stomac, whose good or bad
Condition alone stamps a hopeful or desperate Character on a Dysentery. Warm
Wine moderatly used, is proper for this purpose.

10. The Feet, and external parts ought to be kept warm; for the least Cold, or
the drinking of any cold Liquor, revives and exasperats the Disease.

11. There Is nothing so conducive as Rest and Quiet. They ought not to stir
from their Beds, nor move when they are in 'em.

12. Venery is oft-times a Sovereign Cure for a Dysentery.

From what is premised, we may infer the Indications for Cure, viz. To put a
stop to the Irritation of the Intestins, and repair the loss they have sustained;
to purify the Blood, and separat the preternatural ferment.

As for the particular Medicines answering these ends, we shall first run over
the Specifics peculiar to this Disease. In which Class the Pizzle of a Whale
leads the Van; next is a Staggs Pizzle. They are never pounded, but only
shaved. As,

Take of the shavings of a Stags Pizzle, two drams; Hysteric Laudanum, nine
Grains; make a Powder for two Doses.

Take of the Decoction of a Whale's Pizzle, a Pound and a half; Cinnamom-water,
an ounce; Syrup of Coral, two or three ounces. Make a Julep; of which let the
Patient take a Draught over Night. They may be mixed either in Powder or
Decoction with other specific and common Ingredients, of which more anon.

The next Specific is Hartshorn; Its Decoction with Burnet is commended by
Riverius, for ordinary drinking. Its Gelly may be mixed with the Gelly of Stags
Pizzle, and dissolved in any Liquor. Or thus;

Take of the Decoction of the shavings of a Stag's Pizzle, a Pound, Gelly of
Hartshorn, six drams; Cinnamom-water, six drams; Syrup of Comfrey, an ounce.
Make a Julep.

Next in order are the shavings of the Scull of a Man that dies a violent
death, given to a dram; the Moss of the Scull, given to a scruple; the Powder
of a Seahorse Tooth, or Unicorn's Horn, given to a dram; Oak Berries; Misselto
of the Oak: The Powder prepared from Elder-berries, called, Tragaea Granorum
Acts, baken up anew with Hairs-blood, and Stag's Pizzle, and fresh Juice of
the Berries; the blood of a Hare killed by Dogs, given in Powder to a dram or
by way of Infusion; a Clour soaked in it, being infused in Ale or ordinary
Drink: the Blood of a Lamb Killed after frighting, used after the same method;
the dried Livers of Serpents and Vipers given to a Scruple; Crystal, the Livers
of Green Frogs, an Apple excavated and filled with Wax and Gum Arabic and so
Roasted; or rather a Quince with the same Ingredients Roasted; the Dung of a
Dog fed with Bones given to a Dram in Steeled Goats Milk, the Powder of
Horse-hoof given to a Dram, Satyrium Roots by way of Infusion, the Decoction or
Powder of Cork, Wallnut-Catkins given to a Dram in Powder, Tormentil, Rob of
Sorbe Apples, Mineral Unicorn, Dulcified Earth of Vitriol taken from the
Vitriol of Steel, Sulphur and its Flowers, Ashwood given to a Dram in warm
Wine, and Alum, of which Four or Five Grains are given with Cinnamom very
successfully.

Thus far the most Noted Specifics. The Common Ingredients which we usually
join to them are the Astringent, Styptic, absorbent and fat Oily Medicines,
recommended against Vomiting, Loosenesses, and the Cholera.

Goats Milk in the beginning of the Disease is a good Abstergent, and toward
the end, Cows Milk Consolidats and Heals. Chalybeat Milk with Comfrey and
Tormentil Roots, or the shavings of Stag's Pizzle, or Rice, or Yelks of Eggs
and Juice of Ivy boiled in it, is of excellent use. The Essence and Syrup of
Comfrey, the Extract of Venice Treacle, or that of Tormentil given with
Laudanum Opiatum at Night in Pills; The Spirit of Venice Treacle Camphoris'd;
The Tincture of Coral Prepared with Spirit of Sassafras; The Tincture of the
Sulphur of Vitriol; The Styptic Liquor Prepared from Sealed Earth and Spirit of
Nitre, called, Liquor Aureus; The Tincture of Boodstone; Myrrh, and its
Essence; Amber, and its Troches; Sugar of Lead (a Noted Specific) The Tincture
Extracted from the Earth of Gold Mines by Spirit of Salt; These I say, are all
Common Ingredients. A few Receipts shall serve for Examples.

In a Benign Dysentery, if it be Convenient either in the Beginning or
Declension to Purge, of which we must be very cautious; Let Laudanum Opiatum be
exhibited over Night; then in the Morning take of Diascordium, a Dram; Rhubarb,
two Scruples; Laudanum Opiatum, two Grains; With Syrup of Quinces make a Bolus,
to be Reiterated. Or,

Take of Plantan Water, an Ounce; Powder of Rhubarb, a Dram; Laudanum Opiatum,
a Grain; With Syrup of Quinces make a Potion.

In a Malignant Dysentery let Laxatives be omitted, and prescribe thus. Take of
Hartshorn Prepared without fire, a Scruple; Diaphoretic Antimony, half a
Scruple; Volatile Salt of Vipers, five Grains; Laudanum Opiatum, one Grain. Mix.

Take of Mint Water, an Ounce; Spirit of Venice Treacle Camphoris'd, two Drams;
Diaphoretic Antimony, a Scruple; Human Bones calcined, half a Scruple; Extract
of Venice Treacle, five Grains; Syrup of Carduus Benedictus, half an Ounce.
Make a Potion for one Dose.

In fine, the Common Prescriptions against all sorts of Dysenteries are such as
these following.

Take of the shavings of a Stag's Pizzle, half an Ounce; Comfrey Roots,
Tragacanth and Nutmegs, of each three Drams; sealed Earth, Bole Armenic, Burnt
Hartshorn and Zedoary, of each a Dram and an half. Make a Powder. You may add
Laudanum Opiatum, and Oil of Cinnamom.

Take of the Extract of Tormentil, twenty four Grains; Vipers Livers, Prepared
Crabs Eyes, of each a Scruple; Hysteric Laudanum, nine Grains; Distilled Oil of
Cinnamom, two Drops. Mix for two Doses. Ye may add Troches of Amber and
Prepared Crystal.

Take of Venice Treacle, a Dram; Prepared Boodstone, a Scruple; Dead Men's
Bones Calcined, fifteen Grains; Sugar of Lead, six Grains. Make a Bolus.

Take of the Rob of the Fruit of the Service Tree, a Dram and a half;
Chalybeat-Bezoar, fifteen Grains; Dulcified Earth of Vitriol, six Grains;
Laudanum Opiatum, two Grains, make a Bolus.

Take of Diascordium, an Ounce and a half; the Shavings of a Whales Pizzle,
three Drams; Troches of Amber, a Dram and a half; Flowers of Sulphur, a Dram.
With Juice of Quinces, make an Electuary. Of which take a Convenient quantity
at Morning, Noon, and Evening.

Take of Crude Alum, half a Dram; Cinnamon, an Ounce and a half. Make a
Powder. Dose a Scruple to be taken in Red Wine.

Take of Tormentil Water, two or three Ounces; Cinnamon Water Prepared with
Quinces, an Ounce; Spirit of Venice Treacle Camphoris'd, three Drams; Syrup of
Comfrey, an Ounce. Mix for a Vehicle to the abovementioned Powders.

Take of Plantan Water, three Ounces; Cinnamon Water, six Drams; Vinegar of
Roses, half an Ounce; Diascordium, two Drams; Troches of Amber, or those of
Sealed Earth, half a Dram; Prepared Crabs Eyes two Scruples; Diaphoretic
Antimony, a Scruple; Syrup of Myrtleberries, or of Quinces, an Ounce: Mix.
Sugar of Lead, Dulcified Earth of Vitriol, Extract of Tormentil and Shavings of
a Dead Man's Scull, may be added or mutually shifted by turns.

After the Symptoms are mitigated by the use of the foregoing Prescriptions, it
will not be improper to exhibit some healing things calculated for the
Corrosion or Ulceration of the Intestines. Such are the Balsam of Sulphur
prepared with Oil of Amber or Annis, or of Juniper Berries, or of Turpentin;
Balsam of Peru given to half a Scruple with Sugar, or with the Yelk of an Egg:
To which we may add the Vulnerary Decoctions. As,

Take of the Leaves of Ground Ivy, Plantan and Tormentil, of each a handful;
Pomgranat Flowers three little handfuls; Shavings of a Whale's Pizzle three
Ounces. Boil 'em in Black-Smiths-water. To two Pounds of the strained Liquor
add Syrup of Coral, and that of Comfrey, of each three Ounces. Mix and exhibit
a large Draught twice or thrice a day, with fifteen Drops of the Balsam of
Sulphur.

As for Clysters, we ought to be very cautious of using 'em. Anodyn Clysters
for allaying the Pain, and tempering the sharp Humors, are made of Chalybeat
Milk, with Emollent Ingredients boiled in it, and mixed with Laudanum Opiatum,
Turpentin, Venice Treacle, Goats Tallow and Yelks of Eggs. Pouders are not
convenient, for they stick to the Guts, and provoke 'em. Vulnerary Healing
Clysters are prepared from Vulnerary Decoctions, or the Decoction or Juice of
River Crabs mixed with Balsam of Peru, Goats Tallow and Oil of Linseed.

Externally apply a Plaster of Venice Treacle to the Belly, and take of
Expressed Oil of Nutmegs half an Ounce, Balsam of Sulphur prepared with Oil of
Anis two Drams, Balsam of Peru a Dram. Make a Liniment, and anoint the Belly.

Take of Oak leaves and Bran, of each three handfuls, Flowers of Chamomil and
of Mullein of each two handfuls. Make two Quilted Bags to be dipped in warm
Vinegar; one large and round to be applied to the Navel, the other long and
small for the Breech.

Some reap benefit by sitting upon the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol when they go to
stool, others by applying a Cataplasm of Arsemart Leaves, bruised and beaten up
with Chalybeat Wine; others by receiving the smoke of Burnt Hartshorn, or
Vinegar, or Ginger, thrown upon burning Coals just under their Breech, when
they go to stool.

A Tenesmus is a Retainer to Dysenteries, being a perpetual but vain desire of
going to stool. The Immediate Cause is the irritation of the Intestinum Rectum,
especially that part of it that is surrounded with the Sphincter. This
Irritation may proceed by Consent or Sympathy from Nephritic Pains, a Stone in
the Bladder, or Distention of the Womb; or Essentially from a tenacious
Corrosive Acid Humor thrown upon that Gut, either by a preceding Dysentery, or
sharp Purgatives; from Inflammations occasioned by the suppression of the
Piles, and the Corrosion of the worms called Ascarides.

An Essential Tenesmus is more dangerous than a Sympathetical one. If it
continue long it degenerats into Ulcers and Fistula's of the Anus. In Women
with Child it frequently causes miscarriage.

As for the Cure. Let the Irritation be abated by Opiats. If a Tenesmus proceed
from a sharp renacious humor, Abstergent Clysters and Fomentations are proper.
If the Intestin be excoriated, temperat soft Ingredients are required.

Take of Mullein flowers, two handfuls; Seeds of Red Vetches, two Ounces; Salt
of Tartar, a Dram; Boil 'em in Water. To a Pound of the strained Liquor add two
Ounces of Goats Tallow, and an Ounce of Honey of Roses. Mix for two Clysters.
The Decoction of Worms in Milk is likewise very proper. But all Clysters ought
to be injected in small quantities at a time.

Foment the Anus with the Decoction of Mullein flowers in Milk. Or apply a bag
quilted with Toad flax and Mullein Leaves, and the flowers of Mullein and
Chamomil, and boiled in Chalybeat Milk. Or let the Anus be fumigated with hot
Bricks, or Iron, thrown into warm Vinegar; Or with the Decoction of Savin in
Water and Vinegar; Or with Myrrh, Frankincense, Roses, etc. thrown upon burning
Coals.

If the Intestin be Ulcerated, inject Vulnerary Decoctions with the Oil of Wax.
Or anoint with a Liniment of the Oil of Roses, and Earthworms mixed with the
Solution of Litharge in Vinegar; Or thrust up a suppository of Unguentum Album
Camphoratum, Diapompholygos, and dulcified Earth of Vitriol.

Internally the Oil of Mastic with Mint Water, or the red Oil of Vitriol with
Broth, is much approved.

The Hepatic flux is a Painless voiding of Watery Blood from the Internal
Hemorrhoid Veins, which the Ancients fancied to proceed from the Liver. It
either follows the Excoriation caused by a preceding Dysentery, or is
occasioned by the ordinary Causes of Eruption of Blood, of which elsewhere.
Opiats, Astringents, and gentle Laxatives, especially Raisins, are the Basis of
its Cure.

Some Persons are troubled with an Itching of the Anus. If it be caused by the
approach of any External sharp thing, let it be fomented with warm Milk and
Rose Water. If it tend to an Ulcer apply a Liniment of Sulphur, Litharge, and
Tragacanth mixed with Vinegar and Oil of Roses. Oft-times Plantan Water and
Alum are also very effectual.

ARTIC. II. Of the Piles.
THE Hemorrhoid Veins are either Internal or External, The Internal proceed
from the mesenteric Branch of the Vena Portae; the External from the same
Branch of the Vena Cava as those of the womb, and so frequently discharge the
Blood that was wont to be evacuated by the terms, as in the case of Suppression
or Cessation of the terms, or being with Child.

The Blood stagnating in these Hemorrhoid Vessels causes oft-times a dry
Inflammation, straitening the Cavity of the Guts, and occasioning a prodigious
Pain in voiding the Excrements, sitting, walking, etc. It rises up to a great
swelling and hangs out of the Gut in various forms, sometimes mistaken for
warts, or other occasional tumors; and if it be not discus'd or opened,
degenerats into a Scirrhus, or an Ulcer.

If the Vessels give way to the Blood it runs out either by drops from the
Veins, or with a full current from the Arteries. Sometimes this Evacuation is
Natural and Periodical, returning every Month or Week in Men, as the terms in
Women; Sometimes it is Critical infering the solution of an Acute Distemper.
Sometimes not only Blood, but a watery humor resembling the Whites in Women, is
voided by the same Vessels. This evacuation by the Hemorrhoids for the most
part is involuntary, though some few by Custom may have obtained a Privilege of
commanding them when they will.

The Cause of this Flux or Stagnation of Blood is either Internal or External.
The former is some sharp salin ferment in the Blood, following Melancholic,
Scorbutic and Splenetic Distempers, or occasioned by suppression of Blood, and
such like Accidents. This vicious ferment irritats the tender Fibers, and
creats an Inflammation, Pain, and other Symptoms.

The External Causes are, Riding, Running, Leaping, or whatever stretches those
Vessels; any sudden Commotion of the Blood by Anger, Exercise, etc. Hard Labor
of Women with Child, Suppression of the Terms, and the use of Rosinous
Purgatives, which stick to the Guts, and vellicat the Orifices of the Vessels.

The Essential Symptom of the Piles, is a green color of the Face. A pain in
the Loins, without a manifest Cause, prognosticats their approach. They are
distinguished from scorbutic Evacuations of Blood, in that they are generally
exasperated by going to Stool, and the Blood for the most part is voided
together with the Excrements. The dry Piles are distinguished from other
Excrescences, by their being of a different Substance from the Breech, round,
black, placed at the extremities of the Veins, and being altogether free of
Flesh, or Ulceration.

If the Piles be Chronical, or accompany Chronical Diseases, such as the
Scurvy, Melancholy, Obstructions of the Bowels, and especially Arthritic
Pains, we ought to be cautious of stopping 'em, unless they exceed Bounds; in
which case they weaken the Body, disposing it to a Dropsy or Consumption, and
creating an awkward aversion to Women.

Periodical, or usual Piles, or such as proceed from Suppressions, ought to be
promoted, and opened if they be dry. If the Piles flow too copiously, they
ought to be stopped. If the dry Piles seize those who are unacquainted with 'em,
or cannot bear the loss of Blood, they ought to be discussed. Chalybeat
Medicines are in a manner proper for all these purposes, by reason that the
Piles, in what condition soever, are for the most part either the forerunners
or effects of Hypocondriac Diseases. But to answer each Indication apart, we
shall begin with the first.

For opening the Piles, or promoting their Flux, let the part be first fomented
with emollient Decoctions, then apply the Juice of Fig Leaves bruised; or the
Juice of Soubread mixed with that of Beets; or a Liniment of Aloes, and the
Juice of Onyons; or a Suppository of Hiera Picra, with the Powder of
Coloquintida, Honey, and Ox Gall; or the Decoction of River Crabs in Oil
(especially in case of a notable Inflammation, or Heat;) or a Cataplasin of
Pigeons Dung with Staves-acre-seeds; or the Juice of Nettles mixed with boiled
stale Urine scum'd, and Rose Water; or (if the Anus itch) Juice of Lemons, or
Vinegar of Roses. All these Ingredients ought to be put into a leaden Mortar,
till they are discolored. But the most effectual way of opening dry Piles, is
the Application of Leeches. If they creep into the Gut, a Clyster of Salt Water
will fetch 'em out.

Internally the same design is promoted by resinous Purgatives, especially Aloe
with Myrrh, or Elixir Proprietatis.

If the Piles flow too copiously, they ought to be curbed, which was our second
Indication. For this purpose, tosted Rhubarb, Tamarinds, the Conserve and Syrup
of Oak-buds, the Decoction of Mastic Wood; Syrup of dry Roses (a common, but
very effectual Remedy) the Syrups and Juices of Purslain, and Quinces; Juice of
stinging Nettles, given to two or three ounces; the Decoction of Burnet; dead
Men's Bones in Powder; Seahorse Tooth, and especially the Juice and Syrup of
the Ordure of an Ass, are very proper. Chalybeat Medicines which encounter the
Hypocondriac acid, and become as it were Vitriolic, are consequently admirably
fitted for this purpose. Such are the Tincture of the Sulphur of Vitriol, or
that called, Tinctura Antiphthisica, or that of the Vitriol of Steel. A dram of
the Pills of Bdellium is likewise a very proper and effectual Remedy. Venice
Treacle and Narcotics are universally known and used.

Take of Plantan and Purslain water, of each an ounce and a half; Tincture of
the Sulphur of Vitriol, a dram and a half; Laudanum Opiatum, four grains; Syrup
of Coral, six grains. Make a Potion.

External Repellents are Frankincense and Myrrh, or Pitch, for Fumigation; the
Sponge called Crepitus Lupi; the compound Powder of Cork and Mummy; the Powder
of burnt Toads, or of Land Frogs; the fat that drops from a roasted Ele; a
Liniment of Soot, yelks of Eggs, and Spiders Webs; Bags quilted with bruised
Wallnuts and Oaken Leaves, and soaked in Vinegar; all applied to the Fundament.
A Girdle of the Leaves of white Hellebor sewed in a Clout, with the Powder of
Oak bark, is of excellent use. Dulcified Earth of Vitriol beaten up with the
Juice of Plantan; the Ointment of Litharge and Tutty mixed with the Ashes of
Oysters, are useful Liniments. Blooding is of no use, excepting the case of a
Suppression.

The third Indication is to discuss the dry Piles, and allay the Pain. The
Specifics for this purpose, are, the Infusion of the Apple of Jerusalem in Oil
of sweet Almonds, for external application; the Decoction of Mullen, and
Elder-flowers in Milk; or Mullen-flowers, and Henbaneseeds in Water, for
Fomentation; or Cataplasms of their Leaves and Flowers, and the Leaves of
Purslain boiled in Milk; Decoctions of the Leaves and Flowers of Toad-flax, and
the Flowers of Chamomil in Milk, for Fomentation. Or,

Take of Toad-flax, two handfuls; Henbane-leaves, half a handful; Oil of Roses,
Oil of Mullein, of each three ounces; fresh Butter, five ounces. Boil them, and
express the Liquor, to which add a handful of the Leaves of Toadflax; then
express again, and add the yelks of two Eggs. Make a Liniment, and anoint the
part; or add to it expressed Oil of Henbane-seeds, and Sugar, or Lead, in case
of an Inflammation.

The Oil of the Berries of the Herb Paris (for Women with Child) or Oil of
Stag-flies, Oil of Wood-lice, and that of Box-wood, are very much recommended
for Inunctions.

Take of the Mucilages of Fleawort-seeds, of Quince-seeds, and Linseeds,
prepared with Rose Water, of each an ounce; fresh Butter, an ounce; with the
yelks of two Eggs, and Oil of Roses; beat them in a leaden Mortar till they
become livid, and make a Liniment of excellent use against Inflammations of the
Piles. The Oil of Eggs, Spirit of Wine camphoris'd, and Sugar of Lead may be
added.

The Balsam of Sulphur prepared with expressed Oil of Poppy-seeds, or mixed
with Camphyr and Sugar of Lead, or with the Oil of Eggs, and that of Bricks, is
of very good use in External Applications. Some put Venice Treacle mixed with
Sugar of Lead, and the Oil of the Balsam-Apple, upon a Clout, and thrust it
into the Fundament.

Figwort, Orpine, and Pilewort, are three famous Specifics; they are given
inwardly by way of Infusion, in Ale, or Wine. Their Roots are given also in
Powder. Figwort-roots mixed with fresh Butter, and kept in a Cellar for fifteen
days, yield a noble Liniment. The Juice of Pilewort externally applied, is also
of excellent use.

Take of the Roots of Figwort and Pilewort, of each half an ounce; with Oil of
Mullen, make a Liniment.

If they become Chronical, let an Issue be cut in the Thigh. If they are
ulcerated, let fulminatory Gold mixed with Oil of sweet Almonds be applied.

Upon the whole, 'twill not be improper to take notice of Wedelius's Caution,
viz. That Ointments are not always the most convenient forms, by reason that
they enlarge the Capacity of the Veins, stop the Transpiration, and augment the
Heat.

SECT. X. Of Worms in the Guts.
HAving discoursed of the Expulsion of the Excrements, we come next to consider
what preternatural things the Guts may contain, viz. Worms. They are either
long, or broad, or very small, called Ascarides and confined to the Intestinum
Rectum.

The immediate Cause is the seed of Worms conveyed into our Bodies. The remote
cause is putrified Crudities in the Stomac and Guts, and the deficiency or
weakness of the Bile, which is the true scarecrow of Worms.

The Symptoms are an acid smell in the Mouth, stinking Spittle copiously
voided, and with some squeamishness; the Excrements in Color resembling
Cows-dung, the yellowness of the white of the Eye, or a Jaundice. Sometimes a
biting pain seizes and distends the Belly, especially in a Morning; and the
Person is troubled with night fears, gnashing of Teeth, trembling, Convulsions,
corrosion of the Gums, Consumption of the Body; the Face is red, and pale by
turns, the Appetit voracious and fierce; the Symptoms are exasperated by acid
bitter Victuals; and mitigated by Milk and sweet things. The Person is molested
with a dry Cough, and thirst when his Belly is empty.

Broad Worms have this peculiar Symptom, that little things like Gourd-seeds
are interspersed with the Excrements. The Ascarides observe the Motions of the
Moon: By day they are generally quiet; but from ten a Clock at night, till
Morning, they rage. Sometimes they will corrode the Buttocks and Thighs, and
creat Ulcers in the Anus, and Intestinum Rectum.

The broad sort are expelled with the greatest difficulty. Worms frequently
introduce troublesome Diseases. If in the beginning of a Disease they throw
themselves out, it is a sign of great malignity within. In the Declension, or
after Concoction, it is looked upon as a good sign.

In the Diseases of Children, Worms are always suspected. All sorts of Worms
ought to be attacked during the wane of the Moon. Jalap, Rhubarb, and sweet
Mercury are proper Purges. The Specifics are Horse-Radishes, Watercresses,
Centory, Wormwood, Peach-flowers, Turnsil, Flowers of St. John's-wort, Savin,
Water-Germander, Gentian, Zedoary, Onyons, Garlic, Leeks, Myrrh, Aloes, Spirit
of Hartshorn; the Decoction of Quicksilver in Onyon or Garlick-water; or
Quicksilver beat up with Sugar to a Powder, of which half a dram is a Dose; the
Oils of Hazel and Juniper-woods; the acid Spirits mixed with fair Water, such
as that of Vitriol, of Sulphur, etc.

While the Worms are lodged in the small Guts, inject Clysters of Milk, and the
Decoctions of Figs, Raisins, Liquorice, Honey, etc. to invite 'em to come down.
If they are arrived at the great Intestins, kill 'em with Clysters of the
Decoction of Gentian, Wormwood, Grass-roots, etc.

In the mean while apply to the Belly, the Gall of a Bull mixed with Powder of
Coloquintida; or a Cataplasm of Myrrh, Aloe, Vinegar of Roses, and Bull's Gall;
or Rock Oil, and Oil of Hazel-wood, with Hiera Picra; or the Ointment of
Soubread with Quicksilver.

The broad Worms are cured by the Juice of Horse-radishes, and the Powder of
Jalap with Worm-seed. The Ascarides require Suppositories of Dutch Cheese, or
Lard and Honey; and Clysters of Coloquintida.

SECT. XI. Of Pains in the Guts, and particularly of the Colic.
WHEN the Guts are irritated, and suffer wringing Convulsions, they are
molested with a pain called Gripings. Sometimes these Pains reach only the
small Intestins, and then their Station is about the Navel, and Center of the
Belly, and are much more violent than those in the great Guts; If they range
not beyond the Duodenum or beginning of the Jejunum, they are felt in the Loins
bending toward the right Hypochondrium, and are oftimes mistaken for Nephritic
Pains, or those caused by the Convulsions of the mesenteric Nerves, or the
Tumors and Ulcers of the Pancreas.

The Pains in the great Guts are for the most part felt in the Colon,
especially that part of it toward the Circumference of the Belly, upon the
left side, where it is straightened, and incurvated, and consequently more liable
to the shocks of Wind, and more apt to stop the Circulation of the Excrements,
and cause their swelling up into a Tumor, sometimes hard, sometimes soft. This
Pain and Tumor is frequently imputed to the Spleen, whereas the Spleen is
incapable of any shooting, pricking pain, such as this is; its Membran being
almost insensible; and besides, it lies too low to display its tumor
externally. Moreover, this pain is exasperated by riding immediately after
eating; and tho it may be compatible to the Jejunum in the left corner, from
whence it runs to the Center of the Belly, yet the Colon is its usual Seat. And
sometimes it veers about to the right side of the Belly (upon the outermost
Circumference) where the same Colon pursues its Course.

This last mentioned Pain is a Colic, properly so called; but for so much as the
generality of Writers do comprehend the former under the same Title, I shall
not depart from the usual Measures of prescribing their Cure without
Distinction, especially considering that the same is the cause of both.

Tho the Pains of the Guts be equally caused by Convulsions and Contractions,
yet the difference of antecedent Causes requires Consideration. These I cast
into two Heads. 1. Some irritating matter provoking the Guts to such
Convulsions. 2. The disorder and uneasiness of the Nerves inserted into the
Guts, while they themselves are faultless, as to the matter contained in 'em.

If the Irritating humor be a viscous acid mucilage, or hard Excrements
fastened to the pleats of the Guts, it creats a fixed boring sort of Pain; its
viscidity settles it in one station, and its acidity acts the boring part. This
humor causes the common Colic. It sculks for most part in that corner of the
Colon toward the left side of the Belly, where it is contracted and bended
downwards. It is incident to Hypocondriac acid Constitutions, and requires much
the same sort of attenuating Medicines. If this acid acquire any notable
sharpness, it shoots and pricks as it were with a Needle. If the humor be a
viscous matter hatching an imprisoned acid, it causes Wind, and consequently
distending Pains; supposing still that the Intestins are molested with
convulsive Contractions which stop the Egress, and occasion the rebounding of
the Wind. If the humor be altogether viscid without any acrimony, it causes a
heavy dull Pain. If the irritating cause be Worms, or some sharp saltish acid,
it gnaws the Guts. If the Guts are inflamed, or the Arteries contracted by the
Convulsions, they occasion a beating sort of Pain.

The Disorders and Convulsions of the Nerves running from the great Mesenteric
Plexus, will cause tearing, wringing, and contracting Pains. They are
occasioned sometimes accidentally, as by Nephritic Pains, and Childbirth, when
the Mesenteric Plexus being irritated by virtue of its near intercourse with
the Nerves of the Kidneys and the Womb, pulls and contracts both the Stomac and
Guts, which it supplies with Nerves. At other times they are Retainers to some
fixed permanent habitual Cause, that tho it lie latent for some time, has
always an ascendant in the Body. These are either Scorbutic, or Hypochondriac,
or Hysteric, or Nephritic, and are owing to the Convulsions of the Mesenteric
Plexus, to which the Intestins are annexed, it being galled with an offensive
acid; oftimes the Nerves of the Throat are likewise contracted at the same
time, occasioning a difficult Respiration, and a sort of Suffocation. Of this
nature likewise are the griping Pains which follow an irregular Cure of
Fevers, as being caused by transferring the morbific Matter to the Glandules
of the Mesentery, and the subsequent Irritations of its Nerves.

Both these sorts of Pains, viz. those caused by a vicious humor in the
Intestins, and those by a foreign irritation of their Nerves, are equally
attended by the successive returns of Cold and Heat. The Cold proceeds from the
Vellication of the Membrans, when it is universal; or the prevalency of the acid
Juice of the Pancreas, when it is chiefly felt about the Loins. The heat from
the impetuosity of the Spirits, and the acceleration of the Bloods motion; or,
when the humor is lodged in the Duodenum, from the prevalency of the Bile, or
its struggling with the Juice of the Pancreas, and accordingly it is most
perceivable in that place. The Belly is frequently costive, by reason of the
Contractions of the Guts. If it happen to be soluble, the Colic from the humors
in the Guts is mitigated; but that from a mere irritation receives no benefit.
Oftimes the Nerves of the Stomac are influenced by the mesenteric Plexus, and a
Vomiting insues.

If the Urine be watery, it is a Nephritic Colic; if it is highly tinctured
toward the middle, and colored in the surface, and the Anus obstinatly shut,
it is a Scorbutic Colic; if Respiration be difficult, and the Breast Perplexed,
it is Hysteric; if the Convulsion of the Intestins be attended by a Pain
reaching to the Pubes, and Haunch-bone, the Womb is disordered. If the Colic be
caused by the mere irritation of the Nerves, the Pain is tearing, and not heavy
or dull, and the Urine is milky and pale, impregnated with a large Sediment.

A Colic is distinguished from simple Nephritic Pains by these Symptoms. After
eating, or the use of Aromatics, it is mitigated; the Urine undergoes no sudden
Changes, tho a Strangury and high Color may attend the Scorbutic sort; Clysters
and Evacuations give ease, and the heavy Pain does not incessantly molest the
Loins: Now the Symptoms of Nephritic Pains are directly contrary to these.

The Causes of Colics are already hinted at. In general, some noxious acid
either irritats the Nerves, being seated in the Plexus of the Mesentery, or
reigning in the Guts. The Pancreatic Juice is of that nature. The Bile is of a
contrary diluting quality, and does not of it self cause Colic Pains, unless it
become black, rusty, and green, as in the Bilious Colics. The Remote Causes are
whatever promotes Corruption in the Stomac or Guts, increases or exalts an
Acid, or Creates an uneasiness to the Guts and Membrans of the Body. Of these
more under the Head of Iliac Passions.

A Bilious Colic, or that proceeding from humors in the Guts is of a meek
Character, unless it be flatulent. Sometimes it Degenerats into Ulcers. If the
body be very costive and the Anus retracted, it is a fatal symptom and portends
an Iliac. Hoarseness and Vomiting are bad Symptoms. Convulsive Colics,
especially the Scorbutic Kind, are very dangerous and obstinat, and frequently
end in Epilepsies, or some such disorder of the Head.

The Cure is endeavored both during the Paroxysm, and after its disappearance.
In the Paroxysm, the Indications are to allay the Irritation of the Guts,
correct and evacuate the peccant Matter, if the Colic proceed from vicious
Humors, and redress the Disorders of the Nerves, if it be Convulsive.

In order to compass these Ends, 1. The Belly ought to be kept open with
Clysters, especially if the Colic proceed from Vicious Humors in the Guts, or
if the Great Guts be their Habitation. If the Small Guts are affected, gentle
Laxatives taken by the Mouth, are much preferable. In Convulsive Colics we may
inject emollient Anodyn Clysters of Turpentine, etc. But when a Humor, or
hardened Ordure prevails in the great Guts, we may add sharp Purging
Ingredients. As,

Take of the Decoction of Pease Eight Ounces, Infusion of Crocus Metallorum two
or three OUnces, Lenitive Electuary, or Oil of Olives an ounce. Mix for a
Clyster. When the great Guts are afflicted by hard Excrements, some add the
Extract of the greater Common Spurge, instead of the Antimonial Infusion. The
Smoke of Tobacco is also proper for the same purpose.

For Convulsive Colics, Take of the Emollent Decoction one Pound, Turpentine
dissolved with the Yelk of an Egg, two, three or four ounces, strained Honey six
or eight Drams. Make a Clyster. The Oil of Linseed and Rape-Oyl are likewise
very proper. For old Persons an Anodyn Clyster may be prepared of Spanish Wine
and Oil of Chamomil.

For a Flatulent Colic; Take of Bay Leaves, a handful; Chamomil flowers a
handful and a half; Angelica, or Lovage Roots, six Drams; The four lesser hot
Seeds, of each two Drams; Boil them in fair Water. To ten Ounces of the
strained Liquor add Electuary of Bayberries, six Drams; Venice Treacle, one or
two Drams; Distilled Oils of Angelica, Caraways, Cumminseed, and Bayberries, of
each three or four drops. With the Yelk of one Egg; Make two Clysters, to be
injected at two several times, by reason of the wind disturbing the Injection.
Or,

Take of the Carminative Decoction, six Ounces; Man's Urine, four Ounces; Yest,
a Dram; Common Salt, a Scruple; Honey of Roses, an Ounce. Make a Clyster in
flatulent Colics.

In the beginning of the Disease, Gentle Emollient, Anodyn Clysters are not
improper in any Colic. As, take of Henbane Leaves, a handful; Boil them in
Milk; To ten Ounces of the Decoction, add an Ounce of the Honey of Roses. Mix
for a Clyster.

Afterward when we have discovered that vicious matter, or hard Excrements are
Lodged in the great Guts, we may pres^^ be Emollient Clysters sharpened with
Sal Gem, and if these prove ineffectual add sharp Purgatives as above. If the
Anus be much retracted, and threaten an Iliac, let Clysters be sparingly used,
as likewise in all true Convulsive Colics.

2. If the Intestines are much Contracted, either by foreign Convulsions or
vicious matter within, proper Purgatires ought to be avoided; for they promote
the Contraction and Lock up the Excrements closer. In this case Whey, or an
Ounce of the Oil of sweet Almonds, with Spanish Wine and Sperma Caeti, are more
effectual than the strongest Purgatives. If the Guts be inflamed, all Laxatives
whatsoever are Pernicious. If the Colic proceed from a tenacious viscid humor,
and be attended by a heavy Boring pain, Purgatives mixed with attenuating
Ingredients are allowable, tho rather after the Fit has made some progress, and
the Symptoms are a little abated, than just in the beginning, especially if the
Pain be very Violent. The safer way is to begin with Emollient Abstergent
Prescriptions, such as that of the Oil of Almonds and Wine, and Sperma Caeti;
and then after some time prescribe thus.

Take of Mint Water, an ounce and a half; Cinnamon Water, half an ounce; Gum
Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, half a dram; Tartar Vitriolated, fifteen Grains;
Scammony Sulphurated, and Troches Alhandal, of each two Grains; Solutive Syrup
of Roses, or of Apples, half an ounce. Make a Potion for a Colic, proceeding
from a tenacious acid humor in the Guts. In the Declension of the Fit, it is
expedient to exhibit sweet Mercury with the Pills of Hera with Agaric, for
dissolving and washing off the remains of the viscous Acid. Or, if in the
beginning of the Fit it be safe or convenient to Purge, let Laudanum Opiatum be
added. As,

Take of Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, a dram; Diagrydium six Grains;
Laudanum Opiatum, four or five Grains. Mix, etc. Fulminatory Gold is likewise a
proper Ingredient. After the Paroxysm is over Sudorifics and Purgatives mixed
together are not improper.

3. If the Stomac and upper Guts are stuffed with peccant matter, Vomits are
very useful. If the pain bear downwards, they are very Pernicious.

4. Narcotics, especially Hysteric Laudanum, are very useful in Convulsive
Colics and such as proceed from a thin fiery humor. They are given in the
beginning and during the increase of the fit, while the Patient has yet
strength sufficient. In case of a viscous acid humor they are not so proper
till the Guts be cleans'd by Purgatives, unless the Violence of Symptoms
require 'em. The better way is to mix 'em with the Purgatives, and exhibit 'em
also after Purgation. Or to give 'em before Purging, so as that they have not
finished their office till the succeeding Purge join 'em.

5. The Stomac and Feet ought to be well Armed against Cold; and all Cold
Liquors avoided; for sometimes they cause a Colic, and in that case a large
draught of Juniper Water is a Sovereign Remedy. It Is true, there are some
Instances of Colics cured by drinking Cold Water, which perhaps relaxats the
contracted Guts. But it is an accidental case, and ought not to be looked upon
as a precedent.

6. When the Belly is opened, if the Symptoms do not disappear, let Aromatic
Ingredients be used; as being admirably fitted for tempering the acid,
attenuating the viscid matter, discussing Wind, and fortifying the Nerves
against Convulsions. Such are, Male Speedwell, Chamomil, its Decoction in
Water, or its Oil taken inwardly, Clary, Orange Peel, Zedoary, Garlic, Gentian,
Elecampane, Wormwood, the four large hot-seeds, Castor, Sulphur, Horse Dung and
Stones; Spirit of Sal-armoniac, Spirit of Treacle Camphoris'd, Spirit of
Tartar, Spirit of Hartshorn, the Carminative Spirit de tribus, etc. Some
commend the Decoction of Wormwood, Elecampane Roots, and Orange Peel, with
mithridat.

Take of Chamomil and Elder flowers; Leaves of Mint, and dried Rue, of each
three handfuls; fresh Juniper berries two ounces and a half, Bay berries
Peeled, six drams; Cummin Seeds, an ounce; Anis and Fennel Seed, of each half
an ounce; Aromatic Calamus, an ounce and a half; The yellow part of Orange
Peel, three ounces; Cinnamon six drams, Zedoary, three drams; Pound them well,
and sprinkle 'em with six drams of rectified Spirit of Wine. Infuse them in a
sufficient Quantiy of Spirit of Wine, not overrectify'd, for the space of
twelve hours over a gentle heat of Sand; then Distill slowly. Dose a spoonful or
two.

Take of the Waters of Anised, and Chamomil flowers, of each two ounces;
Cinnamon Water, an ounce; Spirit of Zedoary, half an ounce; Dulcified Spirit of
Nitre, two drams; Distilled Oil of Anis, six drops; Laudanum Opiatum, two
Grains; Syrup of Orange Peel, an ounce. Make a Potion to be taken by spoonfuls
in Bilious Colics.

Take of the Waters of Chamomil flowers, Mint and Penny Royal, of each an
ounce; Essence of Castor, two or three drams; Spirit of Hartshorn Succinated,
or Spirit of Sal-armoniac, a dram and a half; Laudanum Opiatum, three Grains;
Syrup of Mugwort, an ounce. Mix for two or three Doses in Convulsive Colics.

Take of Chamomil Water, two drams; Mint Water, an ounce; Essence of Opium,
half a dram; Jaw bone of a Pike, a dram; Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, fifteen
Grains; Syrup of Fennel, three drams. Mix and give a spoonful now and then, in
Convulsive Colics.

Take of the flowers of Sulphur, two drams; Jaw bone of a Pike, a dram;
Distilled Oils of Caraways, Cummin seed and Fennel seed, of each four drops;
Laudanum Opiatum, four Grains, Make a Powder for three, four, or five Doses, in
the Colics that proceed from humors.

In Nephritic Colics, Pills of Turpentin are very proper. If the Gripings are
attended by a burning heat the dulcified Spirit of Nitre; If by a Coldness, the
fixed salts, and absorbent Powders, are useful.

Take of the shavings of Ivory, two scruples; Prepared red Coral, and Crabs
Eyes, of each a scruple; Sealed Earth, twelve Grains; the Distilled Oil of
Orange Peel, the Distilled Oils of Anis, Caraways, Fennel, and Zedoary, of each
a drop. Make a Powder for two Doses.

Take of Castor, half a scruple; Volatile Salt of Amber, five Grains; Laudanum
Opiatum, a Grain or two, Make a Powder for Convulsive Colics. Or,

Take of the Tincture of Tartar, half an ounce; Essence of Gum Ammoniac, three
drams; Essence of Myrrh Tartaris'd, a dram and a half. Mix, etc. Dose fifty
drops. Elixyr Proprietatis, Essence of Castor, or that of Opium may be added by
turns. Pills of the Extract of Castor, and that of Venice Treacle, mixed with
some convenient Oil are very proper. The Decoction, Essence, Powder and Oil of
Orange Peel, (especially in a strangury) and all Preparations from Clary; are
of Sovereign use in all Colics. The flowers of sulphur are of unknown Virtue;
if mixed with Myrrh, or Distilled Oils. Spirit of Nitre well rectified with
Spirit of Wine distilled from aromatic Ingredients, is an incomparable thing in
all hot Colics. It Is given with the Decoction of Elecampane Roots for a
Vehicle. The Oil or Spirit of Turpentin, digested with Juniper Berries and
Flowers of St. John's wort (which by the way are possessed of a rich Oil) is
given against the Colics caused by humors in the Guts, to a scruple, with
wonderful success. The Carminative Spirit made of Nitre Tartar and Spirit of
Urine, given to half a dram in some warm Vehicle, is likewise much applauded.
The Powder of Horse's Stones given to a dram in Lilly Convally Water with a
little Saffron; the shavings of a Bull's Pizzle given to a scruple in Spanish
Wine, the Powder of Soot mixed with Vinegar, or its Spirit, are all approved
Remedies. Sugar of Lead is excellent where acidity prevails. As the juice of
Horse Dung, or that of other Beasts, mixed with warm Ale, is inferior to no
Medicine in that Case. After taking any of these Medicines the Patient ought to
be very quiet, and make account to sweat.

If a Colic tend to a Palsy of the Guts, let sharp Clysters be injected; and
Volatile Salts exhibited, such as that of Urine, Spirit of Hartshorn or of
Sal-armoniac, and especially the Volatile Spirit of Tartar, or which is yet more
Volatile, the Spirit Distilled from the Dregs of Wine. In a scorbutic Colic let
Volatile Salts and Antiscorbutic Ingredients be added. In a Colic caused by any
External error, Laxatives mixed. With Absorbents are proper. If cold or
Drinking occasion it, give Pepper and Spirit of Wine.

As for External Applications against Colic^. Let the Belly and Navel be well
fomented with Li^^^ents of expressed Oils mixed with those that are Distill^^
and afterward cover it with a hot Brick. The fot of a Wild Cat and Zivet is
much approved for this use. As also Galbanum melted and mixed with the
Distilled Oils of Spike and Amber. Plasters made of Tacamahac, Balsam of Peru,
or that of Bay berries with that of Tobacco; Cataplasms of Horse Dung with Oil
of Rue; And Quilted Bags of Milletseeds, or of Anodyn and Aromatic Ingredients;
are likewise applied to the belly with good success.

Take of the Oils of Bays, of Dill and of Chamomil, of each half an ounce;
Galbanum, a dram; Distilled Oil of Amber, half a dram; Distilled Oils of
Caraways, Cummin and Fennel, of each half a scruple. Make a Liniment. The Oil
of Orange Peel, the Distilled Oil of Angelica, and the Oil of Castor, or
Powders of Castor are also proper Ingredients. The Oil of Soap and white Rock
Oil, are of excellent use Externally in all Convulsive Colics.

Take of the tops of Henbane, and Elder Flowers, of each two handfuls; Chamomil
flowers three or four handfuls; fresh Juniper berries, two ounces. Make a
Quilted Bag to be infused in hot Wine, or boiled in Goats Milk, and applied to
the Belly, and frequently reiterated, especially in Scorbutic Colics.

Take of the Leaves of Bays and Rue, of each three handfuls; Tops of Dill and
lesser Centory, flowers of Roman Chamomil, Elder flowers, of each half a
handful; Angelica and Lovage Roots, of each two ounces; Bay berries, an ounce;
Juniper berries, half an ounce; the four greater hot seeds, of each two drams.
Boil them in Wine for a Bag. Some choose to apply Bags of Oats, Juniper
berries, and Coriander seeds. Others apply a little Puppy to the Belly.

So much for the cure of a Colic fit. After the fit is over, let Diuretic and
Garminative Medicines be used. The solution of Steel with the juice of Apples,
the Spirit of Sal-armoniac, and, to robust Constitutions, the Solar Liquor of
Steel, are then very useful.

SECT. XII. Of the Vicious Postures of the Guts.
CHAP. I. Of Ruptures.
THE Caul and Guts are wrapped into the Peritonaeum. If this Membran be
relaxated or broke, they fall out upon the Infirm Part, either separately, or
both together. The Guts, which are liable to this Eruption, are the Jejunum and
Ileum. The great Guts are secure from that danger, as being more firmly
fastened. This Relaxation of the Peritonaeum, happens for the most part in one
of its two Processes, the one surrounding the Umbilical, the other the
Spermatic Vessels. The Bursting at the Navel is sometimes caused by hard Labor
in Childbirth. Vomiting, Jumping, crying aloud, carrying of heavy Burdens,
Coughing, Sneezing, violent Purgations, or whatever divides or stretches the
Membran of the Peritonaeum, are the General Causes of all Ruptures.

Children, whose Membrans are tender, and most exposed to Violence, are very
obnoxious to this Disease. Sometimes the Infirmity is Hereditary, or produced
by Internal Causes, but withal very rarely. If the Process of the Peritonaeum
surrounding the Spermatic Vessels, be dilated, either the Caul, or the Guts, or
both, fall down either upon the Groyn, or into the Cod. If the Membran be quite
broke, they stop about the Muscles of the Groyn. But if it be only dilated,
they trace its Progress to the Cod. Sometimes, but very rarely, this bursting
falls out upon the sides of the belly, or upon the Loins, or through a Breach in
the Womb. And Surgeons ought to be very cautious that they be not imposed upon
by it, under the appearance of an Ulcer in those unwonted Places. The Stones
sometimes are drawn into the Groyn, and Resemble a Rupture, and are often times
taken either for that, or an Imposthume.

A Rupture therefore is a soft Tumor, sometimes decreasing, sometimes
increasing. If it be Recent, it disappears when the Patient lies on his Back,
and returns when he stands upright. For the most part it is Painless, and easy
to put up, unless the Gut be inflamed, or molested with Wind, or hardened
Excrements. And besides, it increases, if the Patient cough. By these Signs it
is distinguished from Bubo's, or the Testicle sticking in the Passage.

If the Gut be irritated either externally by Cold, Bruises, etc. Or Internally
by Wind, hard Excrements, etc. Iliac or Colic Pains ensue and are very fatal;
as likewise Inflammations, or Gangrenes, or Suppuration of the Gut. In adult
People, it is a difficult matter to cure a Rupture, etc. A Hiccough following a
painful and sudden Bursting is a fatal symptom. If it be caused by cold, it is
very dangerous.

The cure is performed by putting up the Caul or Gut, fortifying it in its
proper Station, and healing the Breach, or contracting the Width of the
Peritonaeum.

Purgatives are pernicious. If the great Guts are molested with Wind, or the
Belly costive, let Clysters be injected. Flatulency promotes and exasperates
the Disease, and therefore ought to be particularly subdued by Carminative and
Precipitating Medicines. In putting up the Gut, we ought to handle it very
tenderly, and very seldom, for fear of Irritation, and place the Patient's Feet
higher than his Head. All things used either Internally or Externally, ought to
be Lukewarm. Solid Victuals ought to be avoided, and Liquid Food chiefly used.
If the Gut be hard, let it be Fomented with Emollient Decoctions; for the
hardness proceeds for the most part from its Distention and Convulsive Posture,
rather than hard Excrements, which are seldom found in the small Guts. When the
part is handled, let the Surgeons Hands, or Fingers be anointed with Oil of
Chamomil, and Oil of St. John's wort, with a few Drops of some Carminative Oil.

If it be difficult to put up the Gut, let the following method be observed;
Internally, Exhibit the Decoction of the greater Four hot Seeds in Wine.
Externally, apply a Cataplasm of Sheeps Dung boiled in Goats Milk, and Foment
with the Decoction, adding to it a little of the Spirit of Wine, in order to
discuss the VVind and Hardness, and allay the Pain. Some apply the hot Caul of
a gelded Lamb, and with good success. The Hardness, VVind and Pain are likewise
mitigated by Fomenting with Decoctions of Emollient and Carminative
Ingredients. Or Clysters of the same Ingredients may be injected, that so the
great Guts being emptied, any irritating matter in the small ones may have the
easier passage. Let Plasters also be applied to the Loins to oblige the
mesentery to draw back the fallen Gut. As,

Take of Gum Ammoniac, Galbanum and Sagapenum, of each three drams; Turpentin
and Virgin Wax, two or six drams; Arsenical Loadstone two drams, and fifteen
Grains; Roots of Cuckowpint, a dram. Dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, and boil
them to the consistence of a Plaster together with the other Powders. Apply
the Plaster to the Loins. Some commend the fat of a Bear, or of a Hedghog, for
the same use.

If all these means prove ineffectual, a Surgeon must open the place and put up
the Gut, and then heal the wound.

After the Gut is put into its proper station, it will be necessary to confirm
it and the Peritonaeum, by Internal and External Means. The former are the
Vulnerary Decoctions, especially those of Rupturewort and Thorowax. The Seed of
Carden-Cresses is of Excellent use given inwardly in Powder with Red Wine, or
by way of Decoction, and applied Externally, being beaten up with the Yelk of
an Egg, or formed into a Plaster with Caran and boiled Turpentin. The Oil of
Lizzards is of singular use for External Unction. The salted Skins of Eels, or
of Serpents, boiled up with Lees to the consistence of a Plaster, or Plasters
made of Pitch, Mastic, Caran, Dragons-blood, Bole-armenic, etc. Or of Rosin,
Pitch and Powder of Bricks; or Compound Plasters of Rulandus's Diasulphuris,
the Rupture-Plaister and Pitch mixed in equal Quantities; are all recommended
for outward application. Some anoint the Part with Balsam of Sulphur, and the
Oil of the Yelks of Eggs. But others reject all Oily Ingredients, as being too
Laxative, and order the application of Clouts dipped into distilled Vinegar, in
which Lytharge is dissolved, and after that a Plaster of the Gum of
Black-Cherry-Tree, dissolved in Oil of St. John's-wort, and mixed with
Frankincense and Mastic. During the time of applying these Plasters, let the
Belly be kept open, and a Truss kept constantly about it, and never removed but
when the Patient lies on his Back.

CHAP. II. Of the Downfalling of the Anus.
THE Intestinum Rectum is sometimes stretched out so far, that the Retracting
Muscles are not able to draw it in. The Cause is either the too frequent, or
violent Expulsion tearing the fibers of the Retracting Muscles, and occasioned
by Irritating Clysters, Suppositories, a Tenesmus, Viscid hard Excrements
requiring extraordinary force to expel them, the bearing down in Childbirth, a
stone in the Bladder provoking the Gut, etc. Or the Relaxation and Weakness of
the Retracting Muscle, occasioned by the foregoing causes, or falls upon the Os
sacrum disturbing its Nerves, or the injury of External cold when the Gut is
violently stretched forth.

If this disease continue long, it degenerates into a Troublesome Tumor. If the
Auus be inflamed, it may end in a Gangrene; if troubled with a Tenesmus, or
Bleeding, it is very dangerous. If the Muscle be Paralytic, the Cure will prove
both difficult and tedious.

For Cure; the Anns must be put up, and fastened when it is up. If we suspect
hard Excrements in the Gut, we ought to Foment with, and Inject Clysters of,
the Decoctions of Melilot, Mullen and Elder-Leaves in Milk. If a sharp fordid
Slime provoke the Gut, inject the same Decoction with some Astringent
Ingredients added. If the Anus be inflamed, foment with the Decoction of
Chamomil, Elder, and St. Johnswort flowers, red Roses, Wormwood Tops and
Melilot, in Whey; or in Milk, if the Pain be great; Or in Red Wine, in case of
a hard Swelling.

Then Fumigat the Anus with a mixture of Amber, Mastic, Myrrh, Francinsence and
Jews Pitch; and after fumigation, Anoint with Oil of Eggs, or the Oil of Mastic
in which Stagflies are boiled, applying in the mean while a Plaster of
Opopanax and Sagapenum to the Os Sacrum. Every thing being thus Prepared, let
the Anus be put up with the finger covered with a Clout dipped in red Wine, or
anointed with Goat's or Hart's Tallow. After it is up, let the Person lie on his
Belly with his Legs stretched out. And apply quilted Bags of Bran, Mullein
flowers and Yarrow leaves; boiled in Black Smiths Water and Vinegar, to
strengthen the Anus. For which end Aromatic Ingredients may likewise be added.
If after the return of the Gut to its proper place, there remain an
Inflammation or Redness in the Anus, foment it with Plantan Water in which
Sugar of Lead is dissolved.

SECT. XIII. Of the Encumbrances of the Chyle, in its Passage from the Guts.
THE Chyle being duly separated and purified in the Guts, ought to enter the
Milky Vessels, and proceed through the Glandules of the Mesentery to the common
Receptacle, where it is diluted with the Lymph of the inferior Branches; and
from thence continues its progress through the Conduit of the Breast, to the
Axillary Vein, where it joins the Lymph of the upper Region.

This natural motion is oftimes anticipated by tenacious humors guarding the
entry of the Vasa Lactea, or Scars following the Corrosion of a Dysentery, or
Looseness; or interrupted by its own viscidity, or slime squeezed into its
Vessels from the Guts and afterward congealed; of which we have a plain
Instance in the Case of drinking cold Liquors after a violent hot Exercise; for
as much as the heat melts the slime, and the motion drives it into the Vessels,
and the sudden arrival of cold Liquor cuts off its retreat, by causing its
Coagulation; so that it either stagnats, or proceeds with the Chyle to the
Blood, and depraves its Crasis.

This viscidity or crudity of the Chyle, or of the Humor its Companion, is the
true cause of all Chronical Distempers, falsely imputed by the Ancients to
Obstructions, or contrary Qualities of the Bowels. That there are Obstructions,
I do not deny: Some in the Blood Vessels, causing Inflammations: Others in the
Lymphatic (or perhaps those of the Chyle) causing the rupture of the Vessels,
and effusion of the Lymph upon the Cavities of the Body. And others again in
the Bowels, appearing in the form of Imposthumes and Schirrus's. But these are
rather the effect, than cause of Chronical Diseases. That stagnation of the
Liquors in their respective Vessels, is occasioned by their viscidity. The
viscidity is caused by acid Crudities attending the Chyle, and debauching the
Blood and Lymph. Moreover, the proneness of Imposthumes to suppurate, and that
of Schirrus's to become Ganeers, are solid proofs of their being caused by a
viscous acid. And, as to the Antipathy of the Bowels, it is inconsistent with
the Laws of Circulation. The Blood and Spirits are equally the cause of heat
all over the Body, if all the parts be equally (...) posed for their Reception.
It Is true indeed, a partic^^^^ Bowel, or external part may be occasionally
weak^^^ and suffer a Relaxation of its Fibers; or by virtue of acid pointed
Particles darted into its Bosom, like that of a Thorn into the Finger, may be
disturb'^ with Heat and Inflammation, while the others retain their cooler
Temperature. But it plainly appears, that these effects are not owing to any
Radical Antipathy in the Qualities of the Bowels, but the occasional unequal
Distribution of the viscous acid Particles.

It remains therefore to be concluded upon, that the acid Crudity of the Chyle,
impressed upon it in the first Passages, is the natural and obvious cause of
Chronical Distempers; and that Obstructions may be effected by the long
duration of these Distempers, but cannot claim the privilege of being their
Causes. This Hypothesis will be set in a clearer light by surveying the
Symptoms, and the Method of Curing these Chronical Distempers. The former are
acid Belchings, Wind, loss of Appetit, Gripings, and noise in the Guts;
incident heat and Inflammation, Looseness, etc. the natural Progeny of an acid
Crudity. And as touching the latter, the whole Circle of Specifics is generally
made to center in an aperient Virtue. Now the Preparations of Steel and Lead do
justly lead the Van of this numberless Catalogue. And how these astringent
Medicines should be entitled to an opening Virtue, all the Posse of Writers is
at a loss to explain. Whereas it is an obvious Solution, that these metallin
Particles suck up and encounter the acid Crudity, and transform it into a
vitriolic Concrete, which is afterward evacuated under the form of black
Excrements. So that it opens or unlocks the Passages only indirectly, by
subduing the hostil Intruder.

Antiscorbutic volatile salin Medicines and Gums are likewise used. Now they
attinuat the viscous Humor, precipitat the rank acid, fortify the Stomac (the
original source of the Evil) and whet the Bile. And here by the way, 'twill not
be improper to take notice that the Essences commonly prepared from volatile
Antiscorbutic Herbs, as the Essence of Scurvygrass, etc. fall short of the
original virtue of their Herbs, as containing only the volatile Salt, stripped of
the fixed Salt, which withal is very useful. Upon which account I prefer the
Quintessences made of the Oil, and both the Spirits, one prepared by
Fermentation, and the other by Putrefaction; These two being mixed with the
distilled Oil by long Digestion and frequent Cohobation. And besides, all
Antiscorbutic Spirits prepared by Fermentation, ought to be frequently
cohobated in order to extract the fixed Alcalin Salt. Tartar also is a great
Specific in these Cases. But its Cream is too acid. Let it be mixed with half
the quantity of Salt of Tartar, dissolved in warm water, after Fermentation
filtrated, and set to evaporat. Thus its Acidity is conquered. Its volatile
Spirit, or rather that drawn from the Dregs of Wine; or the Carminative Spirit
prepared from Nitre, Tartar, and Spirit of Wine; and all volatile Preparations
of Tartar are of wonderful efficacy in clearing the first Passages, correcting
the Digestive Ferment, and conquering the acid of Wine, that we in these
Countries are so obnoxious to.

In the Animal Province, Man's Urine given to drink, and all urinous Spirits
and Salts, especially the Spirit of Salarmoniac prepared with Quicklime, are
noted antiacids in all Chronical Distempers. The Spirit of Ants, and that of
Earthworms, are famous Anti-scorbutics. Of the Mineral Family, Steel is the
Head. It ought not to be much impregnated with an acid, otherwise it will not
dissolve in the Body. The best way of giving it is either in crude Powder, or
by way of extract, taken from its Infusion in the Juice of Apples, Quinces, or
of Tamarinds; or a Tincture taken from the same with Spirit of Scurvygrass. The
Tincture of Steel, prepared with Spirit of Bread, is likewise a proper form.
Its Crocus is best prepared by sprinkling it with Juice of Cichory, and
exposing it to the Sun. Next to Steel is Lead, especially its Sugar, and the
Antiphthisical Tincture, prepared from it and vitriol of Steel with Spirit of
Wine.

From these Premises we infer, that the Cause of all Chronical Distempers, is a
viscous acid Crudity, either bred in the Stomac, or caused by the vicious
Effervescencies of the Gall, and the Juice of the Pancreas in the Guts. Upon
which Account all Stomachical, attenuating, anti-acid Medicines are the true
Antidote of these Diseases. And whoever attempts to cure 'em, without a special
regard to the Stomac and first Passages, shoots short of his Mark. The forms of
Recipe's shall be inserted in the particular Description of the respective
Diseases.

SECT. XIV. Of Diseases relating to the Lungs, and Organs of Respiration.
THUS far we have considered the Chyle in its separat State. It remains now, to
survey its state of Complication with the Blood. The mixed Mass of Blood and
Chyle is carried from the Axillary Vein to the descending Trunc of the Vena
Cava; from thence it is conveyed to the right Ventricle of the Heart; and before
its entry into the left Ventricle, is thrown into the Lungs by the Vena
Arteriosa.

The Lungs are a heap of little Bladders joined by a simple Membran, endowed
with moving Fibers, and require to be dilated before the Blood can have
admission. This Dilatation is performed by the Air and Muscles. The Midriff,
together with the Subclavian and Intercostal Muscles, enlarge the Capacity of
the Breast; upon which, there being no Vacuum, the Air crowds into the Lungs,
and distends 'em to fill up the void space. The Lungs being thus distended, the
blood empties it self into 'em; and by virtue of the universal Salt of the Air,
its Mass is dissolved, rarified, volatilis'd, and freed of its Steams. This
Admission of Air, or Dilatation of the Lungs, is called Inspiration. And the
Expulsion of it, or successive compression of the Lungs forwarding the Blood to
the left Ventricle of the Breast, is styled Expiration; the complex Action
bearing the title of Respiration.

CHAP. I. Of Inspiration abolished, or Suffocation.
SUffocation is a denying of admission to the Air. The Cause may relate either
to the Passages through which the Air is to pass, or to the Lungs that are to
receive it, or to the Muscles that ought to dilate the Breast.

The Passages are embarassed by external Ligatures, which if they be suddenly
put on, extinguish all manner of Sense in an instant; by being filled with
Water, or drowning; by Tumors and Inflammations in the Neighborhood of the
Windpipe; by swallowing bulky things that stick in the Gullet and press the
Windpipe, or bear down the Epiglottis; by forcing things into the Windpipe by
laughing, or speaking in the time of eating; by Hairs, etc. sticking to the
Epiglottis, and disturbing its motion; or by a large Polypus in the Nose,
spreading its Branches to the Throat.

After strangling we endeavor to bring the Person to life by Blood-letting,
pouring down spirituous Liquors, and rubbing the Joints. If the Suffocation is
caused by being under Water, we hang up the Person by the Heels, that the Water
may run out; then apply a Toast soaked in Spirit of Wine, and exhibit
Sudorifics, or sometimes a gentle Vomit. If any bulky thing stick in the
Throat, give 'em a blow on the Back, and exhibit Oil of sweet Almonds, or
Cassia. If it stick in the Windpipe, Coughing, Sneezing, and Vomiting will
bring it up. If a Bone stick in the Gullet, let it be brought up by an
Instrument, or apply a suppurating Cataplasm, or exhibit a Vomit. A narrowness
of the Passage caused by Aqua fortis, is cured by the Mucilage of Quinces.

A sudden Suffocation affecting the Lungs immediately, is caused by Narcotic
Sulphurous Steams of New Wine or Ale; new Plaistering, Coal-Pits, and other
Mineral Fumes, which destroy the Airy Spirit that should ferment the Blood, and
so cause its Stagnation in the Lungs, and extinguish the animal Spirits;
producing Apoplexies, Carus's, and many dismal Symptoms. For Cure, let the
Person be carried into free Air, the Mouth opened, and Wind Artificially
procured; let a liquid Vomit mixed with the Essence of Castor, or
Apoplectic-waters, be thrown down the Throat. Let Vinegar, in which Castor is
infused, be exhibited by Spoonfuls. If the Person be Plethoric, open a Vein.
Apply outwardly Epithema's of Vinegar to the Scrotum and Testicles. Blow
Sneezing Powders into the Nostrils, and rub the Temples and Nostrils with
little Bags of Marjoram and Fennel-Flower-seeds infused in Vinegar. Note, Tho
Vinegar be of admirable Efficacy against the Gas or Steams of Vegetables, yet
it is not proper against a Mineral Gas.

Lastly. The Causes of Suffocation relating to the Muscles of the Breast, are
their Paralytic Apoplectic Condition, or Convulsions of the Larynx, occasioned
by the Disorder of the Nerves of the Par Vagum, and those of the Intercostal
Branch, as in the case of Hysteric and Hypochondriac fits, Poison, or eating a
sort of strangling Mushrooms, Venery, etc. The Cure is performed by Essence of
Castor, Volatile Salt of Amber, Camphyr, Opiats, and such Medicines as we use
against Hysteric and Epileptic Fits. Vomits, Oxymel of Squills, and Venice
Treacle are Specifics against the poisonous Mushrooms.

CHAP. II. Of Inspiration depraved, or difficult Breathing.
ART. I. Of Asthma's.
AN Asthma is a frequent difficult Respiration, attended by a perplexity in the
Breast; and sometimes a Cough and Snoring. Sometimes it is so violent, that the
Patient cannot breathe unless he stand upright; and then it is called,
Orthopnaeia. The general Cause of all Asthma's is the Constriction of the
Vesicles of the Lungs. The particular Causes are various.

Some Asthma's are moist, proceeding from vicious Matter, provoking the Lungs
and Windpipe to Contractions: and frequently attended by coughing, spitting
and snoring, tho not always. Others are Dry, occasioned by the Convulsions of
the Organs of Respiration, or dryness of the Lungs, without the influence of
any depraved humor.

The Matter that gives rise to the moist sort, is frequently lodged in the
Stomac and first Passages, and by distending them, presses the Lungs and
Diaphragm; Hence wind and acid Crudities, such as Hypocondriac or Scorbutic
Persons are generally liable to, frequently cause a difficult Breathing in a
Morning when they lie upon their backs in Bed: Or after eating, especially at
Night; or after Drinking Wine. Dropsies also distending the Muscles of the
Belly, and Crouding the Blood with serum, may occasion a difficulty of
Breathing.

If the matter lodge in the Lungs, it is either Originally bred within 'em, or
transferred thither from other Parts. If it be bred there, it proceeds from the
Depravation of the Nutritious Juice of the Lungs, and Wind Pipe; occasioned by
Mineral Steams, or Vicious Air, or the Viscidity and Sharpness of the Lymph
that waters 'em. For if their Nutritious Juice be perverted, it degenerats into
a tartareous, hard, or otherwise Noxious matter. Imposthumes and Ulcers in the
Lungs may also be reckoned as Causes of this Kind of Asthma.

If the Peccant humor be not bred in the Lungs, it proceeds either from serum
thrown upon 'em or the Bronchia, or Blood stagnating within 'em. The former
cause takes place, sometimes in the Declensions of Fevers, or when the Pores
of the Body are stopped; The latter in a Redundancy of Blood, Suppression of the
Terms or Piles, in Cachectic Persons whose Blood is Glutinous and Stuffed with
Crudities, and consequently requires more time for Rarefaction in the Lungs; in
the case of sudden fear, or Drinking of Cold Water immediately after the Blood
has been rarified by a Violent heat. Any Acid matter that is apt to Coagulat the
Blood may also produce the same effect.

As for dry Asthma's; They may proceed from a preternatural form of the Back
and Breast, or from Stones and Schirrus's in the Lungs: But the more Notable
Cause is the Convulsions of the Organs of Respiration, especially the
Diaphragm, occasioned by the disorders of the lower Belly, as in Hysteric or
Hypochondriac Fits; the Contorsion of the Backbone; Nephritic, Arthritic and
Gouty Pains; Or in General any Acid humor irritating the Nerves whether in the
Abdomen or Brain; But especially in the Abdomen, for the Nerves of the Par
Vagum, and those of the Inter-Costal Branch furnish both the Belly, Breast, and
Neck with Nerves; and upon this Account we frequently observe that these
Convulsive Asthma's are attended by disorderly Smptoms in the lower Belly.
Besides, if we consider the Variety and Multitude of the Muscles employed in
Respiration, and the various Motions and Contrary Offices they are obliged to
perform, we shall not be at a loss to Imagine what a sensible Influence any sort
of Convulsions may have upon Breathing. This Convulsive sort of Asthma's may
likewise be caused by the Dryness and Flaccidity of the Lungs, following the
Depravation of their Nutritious Juice; smoking of Tobacco, Mineral steams
frequently irritating the Fibers of the Lungs, etc. The like may ensue upon the
striking in of a Scab, or the unseasonable healing of an Ulcer, the Blood being
thereby rendered sharp and irritating, and its Texture prone to irregular
fermentations.

An Asthma is of its self manifest. But the Symptoms ought to be heedfully
regarded, in order to distinguish the various Causes. Those which proceed from
a Vicious form of the Breast, or from serum, or slime covering the Lungs, or
from the Depravation of their own Nutritive Juice, are continual; Whereas the
other sorts are Periodical. All Asthma's agree in this Symptom, that they are
Exasperated at Night, and when the Patient moves the Body, or Changes the Air.
Moist Asthma's are attended by a Cough, snoring and comfortable Expectoration
of matter in and after the Paroxysm. If the snoring make a deep hollow sound,
the matter lodges in the Bronchia. If it lodge within the substance of the
Lungs the sound is flatter, and the matter is not so Copiously brought up.

Dry Asthma's come suddenly and disappear in like manner without any visible
cause, or discovery of Noxious matter; They are not attended by Snoring,
Coughing, or Spitting, unless it be toward the end of the Fit, and even then
very sparingly; For the matter thus expectorated is not the cause of the
Disease as in the moist kind, but only squeezed out by the Perplexity of the
Muscles, and Agitation of the Lungs: Neither are they so greedy of Inspiration
as of Exspiration, which is contrary to the method of moist Asthma's. If the
cause of the Convulsive kind come Originally from the Head, the fit is ushered
in by Headaches and Swimming of the Head; If from the Belly, by a murmuring
Noise in the Guts; If the Midriff be chiefly affected, Pain Girds that Part
where it is joined to the short Ribs; If the Muscles of the Breast, the whole
Breast seems to be squeezed; If those of the Throat and Wind Pipe, they are as
it were strangled; If the Lungs themselves, They can give no other account, but
that they cannot Breathe.

An Asthma in malignant Cases, or Acute Fevers is a fatal Symptom. The
Convulsive sort is more common than the moist; and of the moist ones, that from
the Stomac is more frequently met with. If an Asthma be Inveterat it seldom
admits of a Radical Cure; and is oft-times followed by Cachexies, Swellings of
the Feet, Dropsies, and then Death it self.

If an Asthma be only a Symptom of other Diseases it yields to their Cure. If
it be of the moist kind, the viscous matter ought to be attenuated and carried
off, and the Stomac or Lungs fortified. The Convulsive kind is cured by
appeasing the Spirits, strengthening the Nerves, and Diverting their Cause by
Blistering Plasters and Issues. In order to obtain these ends, the following
Cautions will assist us.

1. In the moist Asthma's there is no Medicine equals a Vomit. It equally clears
both the Stomac and Lungs, and may be given in the very height of the Fit,
without the least fear of stiffling. In a dry Asthma proceeding from the lower
Belly, it may be exhited after the Paroxysm. Antimonial Preparations, or the
Water or Syrup of Tobacco, or the Juice of the flower de luce, are proper on
this occasion. Some exhibit the Infusion of white Hellebor in Rhenish Wine.
Some mix Emetic Ingredients with attenuating Medicines, but in so small Doses,
that they only Expectorat; others premise attenuating Medicines by themselves,
and then exhibit a Vomit.

2. Cause a Vein to be speedily opened in any Asthma whatsoever; and exhibit
convenient Medicines for dissolving Congealed Blood, Correcting its Cachexy,
and curbing its Turgescence.

3. During the Fit, let all manner of Purgatives be avoided. After the Fit is
over, they are useful, but ought always to be mixed with Gum Ammoniac. As,

Take of the Pills of Ammoniac, fifteen Grains; Sweet Mercury, a scruple;
Extract of Troches Alhandal, two Grains; Distilled Oil of Anis two drops. Make
Pills. Some use Quercetanus's Oxymel of Tobacco. Others the Decoctions of
Aromatic Herbs and Senna, which evacuat Gradually.

4. If the Disease proceed from serum, it ought to be carried off by Sweat,
Urine, Blistering Plasters and Issues. Sudorifics, especially of the Decoction
of Guajacum and Sassafras, are always useful in dry Convulsive Asthma's. They
expectorat also and attenuat, and therefore are not improper for the moist
sort. If the Stomac be faulty, the Acid Crudity must be Corrected and Expelled.

5. Narcotics are of Sovereign use both in and before the Paroxysm of a dry
Asthma. In the moist kind, If the Symptoms are very fierce, they are not
improper.

6. If it proceed from a Particular cause, it requires a Particular Cure. As if
it be caused by the retreat of a Scab or Itch, let volatile sudorifics, such as
the Decoctions of Furmitory, Elecampane, Fennel, Extract of Venice Treacle, and
the fixed Salts, be used for recalling the Itch; and if nothing prove effectual
put the Patient to Bed with those that are Scabby. If it proceed from Metallin
Fumes, as Mercury, let Solar-Bezoar and Diaphoretic Antimony be exhibited. If
from sudden Cold or Drinking of Cold Water, exhibit the Juice of Dasies in Wine.

The specifics commonly used for moist Asthma's, or such as flow from a viscid
matter whether in the Lungs or Stomac, are the Roots of Cuckowpint, Hyssop,
Horehound, Rosemary and its Flowers, Saffron, Speedwell, Zedoary, especially
its Spirit, the Juice of Briony, Elecampane Roots; The Syrup or Volatile Salt of
Tobacco for old Persons, Essence of Saffron, Essence of Sassafras; the Juice of
Radishes; Oxymel of Squills mixed with Cinnamon Water; Gum Ammoniac (above all)
dissolved in Vinegar; Compound Spirit of Verdigrise mixed with the thickened
Juice of Coltsfoot; Dulcified Spirit of Nitre; Elixyr Proprietatis; Sulphur, or
its Spirit per Campanam; The Water of Turnips; Sperma Caeti; Turpentin
dissolved with the yelk of an Egg in a Convenient Vehicle; Balsam of Sulphur,
Prepared with Oil of Anis; Juice of Woodlice with Wine (an incomparable
Medicine) and the Carminative Spirit, if the Stomac be disordered. A Mercurial
Salivation, or washes for the feet, in some Cases are very effectual.

Take of the Roots of Cuckow-Pint, four Scruples; Roots of Florentin Orris, and
Cinnabar of Antimony, of each two Scruples; Flowers of Sulphur, and Benzoin in
Powder, of each a Scruple. Make a Powder. Note, the Faecula's of Cuckowpint,
Briony, etc. are good for nothing.

Take of the Leaves of Hyssop and white Horehound, of each two handfuls;
Elecampane Roots, two Ounces; Fennel seeds, half an Ounce; Anis seed, two
drams; Terra foliata Tartari, three drams; Common Water, three Pound; Scum'd
Honey, half a Pound. Boil them in a close Vessel; Scum the Liquor and add three
drams of Cinnamon, and a dram of Oriental Saffron. Strain it for use. Let the
Patient take a draught twice or thrice a day.

Take of Hyssop and Speedwell Water, of each an ounce and a half; Cinnamon
Water, an ounce; Essence of Zedoary, half an ounce; Gum Ammoniac dissolved in
Vinegar, and a dram and a half; Oxymel of Sqills, an ounce. Mix for two or
three Doses.

Take of Hyssop, Poppy flower, and Asthmatical Waters, an ounce and a half;
Asthmatical Spirit (Prepared from Gum Ammoniac, Verdigris, and Brimstone) an
ounce and a half; Oxymel of Squills, or Syrup of Tobacco an ounce.

Take of the Tincture of Tartar, half an ounce; Spirit of Sal-armoniac, two
drams. Mix and take thirty or forty drops in a warm Vehicle.

Take of the Roots of Fennel, of Asarabacca, and of Florentin Orris, of each
three drams; Liquorice, two drams; Boil them in Water till the third part be
consumed. To eight ounces of the strained Liquor add Gum Ammoniac, a dram;
Oxymel of Squills, an ounce; Syrup of Horehound, an ounce or two. Mix. This is
Brunnerus his Potion. Note, Sugar and Sweet things ought to be Cautiously used
in this Disease; They are offensive to the Stomac and Lungs, and favor a
Phthisic.

Take of Rape flower Water, four ounces; strong Cinnamon Water, half an ounce;
Syrup of Tobacco, an ounce; Spirit of Sulphur, as much as suffices for a
Grateful Acidity. Mix, etc. A dram of Gum Ammoniac may be added.

Take of Cinnamon Water, two ounces; Sperma Caeti, two drams; Oxymel of
Squills, an ounce. Mix, etc.

Take of the Wine and Infusion of Woodlice, eight ounces; Extract of Elecampane
Roots, two drams; Extract of Saffron, half a dram; Syrup of Hyssop, and Syrup
of white Horehound, of each two drams; Mix, and take a draught twice a day.

As for the Convulsive, dry Asthma's, they are cured by premising a Vomit,
excepting the case of Hysterical Symptoms, exhibiting Antiepileptic Medicines,
such as the Volatile Salt of Amber; the Spirits of Tartar, Amber, Hartshorn,
Sulphur and Sal-armoniac; especially the Essence of Castor whose Oily salt
conquers the Acid most effectually; the Spirit of Putrified Earthworms, and the
Distilled Oils of Amber, Anis, and Turpentin, mixed with Narcotics. Externally
we apply the Oil of sweet Almonds with Saffron to the Breast; and Blistering
Plasters to the Shoulder-Blades and Arms.

ART. II. Of a Hiccough.
THE Hickets are a Convulsive motion of the Diaphragm, bending it downward,
distending the Belly, and provoking it to accelerat and interrupt Inspiration.
The Ancients referred it to the Stomac, but its influence over the Belly, its
necessary dependence upon Inspiration, its ready Obedience to the Command of
our Will, its being cured by continued Inspiration, Sneesing, Mirth, and
Violent Passions, argue that it is Seated in the Middriff. It Is true, the
Irritating Cause is frequently lodged in the upper Orifice of the Stomac, from
whence it has a short influence upon the Middriff, through which the Orifice
Passes. Thus sharp, acid, Cold Liquors and Victuals, or an acid Viscous Phlegm
in the Stomac, such as Children are Obnoxious to, are frequently the Authors of
this Disease: As also the Convulsive motions of any other Membran that
Corresponds with the Middriff, Violent Purgatives, Disjoynting of the Ribs,
Inflammations of the Liver, Ruptures, and whatever injures the Guts, or
Adjacent Membrans. If a Hiccough proceed from the assumption of sharp Liquors
or External things, it is not so dangerous, as when it follows the Inflammations
of the Liver, Costiveness, Colics, or Fevers, especially toward their height.

The Cure consists in abating the Convulsive sense of the Middriff, and
removing the material cause. The former end is compassed by Narcotics mixed
with Specifics. Now the Specifics are Cinnamon, Mastic; Galangal, Ginger,
Aniseed, Burnt Hartshorn, or Ivory, Spirit of Sal-armoniac and especially
Castor.

Take of Venice Treacle, half a dram; Laudanum Opiatum, two Grains; Aniseed,
half a Scruple; Distilled Oil of Mace, two drops. With the Juice of Quinces,
Make a Bolus.

If the Evil be Inveterat 'twill be necessary to Vomit; Or, at least to Purge
with Pills of Aloe and Sweet Mercury mixed with Laudanum. After their Operation
is over exhibit the following Mixture.

Take of Wine Impregnated with Quinces, and the Tincture of Roses, of each an
ounce; Extract of Zedoary, fifteen Grains; Laudanum Opiatum, two Grains;
Distilled Oil of Orange Peel, four drops; Syrup of Quinces, half an ounce. Mix,
etc. If the Stomac be distended with Wind, add the Dulcified Spirit of Nitre;
If the Person be molested with Hysterical Symptoms, add the Extract of Castor.

Externally we apply to the Stomac Cataplasms of yest, Aromatic Powders, and
Oil of Castor; Or hot Bread soaked in Spanish Wine, or in Vinegar, in which
Pepper, Castor and Mustard seeds are Boiled.

If a Hiccough proceed from Crudities in the Stomac, besides the General method
of Vomiting and Purging with Aloe, 'twill be requisite to exhibit Stomachical
Mixtures of the Essence of Zedoary, Spirit of Mastic, Elixyr Proprietatis
prepared with Spirit of Sal-armoniac, Essence of Wormwood, etc. If it be
occasioned by sharp Corrosive rusty humors, 'twill be needful to join the above
mentioned Specifics with Absorbent Powders, such as Sealed Earth, Crabs Eyes,
Coral, Solar Earth, and especially the Inner skin of a Hen's Breast. If it take
its Root from Poison, or be Accompanied by Malignity, let Alexipharmacal
Ingredients be added. In Fevers, Antimonial Nitre given to a dram, is of Noted
Efficacy. If sudden Cold, or Drinking of Cold Liquors immediately after heat
gave being to the Disease, 'twill be proper to Bathe in the Decoction of
Nervous Plants.

ART. III. Of the Night Mare.
THE Nightmare is either Accidental or Habitual. The former is occasioned by
the Distention of the Stomac with Wind or Crudities, and prevails when Persons
are asleep and lie upon their Backs. For then the Stomac dilated presses the
Middriff and Muscles of the Bread most; and so incumbers the descent of the one
and dilatation of the other, which are necessary for Inspiration. Thus the
Blood stagnats in the Lungs, and the Person is not able to speak, or breathe
freely, but fancies himself pressed by some particular Object. The Habitual is
occasioned by some Acid Lymph that disorders the Spirits and Creates a
Paralytic or Convulsive Disposition of the Nerves of the Middriff and Muscles
of the Breast; which by consent Cramp those of the Wind Pipe, whose Contraction
raises a sense of strangling, and abolishes the Power of an Articulat Voice.
Hypochondiac and Scorbutic Persons are most subject to this habitual sort,
which is frequently attended by red spots in the skin, and seems to be near
akin to an Epilepsy. Sometimes it is the effect of Worms, and equally attacks
the Patient both by Night and by Day.

The Symptoms are a Difficult Respiration (for the most part in the time of
sleep) an imagination of something heavy pressing the Breast, a querulous
inarticulat Noise, an inability to move; and after the Person is awake and the
Paroxysm over, a weariness of the Limbs, Anxiety of the Breast and Palpitation
of the Heart. If it be Habitual and come by day, and be followed by a
Trembling, Swooning and Cold sweats, it is very dangerous, and Prognosticats
Convulsions to young Persons, and Apoplexies to the Old.

The cure consists in Evacuating the Stomac, regulating the Diet, avoiding
sleep soon after eating; and obviating Convulsions. First let Vomits be
exhibited; Or if that cannot conveniently be done, Purge with the Extract of
black Hellebor, sweet Mercury, and Extract of Troches Alhandal mixed with Oil
of Amber; or with the Pills called Aloephanginae, and Elixyr Proprietatis. If
Wind disturb the first Passages, inject a Carminative Clyster. Then exhibit the
Oil of Aniseed and Spirit of Sal-armoniac, or Venice Treacle and Piony Water,
over Night. In a word, all Epileptic Specifics are proper. In the Paroxysm it
self, if Vomits are inconvenient, give the following Mixture.

Take of Hyssop Water, two ounces; Mint Water, one ounce; Cinnamon Water, half
an ounce; Spirit of Sal-armoniac, two Drams; Syrup of Tobacco, an ounce. Mix
and give it by spoonfuls.

CHAP. III. Of Disorders relating to Exspiration.
ART. I. Of Immoderat Sneezing.
SNeezing is a Convulsive motion of the Middriff, Muscles of the Belly, and
those of the Breast, occasioned by tickling the inward Membran of the Nostrils.
In this Convulsion the Middriff ascends into the Breast, and the Muscles of the
Belly and those of the Breast straiten their Capacities, and so cause an
impetuous Exspiration. The Irritation is conveyed from the Nostri^^ to these
Muscles, by means of the Intercostal Nerves which Correspond immediately with
those of the third and fourth pair; and the effect of it is, that the Middriff
is first Contracted and Pulled downwards to give way to a large Inspiration,
upon which it rebounds up with Force and Violence. The Remote Causes of
Sneezing are Various according to the sensibleness of the Membran, for some who
by the frequent use of snush, have procured a plentiful descent of Rheum into
the Nostrils, are not so easily moved. In General all sharp things from
without, nay, or a sharp acid Lymph from within, and sometimes, the Enjoyment
of Women, will cause it. The matter that is evacuated by sneezing proceeds
chiefly from the Nostrils and Palate, and adjacent Glandules, and secondarily
from the Breast, Wind Pipe and Lungs; If sneezing be violent and frequent it
discovers great disorder among the Spirits. It Is hurtful to the Eyes, promotes
the terms, and encourages the pains of Childbirth.

It Is cured by applying Laudanum, or the Oil of Roses with Opium to the
Nostrils, and giving Narcotics inwardly.

If it proceed from sharp External Objects, let sweet Milk, or the mucilage of
Quince and Fleawort seeds, or the Infusion of Fennel and Aniseeds in Vinegar be
injected into the Nose.

ART. II. Of Disorders of the Voice.
THE Voice is the sound of the Air expelled by the Wind Pipe, and consequently
differs from Speech which is formed by the Tongue. The first disorder it is
Obnoxious to is that of a Total Abolition, which may arise from three sources.
1. When the Muscles of the Wind Pipe are Paralytic, and do not squeese out the
Air; as if a redundancy of moisture over-charge 'em, or if the Recurrent Nerves
are Cut, or if an Apoplectic disorder sieze the Spirits. 2. When the Muscles
and Nerves of the Wind Pipe are Contracted by Convulsions, so that they hinder
the Passage of the Air. Thus the small Pox, a recent Clap, and Worms have been
observed for its Authors. 3. When the Spirits are suddenly disordered by Fear,
or Violent Passion.

If a want of Voice Accompany an Apoplexy, or malignant Fevers, or the
Hickets, it is an ill Omen. If followed by a Looseness (to which stammering
Persons are Obnoxious) it generally disappears.

For Cure; The Irritation must be appeased; The Palsy removed; Or the
prevailing humidity dispelled. For which end the Spirit of Sal-armoniac
Distilled with Oil of Amber and Essence of Castor, the Spirit of Wine
impregnated with Lavender Flowers, the Sudorific Decoctions of Woods, and
Chewing Medicines are proper; as also Blooding in some Cases. Externally, we
apply Bags of Aromatic Ingredients sprinkled with Spirit of Wine, or that of
Ants; Venice Treacle, or Balsam of Peru mixed with the Essence of Castor and
the Oils (by Decoction) of Amber, Lavender, Spike, etc. Or the mouth may be
Gargled as follows.

Take of Sage and Rosemary Leaves, of each a handful; Rocket and Mustard seeds,
of each a dram; Boil them in a Close Vessel. To a Pound of the strained
Decoction, add of the Spirit of Black Cherries, and Spirit of Sal-armoniac, of
each a dram; Honey of Rosemary Flowers, a dram. Mix for a Gargarism.

The second disorder of the Voice is a Hoarseness; occasioned by a prevailing
moisture in the Wind Pipe, separated by the Glandules inserted into it, and the
Glandulous Membran that lines it within. A Recent Hoarseness supposes a thin
humor; but the Inveterat argues it thick and slimy. The Remote Causes are
either External or Internal. The former are acid Fumes, sharp Liquors, much
speaking, or whatever Irritats the Wind Pipe and Promotes the Constriction of
its Glandules. The latter are the Prevalency of a sharp tickling serum in its
Glandules, as in the Scurvy, French Pox, and a Cough; the stuffing of the Nose,
and the Indisposition of the Lungs. If a Hoarseness be Inveterat, and Spring
from Internal Causes, it is very dangerous.

The Cure is varied according to the Consistence of the Peccant Lymph. If it be
thin and sharp it discovers it self by its manner of tickling, and the thinness
of what is cast up: And requires tempering, thickening, Pacific Medicines;
(Purgatives being first premised if there be occasion.) Such are the Syrup of
Poppies, or Diacodium, Liquorice, the Juice of Rapes, Raisins, Sperma Ceti
given to a dram in a warm Vehicle, the mucilage of Marshmallow Roots, the Oil
of Sugar, the Balsam and Flowers of Sulphur, Myrrh, and especially the Syrup of
Jujubes. As,

Take of the Syrup of white Poppies, six drams; Syrups of Violets, Liquorice
and Jujubes, of each half an ounce: Rob of Mulberries, three drams. Make a
licking mixture. Or,

Take of the Juice of Liquorice, two drams; Myrrh, a dram; Tragacanth a
Scruple; Clarified Sugar, two ounces. With Rose Water; Make Tablets to be
gradually melted in the mouth.

If the Hoarseness be Inveterat, and the Eymph become Thick and Crusty,
Bleeding is Pernicious; but Attenuating Ingredients are proper. Such are
Hedg-mustard, or its seed formed into an Electuary with the Pulp of Corants;
The Balsam of Sulphur with the Powder of Cuckowpint Roots, the Spirit of
Sal-armoniac, Cubebs, the thickened Juice of Coleworts; Oxymel of Squills; and
an Electuary made of Honey, Elecampane Roots, Sage, and Water Germander-leaves.
Or,

Take of Scabious Water, three ounces; the Asthmatical Water, six drams; Spirit
of Sal-armoniac Anisated, a dram and a half; Syrup of Hyssop, and Syrup of Hedge
Mustard, of each six drams. Mix for a Potion.

Take of the Clarified Juice of Coleworts, two ounces; Powder of Cuckowpint
Roots, a dram; With Oxymel of Squills, make an Electuary.

ART. III. Of a Cough.
A Cough is a frequent and interrupted Exspiration, or Convulsion of the
Middriff and Muscles of the Breast, attended by a Constriction of the Wind
Pipe, without which 'twould make no Noise. The Immediate cause is the Irritation
and Provocation of the Wind Pipe, or Lungs; or of the Muscles Dedicated for
Respiration. This may proceed either from an irritating matter Seated directly
in these places: Or from a foreign Cause conveying its Influence, by the
Commerce of the Nerves, and creating a Convulsive dry Cough, such as
Hypochondriac and Hysteric Persons, or those in whose Bodies an Acid prevails,
are very liable to. But we shall confine our thoughts to that which proceeds
from the immediate Influence of some material cause. And in order to form a
distinct Idaea of it, shall consider both its External and Internal Causes,
supposing still that the distinction of a dry and wet Cough is minded and
understood.

The External Causes are acid mineral fumes, sharp liquors, hard Food and an
Intemperat Air. The acid fumes and sharp particles of Air tickle the Wind Pipe,
and Pituitous Membran that lines the Palate, and by influencing the Nerves of
the Muscles of the Breast (which spring from the same branch of the Intercostal
Nerve, as those of the Wind Pipe) occasion the Contraction of the Breast and
Expulsion pulsion of what it contains. In like manner sharp liquors or grating
Food, by tickling that part of the Gullet which immediately joins the Wind Pipe,
produce the same effect. Now this Irritation at the first occasions a dry
Cough, and squeezes only a thin serum from the Contracted Glandules. But if it
continue long the parts are inflamed or corroded, and their Nourishment
degenerats into a slimy, thick matter, which Christeus it a wet Cough. The
Ancients imagined that this matter either Distilled from the Head, or was
deposited in the Lungs by the Blood; but they were mistaken, since this vicious
matter is rather the effect than the cause of a Cough.

The Internal causes relating to a wet Cough, are seated either in the Wind
Pipe and Lungs, or in the Gullet and Stomac. Those in the Wind Pipe and Lungs
are the sharpness of the serum deposited by the Blood, Ulcers, Imposthumes,
Inflammations, Morbifical matter transferred thither in the Declension of Acute
Diseases, Stagnation of Blood in the Lungs, and the suppuration of a Pleurisy,
Empyema, or Peripueumonia. Now all these causes occasion the Collection of
Irritating humors, and convert the Nutritious Juice of the parts into a thick,
sordid, purulent matter; Nay, sometimes carry the Curruption so high that
pieces of the very Lungs and Veins, Worms, Stones, etc. are cast up.

The Internal causes of a wet Cough relating to the Stomac, are a defluxion of
a viscid Lymph from the hinder Membrana Pituitaria into the Stomac, or
Indigested Crudities collected about its upper Orifice; but especially the
first. This Lymph falling from the Membran into the Stomac, gave occasion to
the Error of the Ancients in refering such Catarrhs to the Head. When it
irritates the Stomac, especially those parts which join the Wind Pipe and
Middriff, it occasions their Constriction which seldom ceases till some part of
the offending matter be cast up. These Coughs proceeding from the Stomac, are
more frequent than those from the Breast; from whence we may discover the
mistake of those who fancied that the matter cast up by Coughing came always
from the Lungs.

The Internal cause of a dry Cough, is the sharpness of the Lymph watring the
Throat, and separated by its Glandules for that purpose; occasioned by a weak
Digestion, or Crudity of the Chyle in the Mass of Blood. Sometimes a thin salin
humor provoking the upper Orifice of the Stomac, does likewise cause a vehement
dry Cough, as the Chin Cough of Children. But if the humor or Lymph become
thick, it degenerats into a wet one. In the Paroxysms of Intermitting Fevers,
we frequently meet with dry Coughs that proceed from a vicious fermentation of
the humors in the Duodenum, irritating the Stomac, and consequently the
Middriff and Wind Pipe. Preternatural Excrescences in the Lungs and Organs of
Respiration, may be also listed among the causes of dry Coughs.

As for the Diagnostics of Coughs. A wet Cough is known by the viscous matter
it brings up; as a dry one by its small quantity of thin serum. As for wet
Coughs, a superficial sound, easy Respiration, and the high seat of the Pain,
discover their Original from the Wind Pipe; as a difficult Respiration, or an
aptness to Cough upon a large Inspiration, a hollow hoarse sound followed
immediately by evacuation, night Fevers and Phthisical Symptoms, refer 'em to
the Lungs: But a pain and weight under the pit of the Breast, attended
sometimes by a difficult Respiration and Vomiting of Phlegm, a deep hollow
sound with a tearing fierce Cough, and Prostration of the Appetit, ascribe 'em
to the Stomac. A dry Cough proceeding from sharp saltish Lymph relents in the
Day time, and toward evening reassumes its former force, with a gentle
shivering, followed by a Violent Heat, and Night Fevers. Such are those that
usher in the small Pox, or Phthisics, or follow the retreat of Curicular
Eruptions in Children. Their Nocturnal Exacerbations are common to all
Lymphatic Diseases, and are in some measure caused by the want of equal
transpiration with that of the Day. But these dry Coughs always become wet by
continuance. The Coughs that Old and Arthritic Persons are subject to, seem to
proceed from a weak Digestion in the Stomac, where the crude viscid matter
assembles and provokes the adjacent Wind Pipe and Middriff. Sometimes Pectoral
and Stomachical, Moist and Convulsive Coughs are mutually Complicated.

Violent Inveterat Coughs threaten Ruptures, or Miscarrying; and promote
infirmities of the Head and Eyes. A stomachical Cough continuing long, viriats
the Lymph and Produces a Phthific, as also the Nocturnal dry Coughs. To
Scorbutical or Hydropical Persons, any Cough is an ill Omen.

The cure consists in allaying the Irritation, and removing the offensive
cause; for which ends Opiats, Vomits, Thickening, Attenuating and Vulnerary
Medicines are in use. However, for obtaining a distinct method of cure, let the
following directions be minded.

1. Opium is not convenient in wet Coughs ( viz. Those attended by a viscid
matter) till the Universal Evacuations are premised. A dry cough caused by
External Air, or Mineral steams, is admirably cured by Laudanum Opiatum in the
Beginning. To which we add Sylvius's Pills of Storax; The Decoction of Zedoary
in Wine; The Decoction of Raisins and Elecampane Roots in Wine; Or of Juniper
berries in Ale; taken in order to sweat. For Preservatives against the
Influence of the Air, we may anoint the Nostrils with the Distilled Oils of
Anis, Amber and Mace; and snuff up the Powder of black Hellebor mixed with
Sugar and Oil of Cloves.

2. If an accidental dry Cough by continuance become moist, and void slimy
matter, let a Vomit be first exhibited, and then Opiats, followed by Pectoral
Vulnerary Prescriptions if the matter be lodged in the Breast, and Stomachical
Arematics if it lie in the Stomac. The Pectoral Ingredients are Ground Ivy,
Chervil, Speedwell, Scabions, Elecampane Roots, Coltsfoot, and Sassafras. The
Stomachical are, Mint, Zedoary, Elixyr Proprietatis, etc.

3. A wet Pectoral Cough is formally cured by Attenuating and Expectorating
Ingredients interlac'd with Vomits, or moderat Purges; and followed by
Vulnerary Medicines for healing the corroded parts.

The Attenuating Ingredients are Cuckowpint Roots, the fresh Juice of Radishes
given with Sugar, the Decoction of Horehound or of Elecampane, Gum Ammoniac,
Ground Ivy, Hyssop, Ginger, Syrup of Tobacco, Oxymel of Squills, Hedge Mustard,
Spirit of Sal-armoniac, Aniseeds, and the Carminative Spirit de tribus given to
forty drops thrice a day.

Take of Hyssop Water, two ounces; Speedwell Water, an ounce; Asthmatical
Water, half an ounce; Spirit of Sal-armoniac, a dram; Syrup of Tobacco, an
ounce. Mix, etc.

The Vulnerary Ingredients are the flowers of Sulphur, the Balsam of Sulphur
Anisated given to fifteen drops in the yelk of an Egg twice a day, Benzoin,
Poterius's Antihectic, Diaphoretic Antimony, and the Vulnerary Plants.

Take of Crabs Eyes, and Flowers of Sulphur, of each a Scruple; Laudanum
Opiatum, a Grain; Distilled Oil of Anis, a drop; make a Powder.

Take of the Herbs Speedwell, Ground Ivy and Scabious, of each a handful;
Chervil, a handful and a half; Shavings of Sassafras, an ounce. Boil them in
Water, adding at last Bruised Corants, two ounces; Liquorice Roots, an ounce;
And after it is taken off the fire, three drams of Cinnamon hung in a Bag.

4. A wet Stomachical Cough proceeding from a viscid matter in the Stomac is
cured by exhibiting first Vomits, then Purges mixed with attenuating
Ingredients; As,

Take of the Pills of Hiera with Agaric, fifteen Grains; Gum Ammoniac dissolved
in Vinegar, half a scruple; Extract of Troches Alhandal, two Grains; Distilled
Oil of Anis, two drops. With Essence of Gum Ammoniac, make Pills. Sweet Mercury
may also be added.

After Purgation it will be requisite to prepare the matter for Expectoration
by attenuating Compositions; and toward the end, when the viscid matter is in
good measure evacuated, we may add the Syrup of Poppies, As,

Take of Ouckowpint Roots, a dram and a half; Gum Ammoniac dissolved in
Vinegar, Mastic, of each a Scruple; Tartar Vitriolated, half a dram. With Sugar
dissolved in Mint Water, make Tablets.

Take of Hyssop and Mint Water, of each an ounce; Asthmatical Water, six drams;
Cinnamon and Oxymel of Squills, of each an ounce; Gum Ammoniac dissolved in
Vinegar of Squills, two drams; Dulcified Spirit of Salt, as much as sufficieth.
Mix. Dose a spoonful now and then.

After the use of attenuating Medicines, 'twill be proper to strengthen the
Stomac by Elixyr Proprietatis, Essence of Elecampane, Decoction of Zedoary,
Spirit of Sal-armoniac, Essence of Saffron; and Chocolat which is useful
against all Coughs; As Sage and Water Germander Leaves, Flowers of Sulphur, and
Laudanum Opiatum, mixed with the Syrup Diacodium in the form of an Electuary,
are very convenient against all wet Coughs.

5. Dry Nocturnal Coughs proceeding from the acidity and saltness of the Lymph,
are cured by Volatile Sudorifics mixed with Opiats, a Vomit being premised if it
be needful. The Volatile sudorifies are the Spirit of Sal-armoniac, or the
Spirit of Hartshorn succinated, mixed with the Essence of Opium, Amber, Myrrh,
Sylvius's Pills of Storax; to which we may subjoyn the Incrassating Pectorals,
such as the Flowers of Sulphur given to a scruple in a Potch'd Egg, Benzoin,
Sperma Ceti; the Distilled Oil of Anis and Fennel, the Syrup of Jujubes, the
Decoction of Rapes (a very successful Medicine) the Juice of Liquorice Purged
from its Adulterating Ingredients by a Dissolution in Hyssop Water, Gum Arabic,
Marshmallow Roots, etc. For Example.

Take of the Spirit of Sal-armoniac Succinated, Tincture of Sulphur, of each a
dram; Essence of Opium, half a dram. Mix. Dose forty drops, to be taken two
hours before Supper.

Take of prepared Amber, half a scruple; choice Myrrh, and Volatile salt of
Amber, of each five Grains; Extract of Saffron, two or four Grains; Laudanum
Opiatum, one or two Grains; With the Essence of Sassafras make Pills, to be
taken two hours before Supper.

Take of the flowers of Sulphur, Benzoin, Prepared Amber, of each half a dram;
Frankincense and Gum Arabic, of each a scruple; Extract of Saffron, half a
scruple; Laudanum Opiatum, three Grains; With Sugar dissolved in Fennel Water,
make Tablets to be sprinkled with the Distilled Oil of Anis.

Take of Sperma Ceti, a dram; Flowers of Benzoin, a scruple; Myrrh and Volatile
salt of Amber, of each half a scruple; Laudanum Opiatum, four Grains. Make a
Powder for four Doses.

Take of the conserve of red Roses, two ounces; Poterius's Antihectic, a dram
and a half; the flowers of sulphur, and Powder Diaireos, of each two scruples.
With Diacodium. Make an Electuary.

Take of white Henbane seeds, white Poppy seeds, of each half a dram;
Frankincense and Myrrh, of each a scruple; Saffron, half a scruple; thickened
Juice of Liquorice, a dram; Sugar of Marshmallows Prepared with the mucilage of
Marshmallows, half an ounce; Gum Tragacanth dissolved in Rose Water, a dram.
Laudanum Opiatum, a few Grains. Make small Tablets to be melted gradually in
the mouth.

Take of the Conserve of Rosemary flowers, Conserve of Betony flowers, Conserve
of Marygold flowers, of each three drams; Prepared Amber, two drams; Myrrh, two
scruples; Benzoin and Frankincense, of each a scruple. With sugar dissolved in
the Water of Wild Thyme; Make Tablets and Spinkle 'em with the Distilled Oil of
Amber.

Take of the Roots of Florentin Orris, two drams; Flowers of sulphur, a dram;
Distilled Oil of Anis, half a dram; Distilled Oil of Fennel, fifteen drops;
White Sugar, three drams. Make a Powder, of which exhibit a dram twice a day.

Take of the Extract of sulphur Pulveris'd, twelve Grains; Extract of Saffron,
two Grains; Choice Myrrh, four Grains; Laudanum Opiatum, a Grain; With the
Essence of Amber, Make Pills.

Take of Storax, Extract of Liquorice, Olibanum, Myrrh, and Laudanum Opiatum,
of each half a dram; Oriental Saffron, a scruple. With the Syrup of white
Poppies, Make Pills. This is the Composition of Sylvius's Pills of Storax which
are of Excellent use in Nocturnal Coughs. The Juice of Liquorice is frequently
adulterated, and does more harm then good; To prevent this Inconvenience,
'twill be requisite to prescribe always the Juice of Spanish Liquorice, or at
least to dissolve the ordinary Juice of Liquorice in Hyssop Water, and Strain
it before it be thickened; that so the impure dregs may be separated.

Take of the Powder Diaireos, a dram; flowers of sulphur, half a dram; Laudanum
Opiatum, three Grains. Make Pills for three Doses.

If the Nocturnal Fever be troublesome; Take of Scabious Water, four ounces;
Asthmatical Water, half a dram; Spirit of Hartshorn succinated, a dram and a
half; Diacodium, six drams. Mix and Exhibit before the Paroxysm, in order to
sweat.

Toward the finishing of the cure, 'twill not be improper to Purge, thus; Take
of Crato's Pills of Amber, sixteen Grains; Extract of Agarie, eight Grains;
Troches Alhandal and Scammony sulphurated, of each two Grains. With the Essence
of Sassafras. Make Pills.

6. If a dry Noctural Cough continue so long that it begins to void Corrupt
matter, and that the Lungs are Ulcerated, let a draught of the Decoction of
Guajacum and Sassafras, or of China and Raisins, be exhibited every morning;
and Opiats at Night. And apply an Ointment of Hogs Tallow and Onyon Heads to
the Feet in the Evening, for three days together.

7. The dry Chin Cough arising from the Stomac, is cured thus. First give a
Vomit, then exhibit twice a day a spoonful of the Decoction of Electampane and
Corants in Spanish Wine, mixed with Diacodium. The Decoction of Rapes is
equally effectual, both in this and all other dry Coughs. Or,

Take of the Compound Tincture of Tartar, two drams; Spirit of Sal-armoniac
Anisated, a dram; Essence of Opium, half a dram. Dose forty drops thrice a day.

In General; All dry Coughs are treated as Catarrhs, and the moist sort as wet
Asthma's.

8. As for the Convulsive Coughs arising by sympathy from the influence of
foreign Membrans, they are cured, as Convulsions, by Volatile Salts.

9. If the Throat and Palate be excoriated, it is customary to give some
thickening licking Medicines for defending the Passage. This gave occasion to
the Vulgar mistake, as if such licking Medicines should drop into the Wind
Pipe, whereas they only keep the throat easy. Such are the Syrups of Jujubes,
Coltsfoot, Liquorice; and the Oil of sugar thus Prepared.

Take of the Spirit and Oil of Juniper berries, of each four ounces; White
sugar, two ounces. Kindle the Spirit; and the Sugar, or Oil will remain. Which
mix with the Extract of Saffron to be often licked of.

ART. IV. Of a Choking Catarrh.
THAT which the Ancients called a Choking Catarrh, is a Disease causing
difficult Respiration, and Threatening Suffocation; which seems to be
Complicated of an Asthma, Cough, and Hoarseness. The Ancients fancied that a
Catarrh falls from the Head, and overflows the Lungs; But Anatomy affords no
Passage for such a descent, and therefore we shall wave their Opinions. For the
most part Convulsive Asthma's are miscalled Catarrhs; or whatever symptom of
this Nature is different from them, may be cast into these four Heads.

1. A fear of suffocation may ensue when the Lungs are stuffed and provoked to
Contract their fibers by a viscid Heterogeneous Acid; as if sulphurous fumes
should stick to 'em like foot to a Chimney, they would provoke the Lungs to
contract and squeese out Lymph, with which they join in the form of a new
Concrete, till being concocted together they find a vent by Expectoration. Upon
which the Contraction and Difficulty of Breathing ceases; But the Nutritious
Juice of the Lungs is so depraved that they retain a Propensity to relapse upon
the least occasion. The acid that prevails in Children renders them also liable
to this symptom. It Is cured by Opiats and Thickening Medicines.

2. When the Head of the Wind Pipe and Epiglottis are provoked to Contraction,
as when a bit of Bread falling into it causes a Coughing, Hoarseness, difficult
breathing and voiding of matter. The cause in respect of the Larynx, is either
External or Internal. The former is a viscous thick Lymph falling from the
hinder Membrana Pituitaria into the Wind Pipe, especially in the Night time and
when the Patient lies on his back, which Irritats and Tickles the Head of the
Wind Pipe, provokes the Epiglottis to shut and hinder Respiration, occasions a
hoarseness, snoring and spitting of thin matter, which in process of time
becomes thick and concocted. The latter is a sharp Lymph, lodged within the
Wind Pipe and producing the like effects.

As for cure, if it proceed from the cause that is External or Foreign to the
Wind Pipe, it requires a Vomit and Attenuating Medicines, viz. The Juice of
Radishes, Syrup of Tobacco, Gum Ammoniac, etc. And in a word, the same cure
with the Inveterat moist Gough. As for Example.

Take of Hyssop Water, Mint Water, and the Water of Tobacco, of each an ounce;
The Asthmatical Water, six drams; Oxymel of Squills, half an ounce; Syrup of
Tobacco six drams, or an ounce. Mix and make a Potion, of which give a spoonful
now and then: Or,

Take of Hyssop Water and Scabious Water, of each an ounce and a half; The
Asthmatical Water, six drams; Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, a dram; Syrup
of Scabious, an ounce; Mix and Exhibit as above.

To these and such like mixtures, we may add opiats now and then. The Water of
Hedge Mustard with Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, the Roots of Cuckowpint,
and Michael's Asthmatical Spirit Prepared from Verdigris and Gum Ammoniac, are
also very proper.

If this Symptom proceeds from an Internal cause, it is cured by sudorifics
mixed with Opiats, Vomits being premised if there be occasion; after the same
manner as a dry Nocturnal Cough proceeding from a sharp Lymph.

Take of Mint Water, Scabious Water, Water of Mother of Thyme, of each an
ounce; Asthmatical Water, six drams; Spirit of Sal-armoniac Anisated, two
drams; Flowers of sulphur, half a dram; Syrup of Diacodium, an ounce. Mix and
give a spoonful now and then. Or.

Take of the Essence against Catarrhs, three drams, the Spirit of Sal-armoniac
Anisated, a dram. Mix and Exhibit a Convenient quantity frequently.

Take of Aqua Articularis ad Extra, two drams; Spirit of black Cherries, and of
Lilly of the Valley, of each a dram; Essence of Opium, two scruples. Mix and
apply it with a warm Cloth to the Region of the Larynx, especially when the
Person is sensible of a tickling, or constriction in that part.

If this Disease return frequently let an Issue be cut in the Arm. Clysters,
Blood-letting, Blistering Plasters, and all the Stratagems of the Ancients
Calculated for Defluxions from the Head are of no use.

3. The third sort of Suffocation, or Catarrhus Suffocativus, happens when the
Blood stagnats in the Lungs. In this Case it is coincident with a Syncope
Cardiaca, approaches to a Peripneumonia, and is attended by the Symptoms of an
Apoplexy. Nay, Apoplectic Persons, when Dead, have their Lungs stuffed after
the same manner as those who dye of this distemper; And therefore Hypocrates
Styled it a strangling Aph. 13. Sect. 2. The froth that sometimes attends this
Paroxysm, proceeds from the Imprisoned Blood in the Lungs, when Rarified by
Air: Thus, if we inject Oil of Turpentin into a Dogs Veins, it congeals the
Blood in the Lungs, and causes a plentiful evacuation of froth. The slime that
is also voided, proceeds from the Glandules of the Wind Pipe, which are
provoked to frequent Contractions by the Anxiety of the Breast; and so separate
large quantities of serum, which accompanies the Air in Exspiration. Besides,
the Pituitous Membran being straightened by this Anxiety Distills a viscous Lymph
upon the Wind Pipe, which helps to make up the quantity.

The remote causes of this stagnation (which the Ancients erroneously miscalled
a Catarrh) are. 1. The redundancy or over-bearing Turgescence of Blood. 2. The
Viscidity of the Blood occasioned by Crude Chyle. 3. Its Coagulation caused by
cold Air, by an inconsiderat assumption of cold Water immediately after great
heats; by fear, or by the Influence of a Vicious Acid. 4. The accidental
obstruction of the Lungs, by Stones, Excrescences, etc.

The symptoms are a sense of weight upon the Breast, difficulty of breathing,
danger of Choking, a very slow pulse, and sometimes a Cough, and a fatal
evacuation of froth and slime. It Is distinguished from an Apoplexy, by the
difficulty of Respiration, and lowness of the Pulse.

For Cure; Blood-letting is absolutely necessary; and ought to be performed
betimes; after which a sharp Clyster may be injected; and scarifying
Cupping-Glasses applied to several parts of the Body. Then give Sperma Ceti to
a dram in Hyssop Water. Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, or its Spirit
Prepared with Verdigris, Saffron, Volatile salt of Amber, Spirit of Hartshorn,
Crabs Eyes, Diaphoretic Antimony, the Juice of the flowers of red Dasies, and
the Vulnerary herbs, especially the Juice of Radishes, are also very proper. As
for the Ligatures, Frictions, Cataplasms, Plasters, Gargarisms, etc.
recommended by the Ancients, they are of no use; as being only contrived in
pursuit of their mistake, assigning a Chimerical defluxion from the Head for
the cause of this disease.

These three different sorts of choking Diseases, miscalled Catarrhs, ought to
be carefully distinguished; by reason that their Cures are so very different.

SECT. XV. Of the accidents that disturb the transformation of the Chyle; and
fermentation of the Blood.
THE Chyle being separated in the Guts, and conveyed through the milky vessels
into the Conduit of the Breast, joins the Blood in the left Subclavian Vein;
and by virtue of fermentation is wrought into the same color, and consistence.

This Fermentation, which for the most part assimilates the Chyle, springs from
the Vital Spirit, and saline principle lodged in the Blood; which is enlivened
and reinforced by the continued supplies of the air received in the Lungs. For
the Chyle is carried up to the Subclavian Vein, in order to have a shorter
passage into the Lungs, where the mixed Composure of Blood and Chyle is
dissolved, and rarified; the acid and urinous Salts are disengaged, and
rendered volatile, which by justling and encountering each the other produce a
notable Fermentation; by virtue of which the Sulphurous and Volatile parts join
together, and are invested with a red Color. Besides, the Chyle is tinctured
with the Sulphur of the Choler in the Guts, and so predispos'd to a likeness
and easy union with the Blood.

This Transformation of the Chyle is not accomplished by one single passage
through the Lungs, but must be completed by repeated Circulations along with the
Blood. Which truth is plainly made out by the Chyle or Milky liquor that swims
upon Blood drawn forth, four or five hours after eating. So that the mass of
Blood consists naturally of Chyle and Blood, which being perfectly mixed make
up an univocal Homogeneous Liquor. It Is true the Ancients speak of four
humors, etc. as being different ingredients of the Blood, which they inferred
from the apparent unequal condition or the several parts of Blood drawn forth
from the Body; but that is owing only to its Corruption, or alteration
occasioned by the Nitrous Salts of the Air. Upon which account all special
predictions, grounded on the external appearance of Blood, are frivolous and
uncertain.

This regular Fermentation and Assimilation is disordered by the defects of the
Chyle, or the Blood. The former may be cast into three heads. 1. When the Chyle
is not sufficiently digested, attenuated, and volatilis'd in the Stomach. 2.
When it is not duly tinctured with the Oily Sulphur of the Choler. 3. When the
Choleric or pancreatic Juices are tardy in separating its dregs. The Latter
into these. 1. When the Motion of the Blood is raised beyond its natural pitch.
2. When it is depressed and diminished. 3. When its substance is adulterated.
The signs by which we descry a disorderly fermentation are the pulse and urine.
But they are oft-times fallacious. For the pulse may be immediately influenced
by the Animal Spirits, without any dependence upon the fermentation of the
Blood; and the Urine may be disguised by drinking, or the disorders of the
solid parts employed in that service.

The immediate cause of a disorderly fermentation of the Blood, is the
degeneracy of the Urinous and Acid Salts from their due proportion and harmony.
The remote causes are; the various Contagious particles conveyed into the Body
with the Air or any other vehicle; antecedent losses of Blood, disorders of the
Bowels, etc.

The Cure is performed by Saline Remedies calculated for the particular
indisposition of the Blood, and varied according to the difference of
Temperaments. Of which more above.

CHAP. I. Of Fevers in general.
A Fever is a vicious fermentation of the Blood, in which its temperament is
depraved, and the whole Body disordered. The infinite variety of Feverish
ferments, occasions a great many various depravations of the Blood. But in
general, the formal Essence of all Fevers consists in a preternatural
fermentation of the Blood, occasioned by a foreign ferment, which sometimes
immediately affects the Blood, sometimes the Spirits, and sometimes both; at
which time Nature endeavors to throw out the heterogeneous particles. In order
to make this appear, let us Consider the following Remarks.

1. That the eating of Summer Fruits frequently causes Fevers. Now these are
endowed with a notable propensity to ferment. 2. That Cold, or what ever
impairs the insensible transpiration, produces the like effect. Now the Vicious
Salts thus imprisoned and overflowing in the Blood, cannot affect it any other
way, than by creating a fermentation. 3. That Fevers ensue the inspiration of
Contagious particles, which naturally propagate by fermenting. 4. That the
Rotten Fevers mentioned by the ancients, are only explicable by the Doctrine
of fermentations; for no living thing can be properly entitled to putrefaction,
unless by it be meant a turbulent confused motion, proceeding from the
dissolution of contrary Salts; as that of Spirit of Vitriol and Oil of
Turpentin.

The Common Symptoms of Fevers are likewise vouchers for the fermentation that
causes 'em. These are commonly reckoned four, viz. 1. An alteration of the
pulse. 2. A Chilness, shivering, and shaking 3. Excessive heat. 4. The Change
of Urine, both as to the Liquor and what it contains.

As for the first. A preternatural frequency of the pulse, from an internal
cause, is accounted by Silvius a peculiar and infallible Symptom of a Fever
(though some malignant Fevers seem to make an exception to the Rule.) For the
most part the pulse is also swifter. Now these effects are plainly resolvable
into the fermentation of the Blood, or the irritation of the Heart and Spirits,
occasioned by a foreign ferment.

As for the second: A Chilness, shivering, and shaking differ only gradually.
The first is only a light Convulsion of the Skin, and contraction of the pores,
resembling the sense of Cold; tho, in the mean while the Body feels hot to the
External touch. If the muscles are likewise affected, it creates a shivering,
and sometimes a stiffness. These effects proceed from a prevalent Acid which
twitches the membranous parts, and corrupts the mass of Blood. In the beginning
of intermitting or Continual Fevers, these Convulsions chiefly affect the
internal and noble parts. But after the height of Malignant or Favorable
Fevers they are seated for the most part in the external Membrans, and portend
Critical eruptions.

The third Symptom is the immoderat Heat of the Body. I call it only a Symptom;
for it is not Essential to a Fever, as some would have it. For some diseases are
attended with a preternatural Heat, that are not accompanied by a Fever, and
besides, there are some Fevers that are not hot, but on the contrary notably
Cold. Though this advance may sound like a paradox, it is backed by Hippocrates,
Avicenna, Galen, Bartholin, and Helmont: Nay, I my self have met with an
instance of an intermitting Fever, that had no hot fits at all; which I cured,
after the common evacuations, by a mixture of Spirit of Sal-armoniac and Spirit
of Scurvy Grass, exhibited in the intermitting days, and a Powder of Tartar
vitriolated, or Salt of Wormwood with prepared Crabs Eyes, taken some hours
before the invasion of the Paroxysm. To return to the preternatural heat which
for the most part attends Fevers, it is sometimes moist when the fibers of the
Skin are unbended, and the steams of the humors copiously exhaled. Sometimes
when these fibers are contracted, it is dry. If the Acid Salts are not much
exalted, it is meek and tolerable; but if these sharper Salts abound in the
Blood, the heat gives a biting and fiery impression to the external Organs of
touching.

This preternatural Heat springs immediately from the boiling and struggling of
the Salts in the mass of Blood. The Occasional Cause is an Acid, which
sometimes infects chiefly the Spirits; and then the heat is remisser, than when
it principally affects the Blood. It destroys the established proportion of the
Salts, and so gives rise to vicious: fermentations. To make good this
assertion, namely, that an Acid is the principal author of excessive heat, and
consequently of Fevers themselves; it will not be improper to mention the
following Observations.

1. All wounds and ulcers are offended by Acids, by reason of the Inflammation
and heat occasioned by them. And Alcali's perform the cure. 2. Pleurisies,
Quinsies, and all inflammations, are still attended by acute hot Fevers. Now
they are the product of Acids, and yield only to Alcalin Remedies. 3. The same
may be said of St. Antony's fire. 4. Intermitting Fevers spring from an Acid
Crudity prevailing in the stomach, and are only cured by absorbent Alcali's. 5.
Catarrhous fevers proceed from the Acid sharpness of the Limpha, and are cured
by Volatile temperat Medicines. 6. The Measles and Smallpox are attended with a
remarkable heat and Fever before the eruption. Now the prevalency of an Acid
in these cases is plainly evinced by the corrosion of the Skin, suppuration of
the Pimples, and method of Cure. 7. Arthritic pains are oft-times ushered in by
Feverish Symptoms. Now, their Cause is an Acid, and the cure consists in
subduing it. 8. The Fevers which follow the stopping of an itch or crusty scab
in Children, are the natural offspring of the Acids retained in the Body, by
means of that suppression. 9. Hectic Fevers always attend purulent internal
Ulcers, which partake of acidity. 10. Children are oft-times seized with
Fevers and gripings, by virtue of the corrupt Acid of the Milk. 11. The high
Color of the Urine in Fevers must needs proceed from a prevalent Acid; for
Alcali's give a contrary Tincture. 12. Immoderat use of Wine produces the same
Symptoms as a Fever, by means of its Acid Tartareous parts. 13. Hypochondriac
persons are obnoxious to Inflammations, etc. by reason of the prevailing
Acidity in the first passages. 14. The Heart-burning resembles the Symptoms of
a Fever, and is caused by a gnawing Acid in the mouth of the stomac. 15. That
according to Tachenius, the hot vegetable Remedies are proper against a
predominant Acid; and the cold vegetables against an Alcali. The plain truth is
this. All hot vegetables have a fat rosinous Acid, which if set at liberty is
notably hot; but if they be digested with fixed Salts, the fat Acid is retained
by the fixed Salt, and then they yield a thin meagre Spirit, of noted
excellency in hot diseases; as I have often experienced by the simple Spirit of
Sal-armoniac. 16. That the pain and heat remaining after burning, proceeds from
the keen Acid particles shot into the part; and is removed by Alcali's.

Some derive the excessive heat attending Fevers from the Bile; but several
medicines near allied to the Choler expel the heat; and besides, its Patrons
cannot determine whether it should proceed from its Acid or Alcali, since it is
equally entitled to the possession of both.

The fourth Symptom is the Alteration of Urine. When the Chyle or Blood is
viciated, Nature endeavors to discharge the Heterogeneous particles by this
passage; which accordingly impart to the Urine a high or flat tincture,
according to the degree of the peccant Acid; which is equally the Cause of this
and all other Symptoms attending Fevers.

The immediate subject of Fevers is the Blood and Spirits. The alteration of
Pulse and Urine clearly infers that the Blood is affected; the Critical Sweats,
the Jaundice, and sometimes the Acid tincture of the Blood ensuing Fevers, are
plain Demonstrations of the same truth. The feverish tendency of Aches, the
efficacy of Opium in appeasing febrile commotions, and the nature of some
malignant Fevers that produce no notable alteration in the Blood and Urine,
make it to appear, that the discomposure of the Spirits is properly called a
Fever.

From whence I infer, that Heat or Chilness are not essential to a Fever; and
that the Heart, or any other solid part, are not the immediate subject. It Is
true, the febrile source may lodge in some corrupt or vitiated part, but it
only causes a Fever by disordering the Blood and Spirits. This remote Cause of
Fevers ought to be heedfully distinguished from their Effects of the same
Nature; namely, when in their declination any solid part is seized with a
swelling, obstruction, etc. according to the various disposition of the febrile
matter, and the previous infirmity of the part.

The various Divisions of Fevers may be gathered from the following Chapters.
As for their Causes; whatever abolishes the natural proportion and Symmetry of
the Salts, causes a preternatural Fermentation, and is called a febrile
Ferment. If it affect the Blood immediately, the Spirits receive its influence
at second hand; and if the Spirits are first attacked, the Blood is disorderd
by them.

This Ferment must be somewhat disagreeable to our natural Ferments, else it
cannot cause a Fever. Such as are the particles retained by stopping the
insensible transpiration, the Ferment proceeding from Ulcers, Inflammations,
Contagion, or Acid Lymph, striking inwards a Scab or Itch, eating Summer
Fruits, etc.

If this ferment be engendered within the Body, it oft-times proceeds from the
long stay of Victuals in the stomac, which by delay and want of digestion
become naked Acids, or viscid Bodies enclosing an Acid within 'em; upon which
account we derive the cause of Intermitting Fevers from the Stomac; and for so
much as their Paroxysms are but so many continual Fevers, most of this sort
acknowledge the same Original. When the Blood and Humors are forced out of
their respective Vessels by Wounds and Ulcers, they ferment and occasion a
feverish disorder in the Blood or Spirits.

This Ferment approaches to an Acid, both in favorable and malignant Fevers;
but with this difference; that a malignant ferment is sharper and more Volatile
and penetrating than the other; and is frequently couched under covert of other
minute particles; as in Spring the Exhalations of Fermenting Plants; in Summer
the Alcalin Effluviums in the Air; in Autumn and Winter, the Acid Salt which
then prevails.

The steams of Rotten Carcasses, and the unfavourable aspects of the Stars may
occasion the like malignity. These particles though originally included in a
narrow compass, multiply by fermentation, and spin out the disease. The
alteration occasioned by them in the Blood, is perfectly parallel to that of
Urine, which is brought into fermentation by the jarring of its Salts, by
virtue of which it precipitates its disproportionable parts, and then returns
to a pacific state. Even so, the preternatural fermentation of the Blood, is
caused by the disproportion of its Salts; and moves it to cast forth the
superfluous and offending parts by the passages of Urine, Sweat, etc. Though in
this Critical Evacuation, not only the first morbific matter, but the laudable
parts of the Blood and Chyle, that the fermentation had melted down into a
saline form, and rendered insociable, are equally discharged.

The remote Causes are various. The Obstruction of the pores of the Skin, and
excessive Drinking or Eating, are natural inlets to a Fever. The passions of
the Mind, especially Fear, are generally arraigned as Causes of malignant
Fevers; but it is not immaginable how they should produce such an effect of
themselves. It Is true indeed, Fear, and other passions, may depress or disorder
the Spirits, and so procure an easy admissio nto the Airy Ferment, that was
unable to storm them in their natural Order.

The Symptoms are accounted for above; to which we may add the vicious
increase, or diminution, or depravation of the Appetit; Headachs, swoonings,
etc.

The general Prognostics are derived from the Pulse and Urine. A vehement,
large, equal pulse is a sign of strength; a small unfrequent pulse betokens
weakness: A hard pulse bespeaks the inflammation or distention of some
membranous part; as in Pleurisies, and malignant Fevers, affecting the Spirits
and Nerves: A soft pulse discovers that the Spirits are not much disordered;
and if it be large and vehement withal, forebodes sweating.

Urine affords the signs of Crudity or Concoction. If clear Urine become muddy
or contain a Cloud or Sediment, it is a sign of Concoction, and portends a happy
solution of the disease: for by Concoction we understand the separation or
precipitation of the peccant Salts from the mass of Blood, and by Crudity the
perturbation of the Blood arising from these Salts. Now, in the beginning of
Acute Diseases the Urine is clear and unmuddy'd, by reason that the Salts are
yet reigning in the Blood; but in the increase of the Disease it becomes thick
and troubled, and at the height precipitates a copious sediment. If the Urine
continue muddy, and does not Clarify by standing, it is a sign that the
Commotion and Confusion of the Blood does not yet abate. Nature does not
evacuate the offending matter before a sufficient Concoction; and in imitation
of her example, Art ought not to attempt any evacuation in Benign Fevers,
before the signs of Concoction appear. In malignant Fevers indeed, it is not
safe to wait for 'em; but to endeavor an early precipitation by proper
remedies. Clear and sound-like Urine is a sign that the animal Spirits are
principally affected, and is attended by malignity: but concocted Urine, if it
continue such, is a certain presage of Recovery. If after an apparent
Concoction, it become crude or thin again, it is a fatal Omen.

This gradual Concoction is the effect of Nature endeavoring a Crisis.
Accordingly, we find that immediately before the Crisis, Nature struggles most,
and the Sickness is at its greatest height, in which case it ought not be
disturbed by artificial administrations, but the natural tendency of the
morbific matter must be heedfully observed; for sometimes it is cast forth by
Sweat, sometimes by Urine, sometimes by Bleeding, and at other times is thrown
upon several parts of the Body by way of swellings and Imposthumes; or is
gathered under the skin all over the Body, and tinges it with a yellow color,
which we call the Jaundice, and is a sign of health, if it happen on the fifth
or seventh day; but if it commence sooner, unless attended by some notable
Evacuation, it is oft-times fatal. But of all fatal signs that of the Patient's
rubbing and picking the nose, without any efflux of matter, is the most dismal.

As touching the Method of Cure: It Is necessary to distinguish malignant
Fevers which suddenly weaken the Person, and generally determine in some
notable Evacuations; from those that are benign and favorable, in which we
either leave all to Nature, as the ancients did, or anticipat her efforts by
enervating and correcting the febrile Ferment with Artificial Remedies, and so
ascribe the whole Cure to Art.

Sometimes we join issue with Nature, and while she performs her Work, are only
busied in removing the impediments that imbarrass her, by cleansing the first
passages, emptying the Blood Vessels, and promoting the precipitation of the
morbific matter by Medicines proper for that purpose. Indeed when Nature
departs from her due Measures, by endeavoring unseasonable evacuations, as in
the beginning of a Fever, while the Urine is yet Crude, a violent Looseness,
Bleeding, etc. it is a perplexed Case; for to withstand Nature, and stop the
Looseness, etc. were to augment the Fever; and to suffer it to go on, weakens
and disables the Patient, so that he cannot encounter the Disease. In order to
solve this difficult knot, let us consider in the first place, that Nature is
forced to these Evacuations, by the sharpness of the humors, which ought to be
corrected by temperat Medicines; in the next place, that if they exceed in
quantity, they may be safely curbed; or if deficient in quantity, may be gently
encouraged. If the quality of the matter be faulty, that is, if such things are
evacuated as ought not to be, it is allowable to stop it, according to Hipp.
Sect. 2. Aph. 2. If both quantity and quality be faultless, and the evacuation
charged with no Crime, but that of its being ill timed, it may nevertheless
prove Critical.

Blood-letting is frequently enjoined in Fevers, but oft-times it does more
harm than good. The general Plea for it, is, that it ventilats and cools the
Blood; whereas on the contrary, the more space be given to the Blood to boil
in, the higher it boyls. In intermitting Fevers, I positively aver, that it is
noxious; in malignant Fevers it is next door to cutting the Patient's Throat.
And as touching the continual burning Fevers, it ought to be very cautiously
gone about, by reason of a latent malignity that oft-times attends them. If the
Patient be plethoric, young and lusty, if a Vomit could not conveniently be
exhibited in the beginning of the Fever, if any wonted evacuation of Blood be
stopped, and such other circumstances indicate Blood-letting, it is well: But
however it be, it is never safe after the third or fourth Day.

As for evacuating Remedies Hippocrates's Aphorism is a standing Rule; namely,
that Concocted, not crude humors, ought to be evacuated. So proper Purgatives
are inconvenient till after the height of the distemper. Indeed gentle
lenitives, that do not reach further than the first ways, may be mixed with
digestive Salts, and exhibited in the beginning, or progress, avoiding the time
of the Crisis. Vomits are proper in all kinds of Fevers, especially if there
be any inclination to Vomit, sour Belchings, murmuring noise in the Guts,
Headache or Giddiness. They ought to be Administered only in the beginning of
acute Fevers. In the progress of slow Fevers they may likewise be given.

Clysters are proper for mitigating the Heat, and redressing the disorders of
the Head and Guts. But upon the point of Critical Evacuations or Eruptions,
they are altogether improper.

Sweating Medicines are authorized by Nature's Example. They ought to be
frequently repeated, and that not only after signs of Concoction, but during
the whole course of the disease, especially if it be malignant. Such of 'em as
are sharp, aromatic, rosinous, oily, or Hot, are to be avoided; and those which
are temperat, as the fixed absorbents, and the thin volatils are only proper
for this purpose. If sweat do not easily ensue, add Opiats to them. Which are
never to be used without a sudorific mixture, nor about the time of the Crisis,
nor in the very first beginning of the disease.

In Fevers Sugar and sweet things ought to be avoided, by reason that they
promote the Fermentation. Thirst generally attends Fevers, and proceeds from
the deficiency of Spittle, and from Alcalin Salts lodged in the Palate. It Is a
vulgar Error to derive it from Heat; for a few drops of Spirit of Sulphur are
more efficatious in quenching it, than a whole Gallon of Water or cooling
Liquors. Wine is likewise of noted efficacy for quenching Thirst, corroberating
the Stomac and Spirits, and promoting Urine. But it ought to be of a sharp thin
Body; for the sweet fat Wines from Spain, Florence, etc. are hurtful.
Hippocrates was wont to exhibit Wine in all Fevers; at least in intermitting
and malignant Fevers it is of sovereign use. In continual burning Fevers what
disorders it may occasion are presently visible, and yield to absorbent
Powders; for it is not the hot Spirit, but the Acid of the Wine that can do the
least harm; nor that neither, but only in some particular Constitutions.

Ale or Beer is not agreeable to feverish Persons, because the digestive
faculty of the Stomac being languid, it corrupts and causes bitter musty
Belchings. Waters and thin Liquors mixed with Acids are preferable. As,

Take of the Flowers of red Roses two handfuls; extract a Tincture from them
with Water sharpened with Spirit of Sulphur; then add the Syrrup of the Juice
of Gitrons, or of Barberries, or of Rasberries, and make a Julep. Or,

Take three Citrons sliced, and throw upon 'em white Sugar. Then Boil them in
common Water. Take of this Liquor strained a Pound and half, fresh juice of
Citrons three Ounces; Flowers of Roses and of red Poppies, of each a handful;
with a small quantity of dulcified Spirit of Salt. Let them stand in a warm
infusion, in order to extract a Tincture.

In continual Fevers let the Patient drink at pleasure: But the Liquor must
not be cold, nor much of it drunk at once. In intermitting Fevers these Acid
potions, ought not to be Administered till after the cold Fit. The Spirit of
Sulphur with common Water is a proper Liquor both for quenching thirst and
promoting sweat. Or,

Take of Whey two Pound, Citron Juice three Ounces; Dasies and red Poppy
Flowers, of each an Ounce and a half. Boil in a close Vessel till the Tincture
be extracted. The Citron Juice depurates the Whey. It is useful in all
continual Fevers, and qualifies Scorbutic or Hypochondriac Salts.

As for Diet. They ought to avoid Meat, Fishes, and Summer Fruits. In a word,
let them eat but a little, and as their Appetit requires. What they eat must be
thin and watery, but never forced upon 'em. Broth, Panado's, a Tossed in Wine, or
at most poach'd Eggs are their proper food.

Quiet and Rest are good Signs; and sleep, if it be not preternatural, composes
the Spirits and procures Sweat.

CHAP. II. Of Intermitting Fevers.
A Fever is styled Intermitting, when the fermentation, and agitation of the
Blood and Spirits is interrupted, and after a certain interval of time revives
again. If it return with equal force every Day, it is called Quotidian: If it
return every other Day, leaving an interval of one entire Day, it is a Tertian:
if the interval consist of two Days, it is a Quartan. Some return after three
Days, some after four, five, etc. Some every Week, some every Month, and some
every Year; but these are very unfrequent.

If the fit return twice or thrice in one Day, it is called a double or treble
Quotidian. If two Paroxisms happen every other Day, or if the intermitting Days
of Tertians have likewise Paroxysms corresponding to one another, it is a double
Tertian; If two Fits come in the Fir Days, and but one in the Intermitting,
it is a treble Tertian. If the Fits return every Day, so as that the first for
duration and other Symptoms is parallel to the fourth, the second to the fifth,
third to the sixth, etc. it is a treble Quartan. If the Fever intermit only
every third Day, it is a double Quartan.

It Is a hard matter to distinguish Quotidians from double Tertians. These last
are known by this, that either the Paroxysms have an alternat correspondence,
the first to the third, second to the fourth, etc. Or the intervening Paroxysm
comes later, while the other two observe their set Periods; or in Progress of
time it entirely disappears, and two Fits recur every other Day. A precedent or
succeeding simple Tertian, discovers likewise a double Tertian. So that true
Quotidians are very rare, and some are so hardy as to deny that there are any
such. But several good Authors have vouched for the Affirmative.

There are some Erratic Intermitting Fevers, that observe dark Periods
peculiar to themselves; and some called Wandering, which have no set times at
all.

The grand Symptoms of intermitting Fevers are a chillness, shivering and
shaking, followed by heat; and that by plentiful Sweats. Before the invasion of
the Paroxysm, the Patient is molested with a Yawning and Stretching; a
weariness of the Joints, and unquietness or tossing in Bed. The Nails become
livid and blue; a gentle chillness seizes the Loins and Back, afterward it
creeps to the Belly, and by degrees overspreads the whole Body, especially the
extreme Parts. Then follows a shivering, and sometimes a violent concussion of
all the parts of the Body. During the cold Fit, several sorts of pains affect
the Joints, the Guts are gripped, and make a murmuring noise; and the Pulse is
rendered more frequent, but withal weaker and lesser, nay scarce perceivable.

When the coldness abates, a difficulty of breathing insues, with a notable
heat and thirst; the Pulse is strengthened and enlarged. (If the Pulse be
small, it is a sign of great Malignity.) The Tongue becomes dry, the Neck and
Temples are seized with a beating heat, attended with frequent respiration,
headache, watching, and sometimes doting. The heat declining is followed by
sweating and voiding Urine. After which sleep takes place, and the Symptoms
disappear. In Tertians the heat and thirst are greatest. And in Quartans, the
cold, shaking, and weariness of the Joints are most troublesome.

This is the ordinary manner of Invasion. But withal, there are some irregular
Fevers, that depart from this method. As the cold Fevers that have no hot
Fits; and the hot Tertian Fevers that are not ushered in by cold. Sometimes,
but very rarely, the Order is inverted, and the heat precedes the cold Fit.
Oft-times these Fevers begin regularly, and afterward degenerate; or on the
contrary, begin in a disorderly manner, and by continuation become regular.

If the Pulse be very small, the Strength abolished, the Breast disturbed, the
Spirits disquieted, in the beginning of the paroxysm, and afterward Pushes and
Spots appear in the Skin, the Fever is malignant and very dangerous. Though some
are inclined to exclude malignity from the whole circle of intermitting Fevers.

Though intermitting Fevers may differ in their Periods, and some occasional
Symptoms, they all proceed from one and the same Cause, and require the same
method of Cure; as appears by their frequent permutation. The general efficient
Cause of all Motion is the Spirits; but the occasional material Cause which
provokes them to such irregular Motions, is a vicious acid ferment bred in the
Stomach and first Passages, by the depravation or weakness of the digestive
Faculty. This Opinion is justified by the preternatural Appetit that sometimes
attends Fevers, the frequent Cures performed by Fasting, by excessive Drinking
and Vomiting, or by eating greedily what was longed for; and the notable
exasperation or relapse of the Disease occasioned by any error in Diet, or
earing unacceptable Food. It Is true, such Fevers may sometimes proceed from
the Air, or quality of the Food; but very rarely. The disorders of the Spleen
and Liver do frequently attend Quartans, and Tertians, but they are rather
their Effects, than Causes; or perhaps they may remotely indispose the Body,
and render the Paroxysms more obstinat. The suppression of the Terms, or
obstruction of any part, may produce the like Effects; but still the immediate
Cause is lodged in the Stomac, or first Passages, which insinuats it self into
the remains of indigested Food, and so multiplies the Cause of repeated
Paroxysms.

Now by means of this Acid, all the Symptoms and Periods of Paroxysms, are thus
accounted for. If the Chyle be not well digested in the Stomac, and duly
separated from the grosser parts, by the interposal of the pancreatic and
choleric Juices in the Guts, it degenerates from its temperat, volatile, saline
Quality, and becomes acid, or viscid; and accordingly when it joins the Blood,
fixes its saline volatile oily Particles, and thickens the whole Mass. Thus its
fermentation is impaired, and by consequence the Pulse is weakened and
diminished, but withal rendered more frequent by the irritation of the Heart.
The heat of the Body is extinguished, and the Spirits disordered by the
indisposition and vicious fermentation of the Blood, from whence issues the
weariness of the Joints. When this Acid begins to exert it self, it twitches
and contracts the nervous and membranous parts, the Coats of the Guts and
Stomach, with the annexed choleric and pancreatic Vessels, the fat Membrane or
Panniculus Carnosus, etc. the natural Consequences of which are a shivering,
shaking, pains of the Joints, and violent Vomiting of white or green matter,
which is nothing else but a mixture of the pancreatic and bilious Juices,
perverted by this irregular fermentation, and causing gripings of the Guts, a
coldness of the Belly, and many other Symptoms.

These Symptoms are allotted only to the beginning of the Paroxysm. For after
that this acid has for some time stifled the volatile oily parts of the Blood,
they make head against it, and the mutual Encounter creates a notable
effervescency, which ends in discharging the vanquished acid in a vehicle of
attenuated Serum by Urine or Sweat. From hence we deduce the other Symptoms of
heat, burning, the vehemence and largeness of the Pulse, plentiful Sweats, the
clearness of the Urine at first, and its subsequent muddiness. The Acid being
thus subdued and evacuated, the Fever and concurring Symptoms intermit, till
such time as the remaining Miasma's be provoked afresh, or supplied by new
recruits from the Stomac.

If this intermitting ferment be cramped by a vicid pituitous Vehicle, the
Paroxysm is longer, and the Symptoms meeker, than when it is master of it self,
and at liberty to display its utmost energy. From whence we gather the
difference of acute and chronical, spurious and regular Fevers.

In these Northern Countries, it is highly necessary to take notice of scorbutic
and hypocondriac Diseases, as the frequent Companions of intermitting Fevers.
Those which we call erratic are always scorbutic, unless they be caused by
Imposthumes of the internal parts, which seldom happen. The signs of a
scorbutic Fever are, anxieties of the Breast, rending pains of the Joints,
floating pains or convulsions of the lower Belly (either before or in the
Paroxysm) vomiting of green or yellow Matter, and the eruption of livid or red
Spots toward the end of the Fit; which sometimes break forth together with the
Sweat, and disappear when it is finished. But the most infallible evidence of a
scorbutic Fever is, when red crumbling clots of Sand stick to the bottom or
sides of the Chamber Pot; or in room of that a fat Crust, or a gross, reddish,
scurfy Sediment appears in the Urine.

Periodical Fevers degenerat oft-times from their regular Measures, and either
anticipat or postpone the hour of returning. This may be occasioned by the
strength or weakness of the Spirits, the greater or less activity of the
febrile ferment, or viscidity of its Vehicle.

As for their frequent multiplication, or the degeneracy of simple Fevers into
double, triple, quadruple, etc. it is occasioned either by a preposterous use of
fixing Medicines, Opiats, or Purgatives; or by eating Fish, Summer-fruits,
Milks, and over-feeding just before the Paroxysm.

The Diagnostics are couched in the preceding Paragraphs. As for Prognostics;
a Tertian, if regular and well managed, does not exceed seven Fits; but a
Quartan, though more tedious, is less dangerous. Malignant intermitting Fevers
are justly suspected. The spurious Tertians, or such as begin meekly and
slowly, are worse to cure than the regular acute ones; and for the most part
drive out to the fourteenth Paroxysm. All benign intermitting Fevers are
easily cured, if taken care of betimes; but if neglected, they become
chronical, and degenerat into grievous Distempers. If the Urine, voided out of
the Paroxysm, thicken apace, it signifies the shortness of the Disease. If at
first it appear crude, and soon after assume a white Cloud, the Fever will end
with the fourth Paroxysm. But if it continue scanty, reddish, and unconcocted,
the Fever will last to the seventh Fit; or, if discontinu'd, is apt to
relapse. If all the Symptoms are heightened in the second Paroxysm of a
Tertian, and relent in the third, the fourth concludes the Fever; but if their
height be put off till the fourth, and their remission to the fifth, the
seventh is the finishing stroke. While a Tertian anticipates its hours, it
increases; and declines when it begins to postpone. Schirrus's in the Bowels
succeeding to intermitting Fevers, are sad presages of chronical Distempers.
Such Fevers as observe regular constant Periods, are more obstinate than those
which vary. Vomiting is a good sign; and Convulsions in the Fit are not to be
feared. When a copious Sweat succeeds to the Paroxysm, oft-times there is no
sediment in the Urine; and in that case there is no bad indication; but if
otherwise, it is justly suspicious.

As for Quotidians, they are apt to continue forty Days or longer. If attended
by a heaviness of the Head and drowsiness, they terminat in a Lethargy or
Carus. If they are sipun out to a considerable length, they degenerat into
Dropsies, and other grievous Distempers. If the Paroxysms invade by Day, it is a
worse case than if they came by Night; and if they continue long without
Sweating, while the Appetit and Strength of the Person are very languid,
there is small hope of recovery. If the Paroxysms be short, attended by Vomiting
in the beginning, and early signs of Concoction in the progress of the Disease,
it is a good Omen. Sometimes Quotidians are solved by frequent Vomiting,
pituitous evacuations by Stool, or a translation of the febril matter to the
Joints.

A Quartan after the sixtieth Year of one's Age is mortal. It may continue for
two and twenty Years together, but the utmost measure of its regular duration
is one Year. If its Periods be constant and regular, they portend ill; if
inconstant, they betoken a sudden recovery. An Autumnal Quartan continues till
the Spring Equinox, and then for the most part ceases of its own accord. A
Vernal Quartan, if it do not disappear at the Summer Solstice, reaches to the
Autumnal Equinox. The duration of Autumnal and Winter Quartans is longer than
that of the Summer ones. Women are oft-times freed from this Fever, by being
got with Child. If it be attended by the disorder of any Bowel, it introduces a
Dropsy o^ obstinate Scurvy. If it dwell long in a dry Constitution, it ends in
a Hectic or Consumption. An irregular Diet, especially in respect of drinking,
adds to its duration. Loss of Appetit is a very bad sign. Black Urine, though a
dangerous Symptom in other Diseases, signifies the solution of a Quartan,
unless it be attended by a notable weakness, for then it is a sign of
approaching Death.

A Jaundice in the beginning of a Tertian or Quartan, is an unlucky Sympom; but
if it happen later, may infer a solution of the Disease. Tertians are sometimes
cured by Critical Eruptions in the Lips, Nostrils, etc. and sometimes by long
fasting; but the most effectual way is that of sweating.

Now, in order to answer all the indications of Cure, let the following
Cautions be carefully weighed.

I. That by all means the Cure be commenced betimes, for intermitting Fevers
by delay become obstinat.

II. In these Countries, Blood-letting does but prolong 'em. Perhaps some
occasional Circumstances may justify the use of it in a few particular cases;
but in general, this is an uncontested Maxim, that whatever impairs the Heat,
or does not promote Sweating; is hurtful.

III. Vomiting is absolutely necessary in all intermitting Fevers, especially
Quartans; and ought to be repeated, as occasion requires. Let a Vomit therefore
be exhibited two or three Hours before the invasion of the Paroxysm, unless the
weakness of the Person dissuade; in which case, give it the Day immediately
preceding. The symptomatical Vomitings that oftentimes happen in the Paroxysm,
are so far from arguing against Artificial Vomits, that they are a plain
indication for 'em. If the Person be troubled with a bitter nauseating taste in
the Mouth in a Morning, or complain of straitness of the Breast,
Heart-burrings, Unquietness, Giddiness, Belchings, etc. a Vomit is loudly
demanded. In fine, in Quotidians; and all other Intermitting Fevers, it is a
sovereign Remedy; but withal, care must be taken, that the Stomac be not
over-weaken'd; upon which account, let the following mixture be given after the
operation of the Vomit.

Take of Rasberry-Water, one Ounce; strong Cinnamom-Water, two Drams;
Confection Alkermes, half a Dram; Laudanum Opiatum, one grain; Simple Syrup of
Poppies, two or three Drams. Mix for the above mentioned use.

Asarabecca is a noted Vomit, especially in Quartans. A Dram or Four Scruples
of the Powder of Asarabecca Roots may be given, with eight or ten Grains of
Sal-armoniac, in a draught of White Wind, an Hour or two before the Paroxysm;
it procures both vomiting and sweating. Or Eight or Nine Leaves, cut not very
small, may be infused overnight in Carduus Benedictus Water, and exhibited in
the Morning with Oxymel. If the Leaves be beat in a Mortar 'till their Juice be
expressed, and that mixed with Oxymel and Water of Carduus Benedictus, they
yield a more powerful Vomit. If the leaves be boiled in Water, they are stripped
of the vomiting virtue, and become Diuretic, but withal are highly useful in
Quartan Fevers. The Water of Tobacco, and the Roots of Swallow-wort boiled in
Wine and Water, are likewise approved Vomits in these cases.

But of all the vomiting Tribe, Antimonials are the best; as the Infusion of
Crocus Metallorum; or take of Mercurius vitae, five or six Grains; infuse in
Rhenish, or Wormwood-Wine for the space of a Night, strain out the Wine, and
give an Ounce or ten Drams for a dose. Or,

Take of Mynsicthius his Emetic Tartar, two or three Grains; Sal-armoniac,
twelve or fifteen Grains; mix and exhibit in a warm Vehicle. Or if Pills be
more acceptable, take of Ruffus's Pills de tribus, fifteen Grains;
Mynsicthius's Emetic Tartar, two or three Grains; Scammony sulphurated, one
Grain; with Essence of Lesser Centory make Pills.

Sala's Emetic Syrup may be given in any convenient Vehicle, from three to six
Drams. Salt of Vitriol is very offensive to the Stomac. The Pairings of Man's
Nails is a Horse-Vomit.

IV. All Purgations in the beginning of Intermitting Fevers, or while the
Urine is yet crude, are hurtful; nay, in the height of the Distemper, when the
Urin begins to appear muddy, fierce Purgatives may do a great deal of mischief.
If Vomits do not succeed, or the first passages be stuffed with Humors, gentle
Purgatives may be exhibited after the third or fourth Paroxysm, either on the
Intermitting Day, or the Fit day, so as that the operation may be finished
before the invasion of the Fit. As

Take of Tartar vitriolated, twelve or fifteen Grains; Scammony sulphurated,
three Grains; Troches Alhardal, two Grains; distilled Oil of Aniseeds or of
Cloves, two drops. Mix for a gentle purging Powder.

Take of Tartar vitriolated, Powder of Jalap, of each half a Scruple; Magistery
of Scammony, six Grains: make a Powder.

Take of the Hepatic Red Powder and Tartar vitriolated, of each eight Grains;
Scammony sulphurated, five Grains, make a Powder.

Take of Cream of Tartar, half a Dram; Powder of Jalap, half a Scruple; Extract
of Troches Alhandal, one Grain; distilled Oil of Aniseeds, two drops. Mix them.

Take of Cream of Tartar, half a Dram; Arcanum duplicatum, fifteen Grains;
Powder of Jalap, six Grains. Make a Powder.

Take of Powder of Jalap, fifteen Grains; Scammony sulphurated, three Grains;
depurated Nitre, four Grains; Salt of Tartar, two Grains. Make a Powder.

If Infusions be more acceptable; Take of picked Senna, three or four Drams;
Aniseeds bruised, a Dram; Salt of Tartar, half a Dram. Infuse for the space of
one Night, in a sufficient quantity of Carduus Benedictus Water. To three
Ounces of the strained Liquor, add Cinnamom-Water, and Syrup of Apples, of each
half an Ounce. Mix for a Potion. It tastes prettily, and purges very gently. In
Tertians, the Dose of the Senna is lessened, and Rhubarb added.

Take of picked Senna; an Ounce; crude Roots of Black Hellebor, two Drams; of
Polypody of the Oak, three Drams; Salt of Tartar, half a Dram; boil them gently
in clarifi'd Whey. To Four Ounces of the strained Liquor, add Tincture of
Tartar, a Scruple; compound Syrup of Fumitory, half an Ounce. Mix as above.

Take of picked Senna, an Ounce; crude Black Hellebor and Ginger, of each two
Drams; of the sharpest Salt of Tartar, half a Dram; tie them into a Bag, which
infuse in warm Water in a close Vessel. Let it stand 'till it cool, and reserve
the Infusion in a Cellar for use; of which, let the Patient take a large
draught every fit day, about two Hours before the Paroxysm, and likewise in the
Intermitting Days, especially in Quartans.

Take of Wormwood-tops, half a handful; Flowers of lesser Centory, two little
handfuls; choice Rhubarb, two Drams; Black Hellebor Roots, a Dram; Cinnamom,
Salt of Tartar, of each a Scruple. Infuse them in Fumitory Water, for the space
of a Night, in a warm place. To three Ounces of the strained Liquor, add
solutive Syrup of Roses, three Drams. Mix for one Dose.

Take of Water of Carduus Benedictus, one or two Ounces; extract of Black
Hellebor, a Scruple; Aperitive Extract of Steel, half a Scruple; Troches
Alhandal two or three Grains; Syrup of Apples, six Drams. Make a Potion.

Take of Mint-Water, an Ounce; Cinnamom Water, half a Dram; Gum Ammoniac
dissolved in Vinegar, sixteen or twenty Grains; Tartar vitriolated, seven or
ten Grains; Scammony sulphurated, three Grains; Extract of Troches Alhandal,
half a Grain, or a whole Grain; solutive Syrup of Roses or of Apples, two
Drams. Mix, etc.

If Pills be more agreeable, take fifteen Grains, or a Scruple of the Extract
called Catholicum, or of Crollius's Extractum Panchymagogum. Or,

Take of Quercetanus his Pills of Ammoniac, or of his Tartar Pills, fifteen or
twenty Grains; Extract of Wormwood, six Grains; Scammony sulphurated, two
Grains; make Pills. Or,

Take of Quercetanus's Pills of Ammoniac, fifteen Grains; Extract of Carduus
Benedictus, Extract of Wormwood, of each four Grains; Nitre prepared with
Antimony, six Grains; Scammony prepared with juice of Roses, one grain. With
Essence of Wormwood make Pills.

Take of Crollius's Extractum Panchymagogum, fifteen grains; Extract of Steel,
prepared with juice of Apples, twelve grains; Tartar vitriolated, six grains;
Scammony sulphurated, three grains. With Essence of Steel make Pills.

Take of Ruffus's Pills de tribus, sweet Mercury, of each fifteen grains;
Scammony sulphurated, three grains; Extract of Troches Alhandal, one grain;
make Pills.

If the form of a Bolus be desired; take of Conserve of Roses, half a Dram;
sweet Mercury, a Scruple; Scammony sulphurated, five grains: Make a Bolus. Or,

Take of sweet Mercury, fifteen grains; Tartar vitriolated, half a Scruple;
Scammony sulphurated, three grains. With Conserve of Roses, make a Bolus.

Sweet Mercury attenuats the viscid Humors. Scammony purges the sharp and
bilious Humors. In obstinat Quartans sweet Mercury mixed with Mercurius vitae,
or Butyrum Antimony, given in Substance, are very effectual. As likewise the
following Powders taken before the Paroxysm.

Take of white Mechoacan, two Drams; white Pepper-Corns, in number
one-and-twenty; prepared Crab's-eyes, one Ounce. Make a Powder for three Doses.

Take of Cream of Tartar, fifteen grains; Scammony sulphurated, three grains;
diaphoretic Antimony, six grains. Make a Powder.

Take of Powder of Cornachini, a Scruple; Troches Alhandal, one grain;
distilled Oil of Mace, two drops. Make a Powder.

Take of Powder of Jalap, twelve grains; diaphoretic Antimony not dulcifi'd,
six, seven, or eight grains. Mix and make a Powder.

Take of prepared Red Coral, Salt of Wormwood or Mynsicthius his Arcanum
Duplicatum, of each from ten to fifteen grains; Brendelius's Preparation of
Scammony, two, three, or four grains. Mix, etc.

Take of Arcanum Duplicatum, half a Scruple; diaphoretic Antimony, five grains;
prepared Red Coral, three grains; Powder of Jalap, six grains; Scammony
sulphurated, two grains. Make a Powder.

V. Carminative and Abstergent Clisters are very useful, especially when Wind
or a murmuring noise molests the Guts; when grievous pains invade the region of
the Loins, proceeding from the Mesentery; when a vomiting, anxiety and
straitness of the Breast afflict the Patient; or when gnawing sharp Humors are
crowded into the Stomach, while its Mouth is stubborn, and not easily moved to
vomiting, as in Hypocondriac, and the like cases. In scorbutic Fevers,
attended by convulsive Pains of the Belly or Loins, those made of Milk, Sugar,
Honey, and the Yelk of an Egg, are very useful. In Hypochondriac and Histeric
Fevers, the same Clysters are given, or mixed with Turpentin. The carminative
and gentle Abstersive Clysters are as follows.

Take of the carminative and emollient Ingredients, of each a handful; Salt of
Potashes, two or three Drams; Dross of Regulus Antimonii, a Dram: Boil in a
sufficient quantity of Water. To eight Ounces of the strained Liquor, add
Electuary of Bay Berries, one Ounce; distilled Oil of Turpentin, a Scruple. Or,

Take of the carminative or emollient Ingredients, two handfuls; Salt of
Tartar, a Dram or two: Boil them in Water: To nine Ounces of the strained
Liquor, add of Electuary of Bayberries, one Ounce; distilled Oil of Amber, half
a Scruple, and the Yelk of one Egg. Make a Clyster.

Take of Chamomil Flowers, two handfuls; Juniper Berries, one Ounce; Aniseeds
half an Ounce; boil them in equal quantities of Water and Human Urine. To eight
Ounces of the Decoction strained, add of lenitive Electuary, one Ounce;
distilled Oil of Juniper Berries, a Scruple. Make a Clyster.

Take of Roman Chamomil, one handful; Bay Leaves and Elder-Flowers, of each
half a handful; Angelica and Lovage Roots, and Aniseeds, of each six Drams;
boil them in Water. To nine Ounces of the Decoction strained, add Electuary of
Bay Berries, and lenitive Electuary, of each, six Drams; Antimonial Nitre, a
Scruple; distilled Oil of Angelica, Oil of Bayberries, and Oil of Rue, of each
four grains; with the Yelk of one Egg, make a Clyster.

Take of Bay Leaves and Elder-Flowers, of each half a handful;
Chamomil-Flowers, one handful; Lovage Roots six drams; Fenugrec Seeds, half an
Ounce. Boil them in Water and Humane Urine. Strain the Decoction; and add to
nine Ounces of it, Electuary of Hiera with Agaric, six Drams; Electuary of
Bay Berries, three Drams; distilled Oil of Angelica, Caraways, and Rue, of each
four drops. Make a Clyster.

Take of the Leaves of Wormwood and Carduus Benedictus, of each a handful;
Roots of Elecampane, one Ounce; Lovage Roots, six Drams; Juniper Berries, one
Ounce, Salt of Tartar, a Dram; boil them in Whey. And to eight Ounces of the
strained Decoction, add Electuary of Hiera with Agaric, one Ounce; Honey of
Roses, six Drams; Sal Gem, a Dram and a half. Mix for a Clyster.

Take of Chamomil Flowers, two handfuls; Mint, one handful; Juniper Berries an
Ounce; boil them in Water and Human Urine, and inject the warm Decoction.

In scorbutic Fevers the Clysters must be composed of Milk; as, take of Goats
or Cows Milk, from nine Ounces to a Pound; Honey of Roses, Honey of Rue, of each
an Ounce, or an Ounce and a half: and two Yelks of Eggs. Make a Clyster, for
two Injections. This and all other Clysters ought always to be injected about
an Hour or two before the Paroxysm.

VI. These general evacuations can never compass the cure, unless followed by
Diaphoretics. It Is true, sweating Medicines ought not to be exhibited till
after Vomiting, etc. But the Fever is not right cured, if they be totally
omitted, or Sweats do not ensue. It Is true, Hot sharp Aromatics are justly
avoided, but the saline Febrifuga's must not be neglected.

VII. The sick Person must take care to have an empty Stomac, when the fit
comes.

VIII. Diaphoretic Medicines are not to be given in the Paroxysm, but an Hour
or two before it, in order to promote sweating in the end of the Fit; for if
that be wanting the Person is seized with the Headache. But withal, it is an
improper way to procure Sweat by a heavy load of Coverings.

IX. The Physician must observe nicely if a Tertian partakes of malignity. If
the Tongue be rough and black, and the Person seized with a sudden Weakness,
it is a shroud evidence of a malignant Tertian. In this case Emulsions of Citron
Seeds, with Alexipharmacal Medicines joined to Febrifuga's, are proper.

X. Spirit of Sal-Armoniac is an infallible comforter either in the Cold or Hot
Fit. In Scorbutic Fevers it is of soevereign use, if mixed with Spirit of
Scurvy Grass. It may be given before the Paroxysm, or on the intermitting Day.

Take of Spirit of Sal-armoniac, a dram; Essence of Opium fifteen drops. Mix
for one Dose, to be taken immediately before the Paroxyism.

Take of Spirit of Sal-armoniac, three drams; Spirit of Hartshorn succinated,
a dram; dose thirty or forty drops.

Take Water of Carduus Benedictus, an ounce; Spirit of Sal-armoniac, half a
dram (or a dram) Laudanum Opiatum, two grains; Syrup of Carduus Benedictus,
half an ounce; mix for a Potion before the Paroxysm.

Take of Mint Water, one ounce; Spirit of Salarmoniac, half a dram; Diaphoretic
Antimony, a scruple; Distilled Oil of Cloves, or of Amber, two drops, Syrup of
Orange peel two drams, mix as above. If the cold Fit be very troublesome, add a
grain of Laudanum Opiatum. In Scorbutic Fevers add Spirit of Scurvy Grass.

Take of Mint Water, two ounces; Cinnamom Water, two drams; Spirit of
Sal-armoniac, a dram; Diaphoretic Antimony, sixteen grains; Syrup of Betony,
two drams; mix as above.

Take of purified Sal-armoniac, a scruple; Antihectcum Poterii, twelve or
fifteen grains; distilled Oil of Cloves, two drops, make a Powder, to be taken
before the accession of the Fit.

Take of Sal-armoniac, fifteen grains; prepared Crabs Eyes, half a Scruple,
Laudamim Opiatum, one grain, make a Powder and use as above.

Take of Antiscorbutic Water, and Water of Carduus Benedictus, of each an ounce
and a half; Spirit of Scurvy Grass, or Spirit of Sal-armoniac, a dram; prepared
Crabs Eyes, and Strobelbergerus his specific against Fevers, of each a
scruple; Laudanum Opiatum, two grains; Forestus's Syrup of Scelotyrbium, an
ounce. Mix, etc.

XI. When the cold Fit is extremely violent, the use of Spirit of Sal-armoniac
may be confined to the intermitting Days, and the fixed Alcali Salts exhibited
on the Fit Days. As,

Take of Red Coral prepared, Salt of Wormwood, of each fifteen grains; Laudanum
Opiatum, a grain; distilled Oil of Cloves, or of Juniper Berries, two drops.
Make a Powder to be given in a warm Vehicle, about an Hour or two before the
Paroxysm, in order to procure Sweat. Or,

Take of Salt of Wormwood, a scruple; Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, five grains;
Laudanum Opiatum, two grains. Make a Powder as above. Or,

Take of Salt of Wormwood, fifteen grains; Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, three
grains prepared red Coral, half a scruple; Distilled Oil of Cloves, two drops.
Make a Powder, etc.

Take of Salt of Wormwood, two scruples; prepared Crabs Eyes, half a dram:
Diaphoretic Antimony, half a scruple. Mix for three Doses, to be exhibited
before a Quartan Paroxysm.

Take of red Coral prepared, Salt of Wormwood, of each a Scruple; Fulminating
Gold, six Grains. Make a Powder.

Take of Hearts horn prepared without Fire, two Scruples; Salt of Carduus
Benedictus, Salt of lesser Centory, of each eight Grains. Make a Powder for two
Doses.

Take of Salt of Wormwood, fifteen grains; Diaphoretic Antimony, half a
Scruple; prepared red Coral, twelve grains; distilled Oil of Sassafras or of
Mace, two Drops-Mix, etc.

If the form of Potions be more acceptable, take of Water of Carduus
Benedictus, one Ounce; Salt of Wormwood, a Scruple; Salt of lesser Centory,
half a Scruple; Julep of Roses, three Drams. Mix for one Dose.

Take of Water of lesser Centory, an Ounce or two; Salt of Wormwood, fifteen or
twenty Grains; prepared Crabs Eyes, ten or fifteen grains; Syrup of Carduus
Benedictus half an Ounce. Make a Potion to be given before the Paroxysm, adding
two Drops of distilled Oil of Cloves.

Take of Parsley Water, two Ounces; Fennel Water, one Ounce; Spirit of Venice
Triacle, a Dram and a half; Volatile salt of Amber, a scruple; Syrup of Carduus
Benedictus, an Ounce. Mix and exhibit a Spoonful now and then.

Take of the Water of Carduus Benedictus, two Ounces; Triacle Water, two Drams;
Salt of Wormwoood, half a Dram; Spirit of Sal-armoniac, a scruple; Syrup of red
Poppies, three Drams. Mix for a Potion.

XII. The fixed Salts consisting of an Alcali and an Acid, such as Arcanum
Duplicatum, Sal Hypochondriacum digestivum, etc. are proper to be used in the
beginning of the Disease before Evacuations; and likewise on the intermitting
and Fit-Days. As,

Take of Hypochondriac Salt, half a scruple; Salt of Wormwood, five grains. Mix
for a Powder.

Take of purified Sal-^rmoniac, a Dram; Antimoniall Nitie, a scruple. Make a
Powder for two Doses, one to be taken in a hot Vehicle in the Morning, and the
other in a cold Vehicle at Night.

Take of Arcanum duplicatum, fifteen or twenty grains; Diaphoretic Antimony,
half a scruple. Mix. Let it be taken before the Invasion of the Fit, and twice
on the intermitting Day.

Take of Arcanum duplicatum, fifteen grains; prepared Crabs Eyes, twelve
grains; distilled Oil of Juniper Berries, two drops. Mix, and make a Powder to
be used as above.

Take of Arcanum duplicatum, fifteen grains; Salt of Wormwood, prepared red
Coral, of each half a scruple; Laudanum Opiatum, one grain, Make a Powder.

Take of prepared Crabs Eyes, Areanum duplicatum, Salt of Wormwood, of each
half a Dram: Volatile Salt of Amber, twelve grains; Laudanum Opiatum, three
Grains. Make a Powder for three Doses: One to be taken immediately before the
Fit; and two on the intermitting Day.

Take Ivory prepared without Fire, Arcanum duplicatum, of each twelve grains;
fulminatory Gold, six Grains. Or,

Take of Cream of Tartar, a Dram; Tartar vitriolated, half a Dram; Spirit of
Sulphur, three or four Drops. Make a Powder for two Doses.

Riverius recommends Crollius's specific Potion to be taken before the
Paroxysm; viz.

Take of Cichory Water, one, two, or three Ounces; Spirit of Sulphur, or Spirit
of Vitriol, fifteen or twenty Drops; Salt of Wormwood, half a Dram. Mix for a
Potion.

XIII. When the hot Fit is very violent, and the cold one short and
inconsiderable, nitrous Salts are very proper. Dulcified Spirit of Nitre
effectually allays the Fever, after the height of the Paroxysm. Antimonial
Nitre, or Nitre vitriolated, is a sovereign Remedy in scorbutic Fevers.

Take of Antimonial Nitre, fifteen grains; Sal-armoniac, six grains. Make a
Powder to be administered before the Paroxysm.

Take of Antimonial Nitre, half a scruple; Arcanum duplicatum, twenty or thirty
grains; Poterius's Antihectic Powder, nine or twelve grains. Mix for three
Doses.

Take of Antimonial Nitre, two scruples; Hartshorn prepared without Fire, a
scruple; Diaphoretic Antimony, eight grains. Mix for two Doses.

Take of Arcanum duplicatum, fifteen or twenty grains; volatile Salt of Amber
six or ten grains. Make a Powder.

XIV. Acids are not very proper in intermitting Fevers. If the Fever approach
to a continual, or be attended by an immoderat burning Heat, insufferable
Thirst, and a difficulty of sweating, they may be exhibited; but never before
the height of the Fit. As,

Take of the Water of Carduus Benedictus, two Ounces; Mint Water, one Ounce;
Diaphoretic Antimony, half a Dram; Laudanum Opiatum, a grain or two; Syrup of
Carduus Benedictus, six drams; Dulcified Spirit of Nitre as much as suffices
to render it grateful. Mix and give it by spoonfuls in the declination of the
Paroxysm.

Take of Rasberry Water, three ounces: Juice of Rasberries, three or six drams;
Diaphoretic Antimony, half a dram, or a dram; Syrup of the Juice of Citrons,
half an ounce, or a whole ounce; Dulcified Spirit of Nitre as much as suffices
for a grateful acidity, mix. Take a spoonful now and then. It quenches thirst,
allays the heat, and promotes sweating.

Take of the Water of red Poppy Flowers, four ounces; Diaphoretic Antimony, two
or three scruples, Syrup of red Poppies, half an ounce; Dulcified Spirit of
Nitre as much as suffices, etc.

Sometimes Crabs Eyes mixed with Vinegar are useful in the Fit; as, take of the
Water of Carduus Benedictus, Cichory Water, of each an ounce and a half; Wine
Vinegar, six drams; simple Spirit of Triacle, three or four drams; Powder of
Crabs Eyes, half a dram; Syrup of the five opening Roots, an ounce; mix and
exhibit a spoonful now and then. Or,

Take of Sorrel Water, Fumitory Water, Mint Water, of each an ounce; Rasberry
or Elder Vinegar, six drams; simple Spirit of Triacle, a dram and a half, or
two drams; prepared Crabs Eyes, two or three scruples; Syrup of Orange Peel,
three drams. Mix and use as above. It Is useful against straitness of the
Breast, Gripings, Wind, and Hypochondriac symptoms of the Belly.

Take of the Water of Carduus Benedictus, Endive Water, and House-leek Water,
of each an ounce; Vinegar, six drams; Dulcified Spirit of Nitre, a scruple;
prepared Crabs Eyes, half a dram; Diaphoretic Antimony, fifteen grains; Syrup
of the Juice of Citrons six drams. Mix as above.

Take of Chervil Water, four ounces; Wine Vinegar, six drams; prepared red
Coral, prepared Crabs Eyes, of each a dram; Laudanum Opiatum, two grains, Syrup
of Ground Ivy, half an ounce. Mix, etc.

XV. Opiats are of Extraordinary use. But if unseasonbly administered, are very
pernicious. Digestive and Evacuating Medicines must always precede the use of
Opium. After them it mitigates the cold and shivering, and effectually removes
such Paroxysms as return more by Custom than the force of the morbific matter.
It must always be joined to proper specifics. As,

Take of Mynsicthius's Arcanum Duplicatum, a scruple; Salt of Wormwood, half a
scruple; Laudanum Opiatum two Grains. Make a Powder, to be taken in Wormwood
Wine, before the invasion of the Fir.

Take of the Febril Elixyr, two drams; Essence of Opium, half a dram; Dose
forty or fifty drops.

XVI. If the Paroxysm does not end in sweating, Headaches follow it. For which
Sympt in let the Head be fomented with some hot camphoris'd Liquor.

XVII. In Chronical Fevers, Blistering Plasters applied to the Wrists or Pit
of the Neck are very serviceable. Mercurial Salivations sometimes remove
inveterat Quartans; but the Cure is worse than the Disease. Aguish Persons are
very apt to salivate, by taking but a few grains of sweet Mercury; which
inconvenience ought to be prevented by Purgation or forcible sweating.

XVIII. Chronical Fevers thicken the Blood and Lymph, and are apt to degenerat
into slow Hectic Fevers; which are best prevented by the use of Sal-armoniac
(a Vomit being premised) or the following Powder, viz. Take of Arcanum
Duplicatum, twelve or fifteen grains; Ivory prepared without fire, half a
scruple, mix and exhibit two hours before the Fit. Inappetency succeeding to
such Fevers is cured by the continued use of Wormwood or lesser Centory.

XIX. Chronical Fevers, and such as are cured by repeated Doses of absorbent
Powders, are frequently followed by Colics, Dropsies, swellings of the Feet,
etc. Such Symptoms are obviated or removed by the internal use of the
Decoction, Essence, Juice, or extract of Wormwood, and the external application
of Celandin the greater.

XX. In the Declination of an Intermitting Fever, or after their removal, or
on the intermitting Days, it is not improper to obviat the Cachectic
indispositions that generally follow 'em, by the use of the following Vegetable
Febrifuga's, which sharpen the Bile, enervat the Acid, and fortify the Stomac.

Take of Essence of Wormwood, or of lesser Centory, or of Gentian, or of Myrrh,
half an ounce; Spirit of Sal-armoniac, two drams. Mix. Dose thirty or forty
drops twice a Day.

Take of Michael's Febril Elixyr, and Elixyr Proprietatis, of each a dram and a
half. Mix. Dose forty or fifty drops.

Take of the sharpest Tincture of Tartar, three drams; Elixyr Proprietatis
prepared without an Acid, two drams. Mix, etc.

Take of the sharpest Tincture of Tartar, three drams; Quintessence of
Wormwood, one dram. Mix, etc.

Take of the sharpest Tincture of Tartar, three drams; of the Carminative
Spirit, a dram. Mix. Dose forty or fifty drops twice a Day.

XXI. During the cold Fit, the sick Person must abstain from Eating or
Drinking. After the height of the Fit, when the Sweat begins to breath forth,
and the Heat is violent, he may drink plentifully. Warm Wormwood Wine, or
Wormwood Ale, is not improper; if there be any apprehension of a scorbutic
Fever, the Wine may be Tinctured with Antiscorbutics. But in Quartan
Paroxysms, it is advisable to drink little or none at all, or at least to drop
forty drops of Spirit of Sal-armoniac into the Liquor: which must always be
warm.

Let the ordinary Drink be Water or small Beer mixed with Wormwood Wine, or
clarified Whey, with a few drops of the juice of Citrons. Refrigerating Juleps
are improper, barring the case of immoderat Heat, for which warm Drink with
Nitre or Spirit of Vitriol is very proper. As,

Take of the Flowers of red Poppies, Flowers of Roses, of each half a Handful.
Infuse them in a Pound and a half of Poppy Flower Water, or Clarified Whey, and
sharpen it with Spirit of Sulphur per Campanam. Let them stand in a warm place
till the Tincture be Extracted. Then add of Syrup of Jujubes, two ounces; Syrup
of Violets, an ounce. Make a Julep.

Take of the Conserve of Wood Sorrel, Conserve of Roses, Conserve of Clove
Gilly-flowers, of each an ounce; dissolve 'em in a sufficient Quantity of the
decoction of Vipers-grass, or Boil them gently in a close Vessel. Strain the
Liquor, and reserve it for use.

Take of the Roots of Woodsorrel, and Tamarinds, of each an ounce; Boil them in
Water. To four pound of the strained Liquor add three Handfuls of red Roses,
sprinkled with dulcified Spirit of Vitrol. Set them in a warm place, till the
Tincture be extracted. Then strain it, and add the Syrup of red Corants, and
Syrup of Rasberries, of each three ounces. Mix, and reserve for use.

Take of Spring Water, half a pound; Cinnamom Water, half an ounce; fresh Juice
of Citrons, an ounce and a half; Spirit of Vitriol as much as suffices for a
grateful Acidity. Mix, etc.

XXII. In Tertians let not Sweat be artificially promoted before the fourth
Fit: and if it comes naturally in the declensions of the Fits, let the Person
be lightly Covered. In Quartans Sudorifics are improper, till the signs of
Concoction appear; but if sweat break forth of its own accord before that time,
it must not be suppressed

XXIII. The chilness, shivering, shaking, etc. attending the cold Fits, are
admirably accounted for by applying Aromatic Oils to the Stomac, Breast,
Backbone, Loins, and Soles of the Feet. As,

Take of Balsam of Peru, a dram; the distilled Oils of Cloves, of Mace, and of
Amber, of each half a scruple. Mix and Anoint the above mentioned Parts.

Take of expressed Oil of Nutmegs, a dram; distilled Oil of Cloves, distilled
Oil of Cinnamom, of each fifteen grains. Mix etc.

Take of the distilled Oil of Juniper Berries and Rosemary, a scruple;
distilled Oil of Cloves half a scruple.

Inwardly the same symptoms are mitigated by exhibiting the fixed Salts,
Aromatic extracts and distilled Aromatic Oils. But they are peculiarly
calculated for such Fevers where the cold Symptoms are more violent than the
hot. The forms of prescribing are such as these.

Take of the Salt of Wormwood a scruple; prepared Oyster-shells and white
Pepper in Powder, of each six or seven grains.

Take of Sal-Armoniac, fifteen grains. Cloves and white Pepper, of each five
grains. Make a Powder for two Doses. To be taken before the invasion of the Fit.

Take of prepared Pearl half a scruple; Salt of Wormwood, fifteen grains;
distilled Oil of Cloves, two drops. Make a Powder.

Take of the Salt of Wormwood, fifteen grains; Diaphoretic Antimony half a
scruple; Laudanum Opiatum, one grain; distilled Oil of Cloves, two drops. Make
a Powder to be taken two or three Hours before the Fit.

Take of Crollius's specific against Fevers, a dram: Salts of Wormwood and of
lesser Centory, of each half a scruple; distilled Oil of Cloves, three drops.
Make a Powder for two Doses.

Take of Carduus Benedictus Water, an ounce; Cinnamom Water, a dram; extract of
Gentian, half a dram; Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, half a dram; Syrup of Carduus
Benedictus, two drams. Make a draught to be exhibited two Hours before the Fit.
In Quartans, when the cold Symptoms prevail most, the Dose of the Extract may
be augmented; but in Tertians, when the Heat obtains the ascendant, the
Quantity of the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac ought to be enlarged.

Take of the Extracts of Wormwood, Carduus Benedictus, lesser Centory, and
Triacle, of each from five to six Grains; distilled Oil of Cloves three Drops.
Make Pills to be given before the Fit, when cold and its Appendants prevail,
and little or no heat insues. For Oil of Cloves is an incomparable Antidote
against shivering. Laudanum Opiatum and Extract of Troches Alhandal are proper
Ingredients for the same purpose.

XXIV. If the heat and its Consequences be more troublesome than the coldness,
Sal Ammoniac, or its urinous Spirit, is the only proper Medicine. As,

Take of Sal Ammoniac a Scruple; Poterius's Antihectic Ponder half a Scruple.
Mix, and make a Powder to be given before the Fit.

If a raging heat succeeding to the cold Fit be attended by a notable
prostration of Strength, short Breathing, a quick frequent and small Pulse,
Spirit of Sal Ammoniac mixed with Vinegar and Crab's-eyes will readily give
relief. If attended by Heart-burnings, gnawings of the Stomac, Unquietness,
anxiety of the Breast, imminent Suffocation, as it frequently occurs in
Hypocondriac, Hysteric, and Scorbutic Constitutions, the same Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac is proper to be given, after premising Vomits or Clysters, according
to the Circumstances of the Patient; and in the mean while it is not amiss to
apply a Plaster of Tacamahac, mixed with Oil of Amber or Balsam of Peru to the
region of the Stomac.

XXV. In Chronical Quartans, let the Physician inquire if there be any
schirrous Swelling in the Bowels, or hardness in the Hypocondria; if Wind
molest the Guts, or scorbutic Symptoms beset the Body: for these Symptoms must
be particularly accounted for, before the Fever can be cured; which generally
in this case ends in the eruption of the Itch or Scab.

XXVI. In stubborn Quartans, the Spaw-waters are convenient, provided the
Stomac and Bowels be regular and in good order. Otherwise Chalybeat Medicines
are more proper. As,

Take of the Essence of Wormwood half a Dram; solution of Steel in the Juice of
Apples a Dram. Mix them to be given before the Fit.

Steel and its Productions are of excellent use in all Hysteric, Hypocondriac,
splenetic and scorbutic Constitutions. It not only removes the obstructing Acid
in the Bowels, which the Jesuits Powder would six and settle, but mitigats the
impetuosity of the Fit, which Anodyns do only palliat and soment.

XXVII. Tho Chronical Agues may seem to be discussed, by reason of the
disappearance of the Fit, yet it is advisable not to desist for some time from a
spare and cautious Diet, and the use of the more noted Febrifuga's, such as Sal
Ammoniac, Salt of Hartshorn, volatile Salt of Amber, volatile Salt of Vipers,
etc. for that ofttimes they relapse after the discontinuation of several Weeks.

If these Remarks be heedfully minded, the Cure of Agues will prove easy and
safe; and many fatal Symptoms which ensue an untimely suppression of the Fits,
or any other disorderly part of Cure, will be effectually prevented.

As for the Scorbutic Fevers that I Have so frequently mentioned, it is to be
remarked, that if the Scurvy be not directly taken care of, 'twill be
impossible to compass the Cure of the Fever. For which purpose the Spirit of
Scurvy Grass and Mynsicthius's Arcanum Duplicatum are noted specifics; they may
be mixed with other Ingredients, as follows.

Take of Quercetanus's Antiscorbutic Water an Ounce; Spirit of Sal Ammoniac
half a Dram; Spirit of Scurvy Grass, a Scruple; Laudanum Opiatum one or two
Grains; Forestus's Antiscorbutical Syrup two Drams. Mix them to be exhibited
before the Fit, after the universal Evacuations are premised.

Take of the Water of Carduus Benedictus, and Elderflowe-water, of each two
Ounces; Spirit of Scurvy Grass, two Drams; Spirit of Sal Ammoniac a Dram;
Mynsicthius his Arcanum Duplicatum a Scruple; prepared red Coral fifteen
Grains, Forestus his Antiscorbutical Syrup an Ounce. Mix as above.

Take of Mint Water, Fennel Water, Fumitory Water, and Carminative Water, of
each an Ounce; Spirit of Scurvy Grass, Spirit of Venice Treacle, of each a
Dram; dulcified Spirit of Nitre twelve Drops; prepared Crabseyes half a Dram;
Laudanum Opiatum a Grain and a half; Syrup of Orange Peel six Drams. Mix, and
give a spoonful now and then, in the very time of the Fit. It is of wonderful
use in scorbutic Fevers attended by extreme heat, straitness of the Breast,
Wind, violent pains in the Joints, etc.

Poterius's Antihectic Powder, with magistery of Coral prepared with Juice of
Citrons, is a sovereign Medicine in S^^^butic Quartans, that threaten a
Phthisie. It may be giv^^ in a convenient Vehicle both before and in the Fit.

Whey of Goats-milk, impregnated with the virtue of Antiscorbutic Herbs, is a
proper Liquor both for restaining the heat and conquering the Scurvy or it may
be mixed with gentle Laxatives, by reason that Scorbutic Fevers are attended
by a constipation of the Belly. As,

Take of Tamarinds, half an ounce; Boil them in Whey. Then strain the Whey and
add of the Ti^cture of the flowers of Dazies, two drams; with Solutive Syrup of
Roses. Make a Julep, to be given during the Violence of the not Fit.

Take of the Decoction of Corants in clarified Whey, a pound and half; Juice of
Scurvy Grass clarified by standing, three ounces; fresh juice of Citrons, an
ounce. Make a Julep, as above.

Milk mixed with Sugar or Spirit of Sal-armoniac, is very proper before and
after the Paroxysm.

From what has been said upon the whole matter, we may gather the general
method of curing intermitting Fevers into this form. First the Stomac must be
prepared with a Digestive Powder or two; then a Vomit must be exhibited before
the Fit, or a Laxative administered on the intermitting Day. Afterward volatile
Alteratives, or chalybeat Medicines given during the time of intermission,
according as the Symptoms require; and in the time of the Fit, the
precipitating Alcali's both volatile and fixed; of which Class are the bitter
Herbs, partaking something of an aromatic Virtue, such as Wormwood, lesser
Centory, Fumitory, Carduus Benedictus, Chamomil, Celandin, Gentian, Zedoary,
etc. They are used by way of Powder, Decoction, expressed Juice, Extract, or in
the form of a fixed Salt. In Powder some give a Dram of the Flowers of lesser
Centory, or of Carduus Benedictus, etc. As for Decoctions, those of a few
Ingredients are infinitely the best. As,

Take of the Leaves of Carduus Benedictus, a handful or two; of Asarabecca
roots, an Ounce; infuse them for the space of a Night in four Pints of Water,
then boil away the third part: Let the Patient take three or four Ounces of
this Decoction w^rm in Bed, six Hours before the Fit, and 'twill procure a
plentiful sweat.

The Juice of Wormwood exhibited in Wormwood-wine some Hours before the
Paroxysm, is much approved. The Extracts of these bitter Herbs, are likewise
frequently given, both during the time of intermission, and a few Hours before
the Fit. Or an Essence may be prepared thus,

Take of the tops of lesser Centory and Wormwood, of each three handfuls; of
the Leaves of Mouse-Ear, and Asarabecca, of each two handfuls; of the Herbs
Cinquefoil, Hore-hound, Rue, Carduus Benedictus, of Water. Germander, of each a
handful; tops of St. John's Wort, half an Ounce; Roots of Celandin, Dandelion,
Angelica, Zedoary, Gentian, Master-wort, white Dittany, Devil's-bit, Fearn, and
round-rooted Birth-wort, of each an Ounce; Cloves and Ounce; long Pepper six
Drams; Ginger, half an Ounce. Extract the Essence with Spirits of Wormwood,
Carduus Benedictus, and lesser Centory. Dose forty or fifty drops to be given
on the intermitting day. But the Vegetable Salts prepared from these Herbs,
together with Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, are much beyond any other Medicines.

The Jesuit's Bark is commonly joined to the vegetable train of specifics. The
ways of using it are as follows.

Take of the Jesuit's Powder, from a Dram to two Drams. Infuse them for the
space of a Night, in two or six Ounces of Rhenish or Spanish Wine; in the
Morning, shake them together, and let the Person drink it warm before the
accession of the Fit.

Take of the Jesuit's Powder, six or eight Drams; Gentian Roots, three Drams;
Flowers of lesser Centory, four little handfuls; long Pepper, a Dram; Salt of
Tartar, half an Ounce. Mix for a Powder.

Take of the Jesuit's Powder six Drams; Gentian roots and filings of Steel, of
each three Drams; Cloves, a Dram and half. Mix, etc.

Take of the Powder of Kinkina, a scruple; prepared Crab's Eyes, a scruple;
Cardamoms and Cubebs, of each three grains. Mix, and give it before the
Paroxysm.

Take of the Powder of Kinkina, six Drams; Guajacum, two or three Drams; tops
of lesser Contory, a handful; Cinnamom, two Drams; Cloves and Crab's Eyes, of
each a Dram; Salt of Tartar, three Drams; make a Bag, to be infused in Rhenish
or Wormwood Wine. Of which, let a Draught be exhibited after the appearance of
the signs of Concoction, some Hours before the Paroxysm.

But it is a fallacious Remedy, and ought not to be exhibited 'till after the
general Evacuations; and if the Body be not purged after the discussion of the
Disease by this Medicine, 'twill relapse after some time.

It Is true, it is an effectual Remedy in Tertian and Quartan Fevers; but since
it is an exotic Plant, our domestic Gentian may supply its want. If two or three
drams of the Powder of Gentian, or a dram of its thickened Juice be given in
Wine about an hour before the Fit* it equals the efficacy of the Jesuit's
Powder. Myrrh and Castor are noted specifics in Quartan and Scorbutic Fevers.
They are given from a Scruple to half a Dram in Wine before the Fit. Some give
forty or fifty drops of the Bezoardic Tincture, in Wormwood Wine, together with
chalybeat diaphoretic Antimony, or Timaeus's pearl'd Powder, immediately before
the Fit. Shells calcined, and burrnt Hearts-horn, are exhibited in like manner,
with good success. Or,

Take of Nutmegs, Nitre, and Alum, of each a Dram. Make a Powder for three
Doses. Of which, let the Patient take one before every Fit, being prepared to
sweat.

Take of prepared Red Coral, half a Dram; sugar of Lead twelve or fifteen
grains; Laudanum Opiatum, one grain. Mix, and exhibit in the decoction of
Carduus Benedictus before the Fit, and continue the use till the Fever be
discussed.

The congealed Spirits of Salt, and Vitriol, Fulminatory Gold, and Salt of
Antimony, are much approved. The Salt of Antimony may be thus prepared. Take
diaphoretic Antimony, and digest it in Vinegar sharpened with Spirit of
Vitriol, in a moderat heat. Then strain and evaporat the Sugar, and ye will
find a Salt or Vitriol, which may be further subtilis'd by dissolving it in
Spirit of Wine, and evaporating. If ye mix this Salt with Flowers of Antimony;
it proves an incomparable Medicin against Fevers.

But we ought to remark, that all these six'd Specifics are offensive to the
Stomac and Appetit, and Enemies to the digestive faculty; and if unseasonably
administered, are followed by Relapses, or Scirrhus's in the Bowels: wherefore
the passages ought to be well cleans'd before we attempt to prescribe 'em; and
when we do, they ought to be mixed with other sudorifics. As,

Take of Carduus Benedictus Water, two Ounces: Strobelbergerus's specific
Powder, half a Dram; volatile Salt of Hartshorn, six grains; Laudanum Opiatum,
one grain. Mix, and exhibit before the Fit. For a Hysteric Tertian, after the
common premises, I Have prescribed the following Powder with very good success.

Take of prepared Hartshorn, half a Dram; Salt of Wormwood, a scruple;
prepared red Coral, twelve grains; Extract of Castor, five grains; Laudanum
Opiatum, two grains. Make a Powder for two Doses. To be frequently repeated and
taken before the Fit. After the Fever is discussed by these Specifics, it is
expedient to purge the Body thus;

Take of Quercetanus's Pills of Ammoniac, twelve grains; Extract of Wormwood,
six or eight grains; Extract of Troches Alhandal, two grains. Make Pills.

If a relapse happen, give Sal-Armoniac mixed with Poterius's Antihectic
Powder, or prepared Coral, before the invasion of the Paroxysm.

Some commend Vitriol as a good specific. But above all, the fixed Salts are
best, which are preferable to any other preparation of the vegetable Specifics;
Brimstone or Gunpowder given from half a dram to a whole one, in Vinegar or
sharp Wine, is much approved. Or,

Take of six'd Nitre, half a Dram; Flowers of Sulphur, three Drams; Flowers of
Sal-Armoniac, one dram; Powder of Red Sanders, six drams; white Sugar, two
drams. Dose a dram and a half, to be taken before the Fit.

Opium is of noted virtue in intermitting Fevers; upon which account, Galen
and his Followers, were wont to prescribe Venice Treacle with juice of
Wormwood. But it ought not to be exhibited before the Concoction be in some
measure advanced. In case of a prevailing Heat, it may be exhibited in Vinegar.

XXVII. Having thus accounted for the direct Cure of intermitting Fevers, it
remains to take a view of their Consequences. Quartan or Chronical Fevers are
oft-times followed by a schirrus of the Spleen or Mesentery, or a tendency to
the Hypochondriac illness. Now, to prevent this inconvenience, 'twill be
needful to join chalybeat or splenetic Medicines to the common specifics. The
Extract of Steel prepared with juice of Apples, or its liquid Essence mixd with
Spirit of Scurvy Grass, or the tincture of Vitriol of Steel, are proper for
this purpose.

Besides internal Medicines, some are wont to make use of external helps. The
symptom of Heat, may be abated by an Epithema of Rose-Vinegar, Juice of
House-leek and Nitre; or a Cataplasm of Yest, Salt and Vinegar applied to the
Feet. The material cause of the Fever is in some measure evacuated by the
application of Blistering, or Corrosive Ingredients; some apply cataplasms of
Garlic, Onyons, Saffron, Vinegar and white Pepper; just before the Fit, to the
Wrists. Some mix bruised Sage-leaves with Soot and the yelk of an Egg; others
Salt, Hopps, and Raisms, for the same purpose. Some put a dram or two of
Camphir, in a Bag, and fasten it to the pit of the Breast, 'till it be exhaled.
Others apply the following Plaster to the Stomac.

Take of Honey, two Ounces; Mastic and Turpentin, of each half an Ounce; boil
the Honey to a due consistency; then mix it with the other Ingredients for a
Plaster. Or,

Take of Shining Soot, an Ounce and a half; Turpentin, six drams; Spider's
Webbs, an Ounce; Camphyr, two scruples; with Oil of Scorpions, make a Plaster,
to be applied to the Wrists.

Oil of Spiders, living Spiders, and all their preparations are much in use. In
malignant and Quartan Fevers, the following Plaster is very successful.

Take of Venice Turpentin, an Ounce; melt it in a Copper Kettle; then throw in
twenty or thirty living Spiders; stir them about with a wooden Spatula, 'till
the Spiders be covered. Then add of the Powder of Toad's-flesh dried, Powder of
red Land-Toads, dried, of each an Ounce; crude Tartar, an Ounce; Savin, two or
six drams. With Oil of Scorpions make a Plaster.

If we suspect any swelling of the Spleen or Bowels, it is proper to apply to
the region thereof, the Plaster of Hemlock, or of Tobacco, or Vigo's Plaster
with Mercury mixed with Gum Ammoniac. The thickened juice or extract of Tobacco
is conducive to this purpose, as also Sylvius's Carminative Plaster. If the
region of the Spleen or Belly be molested with pains, apply what follows.

Take of the Extract of Tobacco prepared by decoction, three Ounces: Opium
dissolved in Wine, and reduced to the consistence of an Extract, one Ounce;
Wax, half a pound. With Turpentine and Oil of Tobacco, make a Plaster.

Having thus dispatched the regular cure of Fevers, 'twill not be improper to
propose some method of relief for those, who by an unseasonable and unskilful
suppression of the Fever, are liable to frequent relapses, convulsive pains in
the Belly, Headaches, Asthma's, weariness of the Body, etc. In this case, let
the Body be rendered soluble by the Decoction of Raisins, and such like
laxative and emollient Ingredients. Then exhibit some pacific mixture; as,

Take of Mint-water, an Ounce and a half; Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, half a Dram;
Hysteric Laudanum, two or three grains; Syrup of Orange-peel, three or six
drams. Mix for a Draught, and continue the use for some time. If any swelling
or violent pain continue in the Hypogastria, apply the Plaster of Gum-Ammoniac
and of Galbanum, with Oil of Bricks. After the symptoms are gone, it is
advisable, to continue for some time the use of Wormwood, or such Remedies as
partake of it.

SECT. IV. Of continual Fevers.
ART. 1. Of Day-Feavers.
OFt-times the abuse of the six no^ natural things, disturbs the natural
fermentation of the Blood, accelerats the Pulse, and in some measure disorders
the functions; which symptoms disappear in a days time, either of their own
accord, or by using some gentle sudorific.

This Fever is called Continual, by reason that it does not intermit from
beginning to ending. If the Blood be vitiated, it is apt to degenerat into a
Synoehus, or a Fever that lasts above one day. In order to prevent which, give
the following Julep.

Take of the decoction of Hartshorn with Vipers-grass, one pound; juice of
Citrons, juice of Quinces, of each half an ounce; tincture of
Columbine-flowers, and of Dazies, of each a dram and a half; Syrup of
Rasberries, two Ounces: Spirit of Vitriol, as much as suffices for a grateful
acidity. Make a Julep, or instead of the Julep, make a decoction of the like
Ingredients, together with gentle laxatives.

If the Belly be swelled, and the Body very hot, take of Fennel Water an ounce
and a half; carminative Water, six Drams; dulcifi'd Spirit of Nitre, three
drams; Syrup of Orange-peel, half an Ounce. Mix and make a Julep.

ART. 2. Of the Principal acute Fevers.
THE continual Fevers that last above one day, are either primary, or
symptomatical. The former are a Disease subsisting by it self, which, if its
period be short, and its Symptoms grievous, is called Acute; if it be
slow-paced, and advance without any notable disturbance, it is called a Slow
Fever. Both of which are called Compounds, or periodical continual Fevers, if
they admit of any remission, or exacerbation in their continued progress. But
if their vehemence be still the same, they are called simple Synochus's.

If Acute Fevers come without the inflammation of any particular part, they
are called Solitary. And if dismal Symptoms happen, beyond the apparent reach
of the Fever, it is styled Malignant: But if otherwise, Benignity is its
Character.

The primary, simple, continual, solitary, hot, benign Fevers are caused by
the prevalency of a volatile, oily, bilious Salt in the Mass of Blood, that
hotly encounters the acid Particles, creates a violent motion and Heat,
accelerates the Pulse, tinctures the Urine, and while the Victory is
undetermined, renders it thin and crude; but when these volatile parts are
subdued, and precipitated by the Acid, the Urine deposits a sediment, and
affords the true signs of Concoction.

The remote cause, for the most part, is the depravation of the Chyle,
occasioned by the defect of the Choler, or a faulty digestion in the Stomac;
for the stomachic digestion is the Mother and source of all the fermentations
of the other Juices in the Body. Now the vicious heterogeneous Particles
conveyed in the Chyle to the Blood, disturb its natural fermentation, and
provoke its constituent parts to rise up, in order to expel the Hostile
Intruders. Thus we see that those, whose Blood is well stocked with bilious
Particles, whose Constitution is foul, corpulent, and plethoric, who feed high,
and drink strong Liquors, are most liable to this preternatural fermentation.
In like manner, whatever stops the insensible transpiration, accumulats oily
Particles in the Blood, and exalts the Spirits, does pr^^^ispose the Blood for
receiving a feverish impression.

The Cause of acute, compound, periodical Fevers, is some vicious acid juice,
proceeding from the Stomac, returning by intervals, while the volatile oily
Ferment continues its course without intermission. They are, as it were,
compounded of a Continual Acute Fever, and an Intermitting one, which is
always a Tertian; for Quotidian and Quartan continued periodical Fevers (if
any such there be) are rather slow than acute. This Compound sort of Acute
Fevers, is oft-times attended by a notable heat, without any shivering.

If an insufferable thirst, dryness of the Tongue, Headaches, Deliriums, a high
tincture and muddiness of Urine, attend a continual Fever, it is called a
Causus or Burning Fever. The cause of these Symptoms is the hot engagement of
a sharp volatile Acid, with the volatile oily Particles. Besides, the stomachic
ferment being vitiated, and unqualifi'd for its wonted Office, the contents of
the Stomac degenerat into an alcalin oily texture, which sticks to its Pleats,
irritats the Membranes of the Gullet, and, by consent, the Tongue it self: And
moreover, when it joins the Blood, impregnats the Lymph which waters the
Throat, and is voided by way of Spittle, with a volatile only Salt. And if this
vicious Saliva stick to the Tongue and Throat, it becomes troublesome and
inflaming; causing in these parts a redness, hear, and pain, known by the name
of Prunella.

Continual Acute Fevers are styled, Lipyria's, when the superficial parts of
the Body are molested with a sense of Cold, while those within are beset with a
violent Heat. They proceed for the most part from the in^ammation of some very
sensible Membranous internal part, and upon that account are referable to the
symptomatical Class. If there be any such thing as a primary Lipyria, the sense
of external Cold must proceed from the irritation of the nervous membranous
parts, and that of inward heat from the pre^ernatural fermentation of the Blood.

If a Continual Acute Fever be attended by a Consumption, or colliquation of
the fat oily parts of the Body, and a tendency to a Marasmus, it is called a
Melting Fever. These oily far nutritious juices are voided either by stool in
the form of stinking Excrements, or by a cool glutinous Sweat, or by copious
quantities of Urine, whose surface is covered with far, or by falling into the
cavity of the Belly, or upon the Feet after a Hydropic manner.

The Causes of melting Fevers are, the thin open texture of the nutritious
juice and fat, occasioned by the want of a fixing congealing Acid; The Acrimony
of the Bile, which sharpens and whets the Chyle, and qualifies it for unlocking
the Body of the nutritious and fat Juices; the vehemence of dissolving Heat;
and the Caustic penetrating sharpness of the febrile ferment. The remote causes
are, the epidemical Constitutions of the Air; the immoderat use of Brandy, or
spiritous Liquors, which over-whet the oily volatile Salt of the Choler; the
over-frequent smoking of Tobacco, and drinking cold Water after a violent
heat. The Scurvy and Cancer in the Breasts are oft-times listed into the number
of the Causes. These melting Fevers ought to be heedfully distinguished from
that profluence of Sweat which proceeds from the deficiency of the Spirits, the
unbending of the Fibers, and flagging of the looser parts, as in swoonings, etc.

Some continual burning Fevers are called Delirious, when the Spirits move
irregularly in the Brain, causing doting, insusterable Headaches, stubborn
watching, and sometimes Convulsions. The cause is partly the heat of the Brain
and Spirits, occasioned by the violent fermentations of the Blood; and partly
the malignity of the febrile ferment, which debauches the quality of the
Spirits, and galls the membranous nervous parts.

If the malignant ferment break out in Pushes and Whelks in the Face, Mouth or
Head, the Fever is called Pemphygodes. If the Person sweat copiously the first
day of the Fevers invasion, but without any ease or benefit, it is called
Elodes. If the Person be disquieted, and toss in Bed, it is called Assodes. This
last symptom may be caused by weakness, notable malignity, vehement heat,
impetuosity of the Spirits, and especially by vicious Humors disturbing the
mouth of the Stomac. If the Person be molested with a Hiccough, which always
proceeds from the Stomac, it is called Lyngodes. If shivering and shaking attend
the whole progress of the Fever, as it oft-times does in the suppurations of
internal Ulcers, and compound continual Fevers, it is called Phricodes.

Of all the compound continual, or continual periodical Fevers, that called
Semitertiana, is most worthy our regard. It Is generally looked upon to be
composed of a Tertian and Quotidian, one of which is a Compound Continual, and
the other an intermitting Fever. Authors give several varying accounts of the
periods of this Fever; but however it is for the most part cast into this form;
viz. A Continual Fever seizes the Patient, and periodical shiverings followed
by a notable heat Observe the order of a Tertian, and gentle shiverings
succeeded by a meeker heat follow a Quotidian period.

The signs of Acute Fevers are manifest. A notable Heat and Thirst always
attends a burning Fever. It Is ushered in by a weariness of the Body, and
perturbation of the Head for some days; then by a chilness and shivering, which
intimats, that the volatile oily Particles have not yet obtained the ascendant
over the Acid. Afterward a notable heat succeeds; the Pulse is frequent and
accelerated, and if the Salts of the Blood are equally matched, it is large and
equal; if it be small or unequal, it bespeaks malignity. If the Salts of the
Blood are very sharp and exalted, a biting vehement heat molests the whole
Body; if they are temperat, the heat is milder. The Urine, at first, is thick,
red, and dark; in progress of time it discovers a Cloud on the top, and, upon
the Crisis, a copious sediment at bottom. If at the height of the Disease the
Urin be thin, it is a fatal sign. If at first it appear thick and dark, and
afterward degenerate into a thin consistence, it portends unquietness,
doting, and frequently Death. But for making a due estimat of the Urine, we
ought to have a particular regard to the Constitution of the Patient. For the
Urine of those whose Blood is copiously tempered with lymph and nutritious
juice, is never so high tinctured nor so thin; as that of Bilious, scorburic,
or Phthisical Persons. Nor can those who sweat much void such large quantities
of Urin and sediment as others. The Spittle is glutinous and scanty, attended
by intolerable thirst, watchings, Headaches, etc.

Acute Fevers come regularly to a Crisis in hot Climats; but in these
Countries, where we are wont to anticipate Nature by alterative, Diaphoretic,
and absorbent Medicines, they are not quite so regular. Sometimes they spend
themselves by gradual solutions by Urine, Night-Sweats, or Salivation.

As for the Prognostics of acute Fevers: a sudden unaccountable Lightning or
ease is a mortal sign. If the Symptoms are extreme high, the Breast disturbed,
and the Stomac queasy, or molested with a gnawing Pain; if in the beginning of
the Disease a looseness happen, attended by a notable prostration of strength,
and a (...) corruption of the excrements; in a word, if any signs of malignity
appear, it is a dangerous case. Vomiting is a good sign. If the Patient be
somewhat benefited and not overweaken'd by a looseness, it is not so very
dangerous. Sometimes a melting Sweat, in which red Sand-like matter is voided,
and found in the Bed, may perform the Cure. White, Pale, crude Urine is always
a bad Omen. The more reddish it appears at first, the sooner the Disease comes
to its height. The Fevers that are occasioned by evident causes are more
favorable, than those whose cause is invisible. If strength decay apace,
without any notable Evacuation, Death is at hand. If the Tongue be moist and of
a natural red Color, all is well; but if it be rough, Dry, Black, Livid,
Slimy, or Chopped, it is in a bad Condition. The swelling of the Face bespeaks
the length of the Disease. If the signs of Concoction appear the fourth Day,
the Fever disappears the seventh, if they are put off till the seventh, the
eleventh Concludes the matter.

The Crisis of the Fever signifies the Period in which the useless and noxious
parts are separated and expelled, sometimes by Ulcers in the Lips and Nostrils,
where the Skin is thin, and Blood Vessels abound; sometimes by a (...) diff^s^d
over the Body; by Urine, Sweating, Salivation, etc.

In ^ot Climats the Disease is sometimes Cured by Bleedings at Nose or other
places. The Bleeding at Nose is for the most part preceded by a tingling of the
Ears. If this Crisis be imperfect, or disturbed by an indiscreet use of
absorbent fixing Medicines, it is followed by insufferable pains of the Stomac,
Guts, or Joints, and sometimes Palsies.

If a Physician know how to anticipat the Crisis, by evacuating the morbific
matter betimes, and curbing the imperuous Motion, he ought to do it. But in
many cases we are at a loss how to compass it, and therefore are obliged to
trace Nature's steps, and patiently wait her Critical Hour, especially in
Benign Fevers, where Nature endeavors to throw out the offensive particles
and purify the Blood. Now to thwart her in so good a Work is dangerous. So that
all that a Physician can do, is to keep Nature upon its Legs, and moderat its
efforts. This indication is answered by cleansing the first Passages; tempering
the urinous sharp Salt in the Blood; assisting Nature in its designed
Evacuation; and mitigating the occasional Symptoms. Now in order to a happy
attainment of these ends, 'twill be needful to subjoyn the following Remarks.

I. That a malignant Fever in the beginning imitats the Symptoms of a Causus;
and therefore the safest way is to commence the Cure of the same by
Alexipharmacal Medicines, and after the fear of the latent Malignity is over to
return to the usual method of Cure.

II. That these Alexipharmacal Medicines ought to be mixed with precipitating
Ingredients, as in the Bezoardic Tincture, in order to promote a gentle
transpiration; but we must not by any means attempt to force sweating.

III. That if the sick Persons be thirsty and hot, we must not deny 'em drink;
only let it be warm and all of one sort, and rather drunk of frequently, than
much of it taken down at once, for fear of weakening the Stomac. If the thirst
be violent, and the Patient free of a looseness, clarified Whey with Juice of
Citrons is a proper Liquor. Barley Water is commonly given, but I do not approve
of it, for that it feeds windy Crudities in the Stomac. Spirit of Sulphur
dropped into Water is very good; as likewise Water mixed with a sixth part of
Wine, and Juice of Citrons or Quinces, and Gelly of Hartshorn.

IV. In the beginning and progress of the Disease, if the Breast and Belly be
oppressed, the Body costive^ if the Blood boil high, and the humors move
toward the Head, inject Clysters, or exhibit gentle laxative Decoctions. If
the Symptoms advance in a precipitant forward way, let this be done before
Bleeding.

V. Vomits are proper in the beginning; and if the strength of the Patient
admit, in the progress of the Disease, They Mitigat all the Symptoms, which are
oft-times caused or at least heightened by the vicious humors lodged in the
first Passages. They must be given in moderat Doses, by reason that the humors
are floating and movable in continual acute Fevers, though in the intermitting
sort they are extreme fixed: If the Patient was in the beginning molested with
a propensity to Vomit, or a Squeamishness, a bitter taste in the Mouth, or
bitter Belchings, Heart-burnings, anxieties of the Breast, Swooning, etc.
Vomiting is highly Convenient.

VI. Purgatives properly so called are prejudicial in continual Fevers, except
in the Declination, when the Febrile matter is not totally evacuated by Urine
and Stool. It Is true in Benign Fevers we ought to keep the Body soluble, and
free the Stomac from the overflowing Choler by mild Lenitives. But proper
Purgatives exhibited before Concoction of the matter are doubtless very
offensive. For if they do not operat they occasion Gripes, swimmings of the
Head, Swoonings, and an infinity of disorders in the Body without any
evacuation; if they happen to work well, they infeeble the Body, melt down the
humors, and prolong the Disease. The Decoction of Tamarinds in Whey is a proper
and safe Laxative, or, if in the beginning you desire to cleanse the first
Passages, take what follows.

Take of the Pulp of Tamarinds, a dram; Powder of Rhubarb, a scruple; prepared
Scammony two or three Grains. Make a Bolus. Or,

Take of choice Rhubarb, a dram and a half; picked Senna Leaves, a dram; infuse
them in Whey all Night, in the Morning let them Boil gently, and add to the
strained Liquor, two drams of Solutive Syrup of Roses.

VII. If the Pulse be large and strong, if the constitution of the Patient be
Plethoric and full, if the Blood boil high, or any notable suppression went
before, it is necessary to Bleed in the Beginning of the Fever, without any
regard to Morning or Evening, or any set time. After the third or fourth Day
it is too late. If the Fever remit, let the Blood be drawn forth during the
time of the Remission; and before the Administration of a Vomit. Some are wont,
in a Prunella, to open a vein under the Tongue; and if the Blood run briskly,
it is accounted a good sign; if it only squeez out by drops, it is Ominous. But
if these foregoing Symptoms be not visible, let Blood-letting be quite omitted,
and a Vomit supply its room. Frequent experience teaches us that repeated
Blood-letting exalts the Fever, especially in these Northern Climats, and
renders Men liable to relapses. The Fever it self exhausts and dries up the
Blood in the Veins, according to Spigelius and Argenterius's observations; upon
which account we ought to be very cautious in lessening its quantity.

VIII. We ought to encourage a breathing Sweat during the whole course of the
Disease, by exhibiting the Salts of Wormwood, Carduus Benedictus, etc. Coral,
sealed Earth, Mineral Bezoar, Hartshorn, etc. To which, we may add
precipitating Ingredients, in order to correct the febrile Ferment. But all
Sulphurous Volatile Rosinous things ought to be carefully avoided; and before
the height of the Disease all forced Sweats are improper.

IX. Meat or Food must never be forced upon feverish Persons; or if their
Appetit require any, let it be very thin and watery. Above all, in the
declination, take care of eating Meat or cramming the Stomac, while the
Digestive faculty is yet weak.

X. In the beginning or height of a Fever opiats are improper. In the
increase, while the Spirits rage, and strength is not quite exhausted, they are
of use for pacifying the Spirits, preventing their Consumption, and promoting
the Concoction of the matter. Let 'em be always mixed with proper specifics.

From these observations we may infer that the alterative specifics are such as
either respect the Fever it self and its material Cause, or the Symptoms that
attend it. Of the former sort are Nitre, Arcanum Duplicatum, and the Sulphurs
of Minerals fixed by Nitre, Diaphoretic Antimony, Mineral Bezoar, Cinnabar of
Antimony, Chalybeat Mineral Bezoar, etc. Cooling and aperient Herbs, as
Cichory, Dandelion, Borrage, Bugloss, Fumitory, Lettuce, Sorrel, Purslain,
Roses, etc. Temperat Oily Seeds, Emulsions, etc. Hartshorn, Coral, sealed
Earth, Ivory, etc. To which we may add Alexipharmacal Medicines, Volatile Salts
of Animals, as of Hartshorn, etc. Of the latter sort are the Vegetable and
Mineral Acid Spirits, especially the last, of which the Spirit of Sulphur and
Nitre are the best; but they ought to be dulcified by Spirit of Wine, for
temperat things are most agreeable to Nature. Spirit of Vitriol contains in it
some metallin Parts, that are very offensive. In the vegetable Province, the
clarified Juices of Acid Fruits are very proper, and much preferable to the
Syrpus, such are the Juices of Citrons, of Quinces, of Barberries, of red
Corants, etc. The Juices of House-leek, Purslain, Plantain, etc. are likewise
very useful. Tamarinds are much approved by reason of their Laxative and
Cooling quality.

As for the forms of Receipts, prescribe as follows. If there be any suspicion
of a latent malignity, let forty or sixty drops of the Bezoardic Tincture be
exhibited in the beginning of the Disease. Then,

Take of the Decoction of Hartshorn, with the roots of Vipers-grass, a pound;
fresh juice of Citrons, two ounces; Syrup of Water Lilly-flowers, Syrup of
white Poppies, of each six drams; dulcified Spirit of Nitre, as much as
suffices for a grateful Acidity. Make a Julep. Or,

Take of the Decoction of Hartshorn, with the roots of Vipers-grass, one
Pound; Juice of Barberries, Juice of red Corans, of each an ounce and a half;
Tincture of Roses, Tincture of Violets, of each a dram; Syrup of the Juice of
Citrons, an ounce and a half; Spirit of Sulphur as much as suffices for a
grateful Acidity. Mix for a Julep. Or,

Take of Common Water a Convenient Quantity, with a little Wine and as much of
the Juice of Quinces as suffices for a grateful Acidity. Mix, etc.

Take of Borrage Water, Bugloss Water, and Water of Rasberries, of each an
ounce; Cinnamom Water, three drams; fresh Juice of Citrons, six or eight drams;
Confection Alkermes, a dram and a half; Syrup of Rasberries, half an ounce.
Mix, etc.

Take of the Conserves of Wood Sorrel, of the Pulp of Citrons, and of Clove
Gilly-flowers, of each an ounce; Rob of red Corants, six drams; Confection
Alkermes, two drams; with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Rasberries.
Make an Electuary.

The Decoction of the Roots and Leaves of Wood Sorrel mixed with the Juice of
red Corants, and Syrup of Rasberries, is a very palatable Liquor for quenching
Thirst.

Extemporary Tinctures may be drawn from the Flowers of Dazies, Poppies, Roses,
Clove Gillyflowers, Violets, Golumbines, etc. with common Water, or the
Decoction of Hartshorn and Vipers-grass, or red Poppy Water, etc. The Flowers
being first sprinkled with Spirit of Sulphur, or of Vitriol These Tinctures are
of a pleasant red Color, for all blue Flowers when mixed with an Acid Spirit,
yield a rutilant Tincture.

These Tinctures may be sweetened with Syrup of Rasberries or of Violets, or of
Iujubes: and are sometimes joined to the dulcified Acid Spirits, and dropped
into the Patient's ordinary Drink.

Instead of Juleps or Tinctures, some use the Decoction of Tamarinds; as, take
of the Pulp of Tanmarinds, from two to three ounces; Boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Whey. To two pound of the strained Liquor, add Juice of Citrons,
six or eight drams. Tincture of Dazy Flowers, three drams; Syrup of the Juice
of Citrons, an ounce and a half. Mix and Exhibit for ordinary Drinking.

Whey is an admirable Drink for Feverish Persons, if purified by Juice of
Citrons, or Pulp of Tamarinds. As, Take of Whey, two pound; fresh Juice of
Citrons, three drams; Flowers of Dazies, and of red Poppies of each a handful
and a half. Let 'em boil in a close Vessel, till the Whey be impregnated with
the Tincture. Strain the Liquor, and sweeten it with Syrup of Poppies, or of
Rasberries.

Next to the foregoing Medicines is Nitre, which is universally approved by all
Practitioners; the preparation of it with Sulphur, called Sal-Prunellae, is of
no efficacy; but if the Crude Nitre be purified by some sharp Lie, it proves an
admirable Remedy. Nitrum Antimoniatum, which is a complication of Nitre with
the Sulphur of Antimony, may be given to a dram in their ordinary Drink, three
or four times a Day, or in Powder together with Antihecticum Poterii.
Diaphoretic Antimony, Mineral Bezoar, or that called Joviale, or Saturninum,
together with Hartshorn prepared without fire, and the above mentioned
absorbent Earths, are all proper for mitigating the fermentation, and promoting
a gentle breathing Heat. As,

Take of Rasberry Water, two ounces; Water of Vipersgrass, and fresh Juice of
Quinces, of each an ounce; Bezoardicum Joviale, a scruple; Syrup of white
Poppies, an ounce; dulcified Spirit of Nitre as much as suffices. Take a
spoonful now and then.

Take of the Water of the Flowers of the Sloe-tree, Water of Elder-Flowers, and
Dandelion Water, of each an ounce; Gelly of Hartshorn, an ounce and a half;
Hartshorn prepared without fire, a scruple; Poterius's Antihectic, and
Diaphoretic Antimony, of each twelve grains; Syrup of Poppies six drams. Mix
and use as above.

In a Solid form they are prescribed thus. Take of purified Nitre, sixteen
grains, Poterius Antihectic Powder, half a scruple; Sugar of Lead five grains.
If a Delirium be feared, or Malignity suspected, add a grain or two of Camphyr.

Take of Nitrum Antimoniatum, two scruples; Chalybeat Diaphoretic Antimony,
half a dram; Laudanum Opiatum, a grain or two. Mix for two Doses, to betaken at
Night in a convenient Vehicle.

Depurated Nitre or Nitrum Antimoniatum, may be dissolved in their ordinary
Drink, after the rate of half an ounce in twenty four Hours.

Emulsions are next in order. They are very proper for tempering the Bilious
Salt, and qualifying the acrimony of the Blood. But they ought not to be too
frequently or copiously used; for that they weaken the Stomac, and clog the
Appetit. Let 'em be mixed with fixed Powders. Thus,

Take of sweet Almonds, two drams; Seeds of white Poppies, a dram; of the four
cold Seeds, of each a dram; with Water of Wood Sorrel, make an Emulsion: To
which add, Diaphoretic Antimony, and Mineral Bezoar, of each half a dram.
Sweeten it with pearl'd Sugar, and exhibit a spoonful now and then.

So much for Internal Remedies. Externally some are wont to apply Cataplasms to
the Palms of the Hands and soles of the Feet; as in the case of Watchings,
Deliriums Pains etc. Take of fresh Rue Leaves, two or three handfuls; Radish
Roots sliced, in number two or three; Salt, a handful; of the strongest Yest,
two ounces with Rue Vinegar, make a Cataplasm to be applied as above.

The Juice of River Crabs may be applied in like manner, or by way of Epithema
to the forehead. When the Mouth and Head are much affected, it is not improper
to open the Vein under the Tongue, or the Vein in the Forehead, or to apply
Leeches behind the Ears. The application of convenient Liquids to the Forehead
and Temples is also not improper. As,

Take of the Water of Dill, or of Roses, or of Elder Flowers, or of Vervain,
two ounces; Apoplectic Water, half an ounce; Philonium Romanum, or Requi^s
Nicolai, or Triacle, a dram. Mix and apply it warm to the Forehead and
Temples, with a Linen Cloth.

Take of white Poppy Seeds, two or three drams; Henbane Seeds, half a dram;
Water of Frogs spawn, three ounces; House-leek Water, Nightshade Water, and
the common Hypnotic Water, of each an ounce. Make an Emulsion. To which add six
or seven grains of Camphyr; and the Juice of River Crabs. Mix for an Epitheme
to be used as above. In Deliriums, Camphyr is a sovereign Remedy, but in the
case of watchful Slumbers it ought to be cautiously used.

Take of Betony Water, Elder Flower Water, and the Water of red Poppy Flowers,
of each an ounce expressed Juice of River Crabs, three ounces; Spirit of Wine
camphoris'd, three drams. Mix for the above mentioned use.

Take of the Ointment of Alabaster, or of Poplar, three drams; expressed Oil of
Nutmegs, half a dram or a dram; Camphyr, six grains; or Philonium Romanum, or
Venice Triacle, half a dram. Mix, and anoint the Forehead and Temples.

If the Head be much oppressed, or if the forementioned Symptoms be occasioned
by the stopping of an external Eruption, blistering Plasters may be applied to
the Arms and Thighs, and sharp Clysters injected.

As for the particular Symptoms of a Prunella, viz. the redness, heat, and
roughness of the Tongue, etc. Let the Patien^ take a convenient Quantity of the
following mixture, and hold it in the Mouth.

Take of the Seeds of Quinces, of Mallows, of Fleawort, of each two drams; with
Water of Frogs spawn, Make a Mucilage, to which add Sal-armoniac, a dram;
compound House-leek Water, two ounces; Juice of River Crabs, an ounce; mix,
etc. Nitre may also be added, or mixed with the Decoctions of cooling Herbs. As,

Take of the Leaves of Self-heal, Willows, and Strawberries, Barley not
bruised, of each a handful. Boil them in Water, and add to a pound of the
strained Liquor one ounce of the Syrup of Mulberries, and half a dram of Nitrum
Antimoniatum. Mix for a Gargle. Or,

Take six River Crabs, bruise 'em with Rasberry Vinegar, and express the Juice;
to which add Juice of Houseleek, three ounces; Rob of Nuts, one ounce; Nitrum
Antimoniatum, a dram. Mix and anoint the Tongue. Or,

Take of House-leek Water, a pound and a half; Juice of River Crabs four
ounces; Sal-Armoniac purified, a dram and a half. Mix, and make a warm Gargle.
Sal-Armoniac and Nitre are noted Ingredients in all Gargles of this Nature.
Water, Spirit of Wine, and Honey, are very useful for the same purpose, in
malignant Fevers, attended by a roughness and Dryness of the Palate, without
any slimy Crust. Fresh Lard, or Butter, or Juice of Rapes boiled to a Syrup,
are likewise very proper to be laid on the Tongue in such an extremity.

In continual periodical Fevers, regard must be had to the Paroxysms, by
exhibiting before the hour of their Invasion fixed Antimonial Powders, Coral,
Crabs Eyes, Vitriolated Nitre, Salt of Carduus Benedictus, Poterius's
Antihectic, and forming Compositions of the Acid and Earthy Ingredients, and
varying them according as the Symtoms require.

Semitertian Fevers ought to be treated in the same Method; only we must
remember to vary it according as the Symptoms are slow or acute, favorable or
malign. If they are attended by Inflammations of particular parts, especially
such as are very sensible, and of the nobler Character, let these be carefully
accounted for. Absorbent Alcali's are proper for vanquishing the Shivering and
Shaking; Vomits are convenient in all Cases; prevailing heat is abated by such
Medicines as render the Body soluble, and promote a breathing Sweat;
Inflammatious are appeased by Diaphoretics: And when the Fever moves slowly,
cleansing and attenuating Salts, such as Sal-armoniac, Arcanum Duplicatum, etc.
are of peculiar use.

In a Causus, or burning Fever, Nitre dissolved in the ordinary Drink, and
Laudanum Opiatum cautiously administered, effectually abate the violence of Heat.

Lipyria's must be treated after the method of Inflammations, of which
elsewhere. In melting Fevers, the sharp humor must be corrected by temperat
Medicines, or absorbent Powders mixed with Acids, as Diaphoretic Antimony,
sealed Earth, etc. Mixed with the Juices of Currants, Barberries, Quinces,
Citrons, Cherries, etc. Sylvius recommends the dulcified Spirit of Salt, others
the Tincture of Boodstone; some Camphyr, others Diascordium mixed with Juice
of Citrons.

Symptomatical acute Fevers, are such as follow other Diseases, and disappear
upon their removal. If they follow Wounds, the following mixture is of Catholic
use.

Take of Hyssop Water, two ounces Fennel Water, an ounce; Spirit of Triacle,
three drams; distilled Vinegar of Wine, three or four drams; Powder of Crabs
Eyes, a dram; Syrup of Carduus Benedictus, three drams: Mix them, etc. Or,

Take of prepared Crabs Eyes, a scruple; Extract of Triacle two grains. Mix and
exhibit.

Those occasioned by Inflammations, as Pleurisies Quinsies, etc. are cured by
removing the Inflammations, of which more elsewhere. If they are caused by the
Extravasation of congealed Blood, they require such Medicines as resolve
clotted Blood, viz. Diaphoretic Antimony, red Poppies, Chervil, Flowers of St.
John's wort, and vulnerary Ingredients.

CHAP. IV. Of Slow Fevers.
SLow Fevers are such as do not quickly finish their Course; are accompanied
by mild Symptoms; and terminat by way of a gradual solution, without any
notable Crisis. They are for most part Benign; for malignity is akin to
accuteness. They are caused by the successive mixture of Vicious Lymph with the
Blood, which is either conveyed immediately to it by the axillary Vein fromt he
Glandules called Conglobatae, that is, gathered round into a Globe; or emptied
into the Conduit of the Breast by the Glandules called Conglomeratae, that is,
rolled into a Heap.

ART. 1. Of Catarrh-Feavers, or such as proceed from the Lymph, separated in
the round Globe-like Glandules.
IF the Lymph of the Glandules, seated about the Head and Breast, become sharp
and saline, it creates a notable alteration of the Blood and Spirits, a biting
sharp Heat, though not over vehement or intense, and a sense of shooting Pains,
Weariness, and as it were Contusions of the Joints; and being plentifully cast
forth about the Brain and Neck occasions a weighty drousie Headache, Defluxions
into the Mouth and Lungs, a Hoarseness, and Cough; the usual Symptoms of a
Feverish Catarrh.

This Fever seems to be near allied to the continual Quotidian Periodical
Fevers of the Ancients. In the Evening, when the Quantity of vicious Lymph is
augmented within the Body by the diminution of the insensible transpiration,
the Symptoms, especially the Heat, are heightened. About Midnight they begin to
relent, and in the Daytime are sometimes followed by a gentle Shivering. The
Pulse is frequent and swift, pretty large and vehement. The Urine is at first
high Colored, but after two or three Days it thickens, becomes muddy and
yellowish, and deposius a copious Sediment.

If this Fever be Epidemical or Malignant, and proceed from the Contagion of
the Air, which seldom happens, it is dangerous, and terminats in mortal
Convulsions.

The Indications of Cure divide themselves into three Branches. 1. To
extinguish the irritation of the solid Parts, which provokes the Spirits, and
occasions the effusion of the Lymph. 2. To qualify the peccant Acrimony of the
Lymph. 3. When it is thus qualified to evacuat it by convenient Passages. The
first is accounted for by Opiats; the second by Volatile Alcalin Salts,
absorbent temperat and thickening Medicines, as the fixed preparations of
Antimony, Poterius's Antihectic, Flowers of Sulphur, prepared Amber, Oil of
Amber, Spirit of Mother of Thyme, Decoction of Sassafras, Myrrh, Camphyr,
volatile Salt of Hartshorn, Spirit and volatile Salt of Human Blood, etc. The
third Design is compassed by diaphoretic, diuretic, and expectorating and, when
the Lymph is well concocted, by sneezing and chewing Medicines.

Take of Fennel-Water, and Water of red Poppy-flowers, of each an Ounce and a
half; Spirit of Hartshorn impregnated with Amber, a Dram and a half; Essence
of Opium, Jaw Bone of a Pike, of each half a Dram; Syrup of the Flowers of red
Poppies, half an Ounce, or six Drams. Mix them for a Julep, of which, exhibit a
spoonful every Hour toward Evening.

Take of the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac annisated, or of the Essence of Amber, two
Drams; Essence of Opium, half a Dram. Mix 'em, and exhibit forty or fifty
drops, some Hours before the periodical exasperation, and reiterate the same
Dose at Night.

Take of prepared Amber, half a Scruple; choice Myrrh, five grains volatile Salt
of Amber, four grains; Extract of Saffron, two grains; Laudanum Opiatum, one
grain; distilled Oil of Amber, one drop. Mix for a Powder to be exhibited in
like manner.

If the Lymph be saltish, Liquorice, Figgs, Jujubes, Barley, emulsions of
Poppy-Seeds, Opiats, Pills of Storax, and such like are proper. If hoarsness
and a difficulty of speech prevail, give what follows.

Take of Mint-Water, two Ounces; Cinnamon Water, half an Ounce Spirit of
Sal-Armoniac anisated, a Dram; Laudanum Opiatum, three grains; Syrup of
Raisins, six Drams. Mix, and give a spoonful now and then.

If the Windpipe, Gullet, and Throat be excoriated, Syrup of Diacodium, Loh of
Raisins, and licking Medecins are proper. If a dry Cough molest the Patient,
let thickning and pacific Remedies be used. As,

Take of the Water of wild Thyme, Water of Carduus Benedictus, of each an
Ounce; Spirit of Treacle camphoris'd, Essence of Sassafras, of each two Drams;
Spirit of Hartshorn succinated, a Dram; Syrup of white Poppies, half an Ounce.
Mix them, and administer a spoonful frequently in the Evening.

This method, if insisted on, together with the continued use of the Decoction
of Sassafras, will in time conquer the Fever. After the Fever is abated, and
the Spirits reduced to order, let the Body be loosened by Queretanus's Pills of
Ammoniac, or Crato's Pills of Amber. Or,

Take of Crato's Pills of Amber, a scruple; volatile Salt of Amber, six grains;
Rosin of Jalap, three grains; extract of Troches Alhandal, one grain; distilled
Oil of Amber, two drops: with Essence of Sassafras, make Pills.

In order to evacuate the prepared Lymph, give forty or fifty drops of the
Liquor of Terra Foliata Tartari, twice a day, which is a proper Diuretic; or
expressed Juice of Radishes with Sugar, which attenuats the Phlegm; or the
following expectorating mixture.

Take of Hyssop-water, two Ounces, Asthmatic-water, half an Ounce; Spirit of
purified Gum Ammoniac, two Drams; Syrup of Tobacco, four or six Drams; Sala's
emetic Syrup, a dram. Mix, etc.

In the beginning while the Cough is yet dry, temperat thickening Medicines are
required, but afterward when the Cough brings up large quantities of viscous
Matter, let cutting expectorating Remedies be used. If the Phlegm be notably
tough and thick, let Oil of Amber be applied to the Nostrils, or let the Person
smell frequently of Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, or that of Urine, or of Hartshorn.
In the last extremity, let the Powder of black Helebor and white Sugar, with
distilled Oil of Cloves, be thrown into the Nostrils.

If the pain of the Head be violent, anoint the Crown with Oil of Amber, or
Balsam of Peru, or apply the Plaster of Bettony softened with Oil of Amber.
After the Disease is in good measure subdued, the following Decoction is of
excellent use for purifying the Blood, correcting the sharpness of the Lymph,
fortifying the Lungs, and preventing a Phthisic.

Take of the shavings of red Saunders, one Ounce; shavings of Sassafras, half
an Ounce; steep them in seven pound of Water, for the space of twelve Hours,
then boil them till a pound and a half be consumed, and add of the Leaves of
Ground Ivy, Leaves of Speed-well, Flowers of St. John's Wort, of each two
handfuls; Liquorice Roots half an Ounce; Fennel-Seeds, six drams; bruised
Currants, three Ounces. Boil the Liquor into four Pounds, strain it, and exhibit
a large draught warm Morning and Evening.

ART. 2. Of Fevers proceeding from the Lymph of Conglomerat Glandules, or such
as are rolled into a heap.
THE conglomerat Glandules deposit their juice into cavities, from whence it is
conveyed to the Blood. The chief of 'em are the Sweetbread, and those behind
the Ears. The former waters the Guts, the latter the Mouth. If their Serum be
viscous, or over saline, it occasions a slow sort of a Fever. All slow Fevers
are periodical, as being exasperated either in the Evening, after the method of
Quotidians, or after eating, in the form of Hectic Fevers.

Those which are independent of any other Disease, are called Primary. And
those which follow the Corruption of any inward part, or the mismanagement of a
preceding Disease, are styled Symptomatical. Though the last approach very near
to the primary form.

Of independent slow Fevers.
They are ushered in by a gentle shivering, which continues for some time, and
is followed by a mild Heat, somewhat sharper in the extreme parts. The Appetit
is dejected, and after eating, the Stomach and Guts are distended, and oppressed
with a heavy pain. Toward the Evening, or after Meals, they increase their
force; at which time the Pulse is frequent, and not very large. If the Spittle
be notably viscous, the Mouth and Throat are covered with slime, and the Person
molested with Thirst. If the Juice of the Sweetbread be likewise over viscid
or saline, anxiety invades the Breast and griping shooting pains beset the
Belly; the Pulse is frequent and swift, and in some measure weak and small. The
Urine, at first, is high colored, afterward it becomes muddy, and drops a
sediment. The Joints are seized with a weariness and shooting pains, and
sometimes the Head with a dull heavy ache.

If the Lymph be simply saline, the symptoms are fiercer; if it be likewise
viscid and tough, they are weaker, but continue longer. The slow Fevers differ
from acute ones in this; that the cause of the latter is a volatile sharp Acid,
which in the former, is invelop'd with a viscous tenacious Vehicle.

The Original cause is a vicious Digestion, rendering the Chyle viscid, or
tending to a sort of acid saline taste. If the Evening Paroxysms are long, the
Strength and Appetit much impaired, it is a dangerous circumstance. The most
favorable sort, if not cautiously taken care of, terminates in Cachexies, or
Hectic Fevers.

These Fevers are cured by retrieving the lost Digestion in the Stomac;
correcting the viscidity, or sharpness of the Lymph, especially the saliva and
pancreatic juice evacuating the crude Phlegm, and Lymph thus prepared; and
mitigating the Symptoms.

If the Breast be oppressed, let a gentle Vomit be exhibited, or a mild
purgative. As,

Take Mynsicht's emetic Tartar, two or three grains; purified Sal-Armoniac,
eight grains. Or,

Take of Ruffius's Pills de tribus, fifteen grains; fulminatory Gold, three
grains; prepared Scammony, Treches Alhandal, of each a grain. With compound
Tincture of Tartar, make Pills.

In the next place, attenuating Diuretic Remedies are proper, as dulcifi'd
Spirit of Salt, (of excellent use against a Hectic) dulcifi'd Spirit of Nitre,
essential Salt of Tartar, Sal-Armoniac, Nitrum Antimoniatum, Tartar
vitriolated, Terra foliata Tartari, or its Liquor, Tincture of Tartar, Essence
of Myrrh tartaris'd, carminative Spirit, Spirit of Sal-Armoniac anisated,
Poterius's Antihectic, etc.

Take of purified Sal-Armoniac, half a dram; Poterius's Antihectic, a scruple;
make a Powder for two Doses, one in the Morning, and the other at Night before
the Fit. Nitrum Antimoniatum mixed with an equal quantity of Sal-Armoniac; or
Arcanum duplicatum mixed with diaphoretic Antimony; or Sal-Armoniac mixed with
Galangal and Ginger, are successfully used after the same method.

Take of Mint-Water, and Fennel-Water, of each an ounce and a half; Spirit of
Treacle, two or three Drams; dulcifi'd Spirit of Salt, half a dram, or a whole
dram* Poterius's Antihectic, a scruple; Syrup of Hyssop, six or eight drams.
Mix for two Doses.

Let the Mouth be gargaris'd with small Beer and Honey of Roses; or with Water,
Vinegar, and purified Nitre or the infusion of Holyhoc-flowers, in Water, with
a little Spirit of Salt, and a convenient Syrup.

The Fever called Epiala, in which the inward parts are oppressed with heat,
while the external are cold, is, by some, referred to this Head. But it is only
a combination, or rencounter of either a Continual and Intermitting, or two
Intermitting Fevers.

The Swoonings that sometimes attend both this and other sorts of Fevers, are
caused either by some viscious slime, irritating the Mouth of the Stomac or
some sharp rusty Humor lodged in it. In the last case, Unicorn's Horn, or the
Decoction of Tamarinds in Water, are much approved. But if a viscid windy
Matter arise to them, volatile spiritous Remedies are proper. Though, after all,
it is worthy our consideration, what Ballonius remarks upon this matter; viz.
That many Physicians are faulty in giving strong Cordials against swooning,
where purging were more proper.

Of Symptomatical slow Fevers.
These Fevers are frequently occasioned by a preposterous use of Absorbents in
Intermitting and Continual Fevers, which fix the heterogeneous Particles, and
render the Chyle and Lymph viscid; or by over-feeding in the declination of
other Fevers while the digestive faculty is weak; by which means the Chyle is
loaded with Crudities. They may likewise follow other Diseases proceeding from
a viscous Acid. Their Symptoms are the same as above, to which we may add, that
sometimes they are accompanied by a looseness, or voiding of liquid pituitous
Matter.

The Cure consists in tempering the saltish Acid, attenuating the viscid
Matter, and procuring to it an egress by vomiting, stool, urine or sweat. They
sometimes proceed from Ulcers, especially of the internal parts: retention of
the Afterbirth, a dead Child in the Womb, chronical Pains; and are cured by
removing the respective Cause by Medecins allotted to that purpose. In general,
gentle Vomits and Purges are proper; and in a word the whole series of Medicines
prescribed for the independent Slow Fevers.

Sometimes such Fevers follow an unseasonable use of sudorific Decoctions
against the Pox, before the Body be evacuated; and are cured by vomiting, and
the repeated use of Sal-Armoniac.

Of Hectic Fevers.
A Hectic is a Slow Fever advancing insensibly. If it be a principal
independent Disease it proceeds from the Corruption of undigested Food in the
Stomac, immoderate fatigue, sorrow, watchings, want, over-liberal evacuations,
excessive Bathings, etc. Oft-times it is only a symptom of other Diseases, and
follows the irregular Cure of Continual and Intermitting Fevers, Inflammations
of the Bowels, Lungs, Mesentery, Womb, and Kidneys; the French Pox, etc.

The Part affected is not the habit of the Body, as the Ancients fancied; but
the mass of Blood, and Lymph: Hence the greatest heat is perceived about the
Arteries. As for the independent Principal sort of Hectics, the Stomac and
digestive Faculty are the original seat of their cause.

The immediate cause is the indisposition and unequal texture of the Blood,
caused by the saltish sharpness of the Lymph in the conglobat Glandules, and
the viscosity of that in the Conglomerat. From whence ensue a depraved and
diminished fermentation, weakness, weariness, deficiency of Spirits, and the
whole train of Hectic Symptoms. The salin and viscid Blood is rendered unfit
for nourishing the parts; and after eating, when the thin readier part of the
fresh Chyle dilutes the Blood, and disengages its Salts, the Pulse is a little
enlarged, and the Heat augmented; and after some time, sink again to their
ordinary pitch. And the coarse remains of the Chyle, are frequently voided by
Night-Sweats, as having received a vicious Tincture in the Stomac from the
Saliva, and being, upon that Account, equally disagreeable to the Blood and
solid parts.

As for the Remote Causes. Fatigue and Labor, Watchings and Care exhaust the
Spirits, and watery Vehicle of the Blood; Anger exalts the Bilious Salt, which
joining with the Acid, acquires a saline Acrimony; Grief and Sorrow increase
the Acid, which joining to the urinous Salt, becomes dull and unactive;
indigested Crudities in the Stomac, or the want of Food, occasion a stricter
union between the Acid and urinous Salts, and their mutual degeneracy into a
third sharp saline Body; Ulcers, both internal and external, corrupt the Blood
by virtue of their salin sharp Matter; continual and intermitting Fevers,
attended by plentiful Sweats exhaust the dewy watery part of the Blood; or the
unseasonable use of absorbent earthy Powders, administered for their Cure,
destroys the Ferment of the Stomac, and increases the Acrimony of the Blood.
Thus they all conspire to render the Blood and Lymph saltish or viscous.

There are three Essential Signs of a Hectic Fever. 1. An obscure insensible
Heat, increasing after eating. 2. The successive Consumption of the Body. 3. A
swift, frequent, small, weak, and oft-times a hard Pulse. To which we may add
in some cases Night-Sweats, the falling off of the Hairs, an universal
Weariness, inward Heat, and averseness to sleep in the morning. If Ashy
belchings precede the appearance of these Symptoms, they serve for a
confirmation. In the beginning of the Disease the Urine resembles that of
healthy Persons, unless the Stomac be much depraved, in which case it is white,
pale, and thick; afterward when the Appetit and Digestion are in a manner
quite abolished it becomes thin, transparent and high Colored; and when it is
formed into a perfect Consumption, a fat oily Crust, resembling Cobwebs, swims
on the Top. But we ought carefully to distinguish between the real fat Crust,
which is usual in continual and intermitting Fevers, and proceeds from the
excessive Heat which melts the internal Fat, and is always uniform as to its
Color and Appearance; and the apparent Crust, familiar to Hypocondriac and
Scorbutic Persons, which is nothing else but the concretion of vicious Salts,
and when the Chamber Pot is a little inclined, appears green, or parti-color'd
like a Peacock's Tail. In the beginning of a Hectic the Belly is costive; but
when it is further advanced, and the Stomac and Digestive faculty quite gone,
they are molested with a Looseness, which, together with melting Sweats,
off-fallings of Hair, and universal Consumption of Body, at length finishes
their Days.

A Perfect Hectic Fever may be considered in its several degrees. 1. When the
Nutritious Juice is dispersed, and mis-apply'd. 2. When not only the simple
Nutritious Juice, but the fat, and what was already appropriated to particular
solid parts, is melted down and consumed. 3. When besides these Symptoms the
Fibers of the solid parts are manifestly dry and withered.

The last degree is incurable. If a Hectic be occasioned by disorders of the
Bowels, or internal Ulcers; if it follow continual or intermitting Fevers or
chronical Distempers; if the Hairs fall off, and the Person be old, or molested
with a Looseness, or Lienteria, attended by a ghastly Countenance, and
swellings of the Feet and Legs; they are all fatal Symptoms, especially the
last three.

If it be a principal independent uncompounded Hectic, the direct Indications
of Cure are, to temper the Acrimony of the Blood, and Acid Viscosity of the
Lymph; and to corroborat the Stomac For which purposes observe. 1. That
Bleeding, Purging, or any Evacuations are improper; unless the first Passages
be stull'd with Crudities, for which a gentle Laxative is allowable, but in a
small Dose; by reason that Hectic Persons are very easily Purged. 2. If it
arise from the Stomac, as it frequently does, Vomits, and the use of Elixir
Proprietatis are very effectual. 3. That by all means Loosenesses and excessive
Sweats must be curbed; the former by Quinces, red Roses, Chalybeat Milk, etc.
The latter by Opiats given at Night in small Doses. 4. That all sweet things,
Sugar, Honey, etc. ought to be cautiously avoided, by reason that they are
offensive to the Stomac, and impart a viscidity to the humors of the Body.

If the Fever be Simptomatical, a particular regard must be had to the
principal Disease, and above all to the Stomac. If it follow a continual or
intermitting Fever, a Vomit, if convenient, may be administered, and after that
there is nothing better than Sal-Armoniac, and Poterius's Antihectic.

If it follow an Ulcer of any internal Part, vulnerary Sulphurous Medicines
are proper, especially the Balsam of Sulphur prepared with expressed Oil of
Almonds (distilled Oils are too sharp) or, this Balsam thus prepared may be
mixed with a little Oil of Aniseeds. Turpentin dissolved in the ^olk of an Egg,
or human Fat, or the Decoctions of vulnerary or pectoral Herbs, are likewise
proper.

After the principal Diseases, and the state of the Stomac are taken care of,
the Hectic Fever it self must be accounted for, by exhibiting temperat
attenuating Medicines. The essential Salt of May-dew, or its Spirit, with the
Flowers of Violets, Borrage, and Bugloss infused in it; the Phlegm of Vitriol
that comes over before the Spirit, if it be rectified, the Juice or Dew which
sticks to the Herb called Rosasolis; the Juicy fat Herbs, Fruits, and Seeds,
such as, House-leek, Plantan, Succory, Marshmallows, Lettuce, Purslain,
Borrage, Bugloss, Fistic Nuts, sweet Almonds, Sebestins, the four cold Seeds,
white Poppy Seeds, and especially Currants or Raisins whether by way of Pulp, or
Decoction with Sassafras, China and Elecampane Roots; or Fermentation with
Wine, or Preparation with Juice of Apples; are all noted Specifics for this
purpose. Crabs Eyes and Pearls are sovereign Antihectics, if we could resolve
'em into their primitive milky Liquor from whence they sprung. Terra foliata
Tartari, and its Liquor well prepared, is likewise of good use. Antihecticum
Poterii is a noble Medicine, if it be very well separated from the Sulphur of
the Tin. As thus,

Take five parts of purified Tin, and four parts of the Regulus of Antimony.
Melt and fix them with triple the Quantity of Nitre. While the mixture stands
melted, stir it with a wooden Spatula, that by so doing the Sulphur of the Tin
may evaporat. Afterward dissolve the mixture, and reserve for use the white
Powder that sinks to the Bottom.

Diaphoretic Antimony, mineral Bezoar, Ivory, Coral, mixed Sal-Armoniac, or
Arcanum Duplicatum, or with Mynsicht's Magistery of Lead, or Sugar of Lead, are
very convenient, where the Heat is more intense. Some give thirty drops of the
Antiphthifical Tincture prepared from Sugar of Lead, and Vitriol of Steel.
Alum, or its Spirit, mixed with Spirit of Wine, is much applauded. Spirit and
Oil of human Blood are recommended by Mr. Boil. If Grief or any passion of the
Mind threaten a Hectic, give twice a Day forty drops of the Tincture of Coral
with Spirit of Stags-heart.

Some receive great Benefit by a Milk Diet of Women's, Asses, Goats, and Cows
Milk. But it ought to be commencd before the strength is very much impaired, or
the Digestion lost. In a word, 'twill be proper to mind these Cautions. 1. That
the Hectic be not attended by a putrid Fever, or a Headache, or distention of
the Hypochondria, or a foul Stomac, and weak Digestion. 2. That while Persons
use Milk they Eat or Drink little else. 3. That all Acids be avoided, and a
little Sugar added to the Milk, to prevent its Curdling. 4. That the Milk be
taken warm, and with a fasting Stomac, either by sucking it from the Breasts,
or drinking it when just milk'd, for fear of any Alteration from the Air. 5.
That the Physician ought to try first if the Milk Diet agree with the Patient's
Constitution; as after a gentle Purgation let him exhibit three or four ounces
of Milk, and if there ensue no sense of weight about the Stomac, Hiccough,
Squeamishness, increase of Heat, or acceleration of the Pulse, he may exhibit a
Pint every Morning and Evening. And after drinking of it, the Patient must not
sleep or use violent Motion

The Food of Hectic Persons must be temperat and juicy; as Broth, decoctions of
Rice or Barley, Pullets, Capons, Hens, Ducks fed with Frogs and Cocles, Snails
fed with Sugar and Meal, and boiled in Hen-broth; juice of River-Crabs made up
with Butter, or mixed with the Oil or Decoction of sweet Almonds; Oysters, if
the Stomach be able to digest 'em, and the Appetit covet 'em; Eels, etc. But
under a Milk Diet, let the Patient abstain from Meat.

CHAP. V. Of Malignant Fevers.
A Fever is called Malignant, when it is attended by more dismal Symptoms, than
its visible Cause is wont to produce. Malignity is not inseparably united to
Contagion, there being some contagious Diseases that are not malignant, as the
Itch, etc. and e contra. Oft-times it lies latent in the Body for three or four
days, 'till the Season of exhibiting Antidotes be over; upon which account, a
Physician ought to be very watchful in the Beginnings of Fevers.

The Symptoms which lead us to the discovery of a latent Malignity, are these
following; a sudden prostration of strength, and the Appetit dejected, while
the other Functions are regularly performed, stubborn Watchings without any
anxiety if the Head be only affected; but if the Stomac and Breast be
disordered, they are attended with a great perplexity, tossing to and again,
sometimes the whole Body, sometimes only an Arm or a Leg; to which symptom
Deliriums and Convulsions frequently succeed. The Urine resembles that of
healthy Persons; or, if by virtue of Medicines, or otherwise, it happens to
thicken, yet it still continues transparent, and has little or no sediment,
unless it be a yellowish Clot of Chyle voided along with it. The Pulse is at
first in seeming good order, of a sudden it becomes weak, small, oft-times
hard; and toward the height of the Fever, unequal. At first a gentle
shivering may usher in the Fever; to which succeeds a very moderat heat
externally, though in the mean while they are burnt up within, which is a fatal
sign of internal Inflammations. And notwithstanding the moderation of the Heat,
an unquenchable thirst molests 'em, and their Tongue is dry and rough. Or if on
the contrary, they be extreme hot, and withal insensible of thirst, it is
likewise a sign of malignity. These are the most common Symptoms. Sometimes the
Fever is attended by violent Headaches; difficult respiration, respecially
upon the point of cuticular Eruptions; stinking Excrements, and lastly,
eruptions of Spotts, Pushes, Wheals, etc. According to which it undergoes
several Denominations. Sometimes the malignity is arrived at that height, that
the external Parts are corrupted and seized with Gangreens, the Person
possessed with, an invincible aversion to all manner of Liquors, etc.

Malignant Fevers admit of several Degrees. The first is when the occasional
sharpness and degeneracy of the febril ferment, converts a benign Fever into a
malign one. 2. When the ferment is not only sharp, but contagious, or
epidemical. Now the original of Contagion, is an active spirituous ferment,
easily communicable to the Spirits, and capable to propagate it self by a
fermentative motion, in matter fit for its purpose; which, in company of
Spirits exhaled from the sick Person, pitch upon those whose Constitution and
Pores gives the easiest admission, such as the Relations of the sick Person,
weak People, etc: The manner of its reaching and insinuating into such Persons,
is either by immediate Contact, or in the Vehicle of Food, Clothes, etc. or that
of the Air conveyed into the Lungs, where it debauches the Spirits circulating
that way, and in passing the Mouth, adulterats the Saliva, which immediately
affects the most sensible Orifice of the Stomac: Hence the first, and most
dismal Scene of tragical Symptoms is laid in the Stomac. 3. When the ferment is
become pestilent. And, 4. When it is formed into a direct Plague.

The cause of Malignity, assigned by Willis, is the coagulation of the Blood;
and that by Sylvius, is a sharp volatile lixivious Alcali, destroying the acid
Sulphur of the Blood, and consequently, its consistence: But the vicious
fluidity of the Blood attending malignity confutes the former; and the natural
inactivity of Alcali's, the known power of volatile Acids in extinguishing the
animal Spitits, and galling the nervous System; and the Antidotal virtue of
Alcali's, both volatile and fixed, such as Camphyr, Myrrh, and the absorbent
Powders, overturns the latter Hypothesis. It Is therefore a sharp volatile Acid
that causes malignity, partly by dissolving the texture of the Blood, and
disposing it for Putrefaction, and generation of Worms, observable by
Microscopes; partly by irritating the Stomac, Brain, and nervous Parts, and
partly by extinguishing both the vital and animal Spirits.

That the Spirits are immediately attacked as well as the Blood and Humors, is
made to appear by the symptoms of sudden Weakness, contracted Pulses,
Watchings, Deliriums, etc. and by the force of imagination in propagating the
Contagion. Nay oft-times the Spirits are principally assaulted, and the Humors
only mediatly, through their sides. Now it will be of use in malignant Fevers,
to distinguish nicely the original trouble of the Animal Spirits and nervous
System, from that of the vital Spirits and Mass of Blood. The Symptoms of the
former, are an unquenchable Thirst, a rough and dry Tongue, a quick and small
Pulse, attended by a moderat Heat, anxiety and unquietness (proceeding from the
Stomac) a melting looseness, the rotten smell of Excrements, and the thin fluid
consistence of the Blood: Those of the latter are a violent heat of the
Forehead; the hardness of the Pulse, without the trouble of any membrane in the
Body; or a laudable Pulse attended by extreme weakness; the prostration of the
Appetit, squeamishness, vomiting, stubborn watchings without any visible Cause,
the dryness or roughness of the Skin, and the unaccountable thickness and
crudity of the Urin.

The Remote Causes of Epidemical Malignity are: approaching to corrupted
things, as Dead Carcases, etc. The Salt Subternanean Fumes; Earthquakes; a
preceding famine; eating of corrupt Food, as of putrified Summer Fruits, and
drinking Rotten Water, etc. Inwardly the prevalent acidity of the Juice of the
Pancreas may so exalt the Bile to a rusty sharp quality, that it becomes
malignant. Thus Benign Fevers frequently degenerat into malign ones; and
Scorbutic or Hypocondriac Persons, who are stuffed with a fixed Acid, are not
so much oppressed with malignity or a Volatile Acid, as others.

The prognostics of malignant Fevers are very uncertain, and fallacious. A
large and equal Pulse is a good sign. A quick and small creeping Pulse is a bad
sign; as also an unequal Pulse; though neither the inequality nor intermission,
nor smallness are so fatal in malignant as in Benign Fevers. If Doting
continue after sleeping and be not attended by Sweats; if the Eye represent
false Colors of Objects; if the Urine, after apparent Concoction, become Crude
again; if it stink, if it appear Fat, Oily, black, or livid, with a blackish
Sediment. If a Looseness happen especially after eruptions upon the Skin; if
the Excrements or Urine are Bloody; If the Excrements, Serum, or Blood, send
forth a heavy Smell; if a redness of the Face, Heat and Watchings be attended
by a dropping at the Nose; if the Tendons start; if a tickling or pricking Pain
invade the Palms of the Hands; if the Person attempts to catch Flies, or pick
the Bed-Cloaths; if any of these Symptoms appear they threaten Convulsions or
Death. Deafness though it be looked upon as a dismal Symptom in the beginning of
acute Fevers, meets with a favorable construction about the height of
Malignant Fevers. The Eruption of Bubo's and swellings of the Glandules
frequently infer the solution of the Disease.

The Cure is either designed for preservation from imminent danger, or removing
the present Illness. Distilled Vinegar, Camphyr, and alexipharmacal Ingredients
are proper Preservatives. As for the proper Cure of Malignant Fevers, it is
performed by expelling the poisonous ferment, and fortifying the Spirits and
Humors, in order to promote the expulsion. To this purpose, Sulphur, absorbent
Antimonial Powders, Camphyr, Vinegar, and Acid Juices; precipitating Powders
such as the friable parts of Animals, mixed with alexipharmacal Ingredients,
such as Zedoary, Ivy-Berries, Juniper and Bay Berries, Myrrh, Angelica, Gentian
and Saffron, with Opium and Sudorifics, are very proper. But in order to a
regular use of 'em, let us mind the following Cautions.

1. Vomits, especially the Infusion of Vitrum Antimonii, are of admirable
efficacy in the very beginning of Malignant Fevers; especially when they are
attended by Anxieties in the Breast, or proceed from an internal corruption of
the Humors. But the Season of exhibiting them must be nicely weighed; for if
Nature be already endeavoring any other evacuation, especially through the
Skin, they are out of season.

2. Sudorifics are justly looked upon as the basis of the Cure; but they ought
to be proportioned to the malignity of the Disease, and strength of the
Patient. If the Malignity be of a moderat Character, it is advisable to begin
with absorbents at first. Indeed a violent malignity requires powerful
Sudorifics; but care must be taken that the Patient be not stifled with weight
of Clothes. And those of the sweating Tribe that are Aromatic and Oily, are
only proper in the beginning, or during the increase: Toward the height, or
when the Heat is violent, it is not amiss to exchange 'em with fixed Powders or,
at least, to qualify 'em with Acids, such as the Spirits of Nitre, the
vegetable Acid Juices, etc. Camphyr is a Sudorific never to be omitted, unless
it be prohibited by a peculiar Antipathy as in some Women, and studious Men.

3. During the time of sweating, or immediately after it, let Acid mixtures of
the Juice of Citrons, and especially Spirit of Nitre etc. be exhibited. They
retrieve the exhausted Spirits, and procure a due consistence to the dissolved
Blood, and ought always to be employed for a Vehicle to Venice Treacle, and
such like hot Compositions.

4. Opiats are of admirable use for promoting Sweat, which is frequently
hindered by anxiety and unquietness. Let 'em be mixed both with Sudorifics, and
with the Acid mixtures exhibited after sweating; but their proper Season is
during the Increase; for toward the Crisis they ought to be avoided.

5. The Cure of malignant Fevers varies according to their respective Causes.
If they proceed from external Contagion, fierce Sudorifics are required. If
from the internal corruption of the Humors, they ought to be more temperat,
and rather absorbent. If the Animal Spirits are the principal seat of the
Malignity, subtle, volatile, penetrating Ingredients, mixed with Narcotics, are
proper. If the Blood claim that Character, they ought to be tempered with Acid
Vehicles. The malignity of the Blood is, for the most part, attended by
eruptions of Humors at one part or other; that of the Spirits by Deliriums,
Watchings, Convulsions, etc. and a tolerable Pulse.

6. Malignant Fevers are frequently complicated continual Burning ones; in
which case regard must be had to the boiling heat of the Blood, by insisting
most on mother at Acids, and fixed absorbents, especially those of Antimony, and
qualifying the volatile oily Specifics.

7. The above mentioned Symptoms relating to the Tongue, Hands, and Tendons
ought always to be inquired after; as also the condition of the Eyes, for if
they are rutilant and fiery, or fierce, they threaten Deliriums.

8 There is nothing more fatal than a Looseness; and all Artificial Purgations
are pernicious, especially if the Disease came by Contagion, or if Nature
endeavor Cutaneous Fruptions, or if the force of malignity surpass that of the
febrile effervescency. If the first Passages be stuffed, let temperat Clysters
be injected, and even those but very cautiously. In the Declension of the
Disease a gentle Laxative is not amiss.

9. Blood-letting is highly Pernicious, especially if the Disease came by
Contagion, or tend to cutaneal Eruptions. Sometimes if the malignity be weak,
and the Blood boil high in a Plethoric young Person, accustomed to Bleeding, it
may be allowed; but with a great deal of Caution and Judgment.

10. Blistering Plasters are very useful. They Are applied to the Legs and
Arms, and in case of sleepy Symptoms to the Nap of the Neck. If the Animal
Spirits are much afflicted, or if the Eruptions designed by nature advance but
slowly or retire afterward, they are of singular use. Stephanus advises us not
to be over hasty in applying 'em, till Nature have discovered her design, and
then if she be weak to interpose their help. The increase or rather beginning
of the Height is a proper time to apply 'em.

11. The Diet must be thin; neither are Victuals to be offered unless the
appetit require 'em. For Drink, let Water be boiled with a third part of
Rhenish Wine, and mixed with the Juice of Citrons and Gelly of Hartshorn. Or
let Whey be sharpened with the Juice of Citrons, or Spirit of Nitre.

Having premised these Cautions, we shall next touch at the Specifics, some of
which are volatile, some fixed. The volatile are either lean and thin, such as
the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, the Spirits and volatile Salts of Hartshorn, of
Vipers, of Tartar, of Urine, of Amber, etc. Or Oily and Aromatic, such as
Camphyr, Elecampane, Birthwort, Rue, Galangal, Mary-gold, Orange Peel,
Germander, Castor, Vipers, Baum, Zedoary, lesser Centory, Rob of Juniper and
Elderberries the distilled Oils of Amber, Camphyr, Hartshorn, and Tartar;
Essence of Triacle; Spirit of Triacle Camphoris'd, and the Essences of Aromatic
Herbs. The fixed are Diaphoretic Antimony, Diaphoretic Gold, native Cinnabar,
or that of Antimony, above all the fixed Sulphur of Antimony, mineral Bezoar
both simple and Compound, the Bezoar Stone given to half a dram, or in the room
of it the Stone cut out of a Man's Bladder, sealed Earth, Coral, Hartshorn,
Sulphur, and the preparations of Nitre, etc. Some are of a temperat nature,
neither properly volatile nor fixed; such are the Gelly of Hartshorn, the
expelling Seeds, viz. Those of Carduus Benedictus, Columbines, Cresses,
Citrons, etc. To which we may add Myrrh, which is a baumy Medicine, of
excellent use for covering the Spirits from the shocks of the malign ferment.

From these Simples are prepared an infinity of compound Medicines, such as
Venice Triacle, or Diascordium (which is better) Mithridat, Species of
Hyacinth, the Powder called Saxonicus etc. As for Venice Triacle and such like
hot Compositions, the best way is to exhibit em in Acid Vehicles, and mix 'em
with fixed Specifics.

Take of Rasberry Water, and that of Water Germander, of each an ounce and a
half Diaphoretic Antimony, half a dram; Cinnabar of Antimony, fifteen grains;
volatile Salt of Hartshorn, twelve grains; Camphyr, two or three grains; (or
Laudanum Opiatum, a grain or two) Syrup of Carduus Benedictus, an ounce. Mix
for two Doses, in order to Sweat. This is to be given in the beginning or
increase of the Disease after the general Premises. As likewise these following.

Take of Rue Water, and that of Vipers-grass Roots, of each an ounce; of the
Mixtura Simplex, a dram; rectified Spirit of Soot, half a dram; Syrup of Water
Germander, half an ounce. Mix for two Doses.

Take of the Cordial Saxony Water, an ounce; Cinnamom Water, half an ounce;
Spirit of Venice Triacle camphoris'd, two drams; volatile Salt of Hartshorn, a
scruple; volatile Salt of Amber, half a scruple; Syrup of Clove Gilly Flowers,
half an ounce. Mix and give a spoonful frequently, when Delirium's are
threatened.

Take of the Water of Carduus Benedictus, Water of Goat Rue, and that of Elder
Flowers of each six drams; Spirit of Venice Triacle camphoris'd, a dram and a
half; volatile Salt of Vipers, a scruple; Diascordium, two drams; Syrup of
Carduus Benedictus, six drams. Mix for two Doses.

Take of the Water of Vipers-grass Roots, and that of Water Germander, and
Vinegar of Wine, of each an ounce; Venice Triacle two drams; Diaphoretic
Antimony, two scruples; Camphyr, six grains: Syrup of Rasberries, an ounce. Mix
for two or three Doses. If the Heat be violent exchange the Triacle for
Diascordium.

Take of the Water of Carduus Benedictus. and that of Water Germander, of each
an ounce and a half; fresh Juice of Citrons, six drams Venice Triacle, a dram
and a half; mineral Bezoar, half a dram; Laudanum Opiatum, a grain and a half;
Syrup of Mint, dulcified Spirit of Nitre, a sufficient quantity. Mix for two
Doses.

Take of the Conserve of Citrons, and Conserve of Roses vitriolated, of each an
ounce and a half; Rob of Juniper, half an ounce; Diascordium, two drams;
Camphyr, a scruple. With Syrup of Citrons make an Electuary.

Take of Venice Triacle, a dram; Diaphoretic Antimony, fifteen grains: Salt of
Wormwood, half a scruple. Mix for a Dose or two, to be taken in Vinegar of
Wine. This is to be given in case of great Malignity.

When the Disease is further advanced toward the height, volatile Sulphurous
Medicines must be cautiously used. As, take of Fumitory Water, three ounces;
Hartshorn prepared without Fire, two scruples; mineral Bezoar, a scruple;
extract of Treacle, six grains; Syrup of Orange Peel, three drams. Mix for
three Doses. Myrrh may also be added.

Take of the simple Mixture, six drams; the Spirit de tribus (distilled from
Antimony, Sulphur, and Nitre) two drams; Flowers of Sulphur, a scruple;
Fumitory Water, two drams; Syrup of the Juice of Citrons, an ounce. Make a
Potion for one Dose.

Take of Diaphoretic Antimony, Cinnabar of Antimony, of each half a scruple;
volatile Salt of Hartshorn, four or five grains; volatile Salt of Amber, two or
three grains; Camphyr, two grains. Make a Powder. I have seen the good effects
of this Powder in the case of Delirium's, and imminent Convulsions.

Take of Hartshorn prepared without Fire, a dram; mineral Bezoar, two
scruples; sealed Earth and mineral Unicorn, of each fifteen grains; laudanum
Opiatum prepared by fermentation, four grains. Make a Powder for four Doses.
Nitrum Antimoniatum, Poterius's Diaphoretic Gold, solar and Jovial Bezoar,
volatile Salt of Vipers and Myrrh, are proper Ingredients for the same purpose.

Take of Sennertus's Bezoardic Powder, prepared Unicorn's Horn, of each a
scruple; solar and Jovial Bezoar, of each six grains. Mix for two Doses.

Take of the red Powder of Pannonia, fifteen grains; Nitrum Antimoniatum,
twelve grains: Poterius's Diaphoretic Gold, five grains. Make a Powder.

During the use of these or suchlike Alexipharmacal Prescriptions, let Acid
Mixtures be exhibited for quenching the Thirst, and comforting the Spirits
after sweating. As,

Take two fresh Citrons, slice 'em. Add of white Sugar, three ounces;
Vipers-grass Roots, two or three drams; Spring Water, six pound. Boil them till
two parts of three be evaporated, and strain it for use.

Take of Mynsicthius his Decoction of Citrons, a pound and a half; Gelly of
Hartshorn, an ounce and a half; Syrup of Cherries, and Syrup of Rasberries, of
each an ounce: with a sufficient quantity of the Juice of Citrons, make a Julep.

Take of the Decoction of Hartshorn, with the Roots of Vipers-grass, one
pound; Tincture of Columbine Flowers, and that of Piony Flowers, of each a
dram; Syrup of the Juice of Citrons, an ounce and a half; Syrup of Rasberries,
six drams: with a sufficient quantity of the Spirit of Nitre, make a Julep. The
Syrup of Poppies in case of violent Heat is added with good success.

Take of the shavings of Sassafras, six drams; boil them in Water, to a pound
and a half of the strained Liquor add two ounces of the Juice of Citrons, an
ounce and a half of the Syrup of Citrons, and a sufficient quantity of the
Spirit of Nitre, to render it grateful.

Take of the Decoction of Tamarinds with Raisins a Pound; Syrup of the Juice of
Citrons, Syrup of Rasberries, of each an ounce; with a little of the Spirit of
Nitre, make a Potion.

Sometimes the Confection Alkermes, or Diascordium, or Diaphoretic Antimony is
dissolved in these acid mixtures.

During the time of Swearing some apply a little Loaf hot from the Oven, the
under Crust being pared off, and the Heart excavated and filled with Triacle
and Wine; thus they apply it to the Navel to attract the Malignity.

If the Patient bleed at Nose, which is a fatal Symptom, apply a dry Toad to
the Armpits; or, take of Vervain Water, three ounces; Spirit of Wine
Comphoris'd, an ounce; Opium, five grains. Make an Epithema for the Forehead;
which is also of use to prevent Head-achs and Delirium's. If the Stomac be much
disordered, apply to it a Plaster of Tacamphac, Balsam of Peru and Venice
Triacle. If the Throat and Palate be dry, without a slimy Crust, make a Gargle
of fair Water, Spirit of Wine rectified, and Honey.

If a Looseness attend a malignant Fever, exhibit two scruples of the red
Powder of Pannonia; or Venice Triacle mixed with Opium and fixed Sudorifics
Prepared Hartshorn, Bole Armenic, sealed Earth, mineral Unicorn, are also
proper to be added to Alexipharmacal Ingredients.

If a malignant Fever be attended by Heartburnings, and gnawings of the
Stomac, violent Head-achs, Watchings, Deliriums, and a grievous Prunella, it is
called the Hungarian, or Camp Fever, and is highly Contagious. Vomits commence
its Cure; which ought be followed by Acid Juleps, and fixed or meagre
Sudorifics. The Hungarians are wont to Cure it by rubbing the Body with a Root
of Garlic soaked in Spirit of Wine, and bruised; and then covering up the
Person in order to Sweat. The Prunella is accounted for by washing the Mouth
with a mixture of House-leek Water, Juice of House-leek, and Sal-Armoniac.

Some malignant Fevers are accompanied by Spots in the Skin resembling
Flea-bitings. These Spots are also compatible to some Tertian and Scorbutic
Fevers that are not tinctured with Malignity. When they attend malign Fevers,
they are ushered in by these Symptoms, viz. an universal bruising, tearing
Pain, and Weariness, a sudden and unaccountable decay of Strength, and a
moderat Heat, with little or no Sickness at first; followed by heavy pains of
the Back and Head, Watchings, Unquietness and anxiety; toward the Evening they
grow worse, and continue so all Night. In the Beginning of the Disease they
Sweat easily; during its further progress they Sweat but little or with great
difficulty, and in the height of the Disease, none at all, either naturally or
artificially. About the fourth, seventh, or tenth Day, the Spots break forth in
the Breast and Shoulders, afterward on the Belly and Legs, and at length in
the Arms, the Face being for the most part free. In the Declension or even in
the height of the Disease, sometimes there insues a comfortable salivation. The
Spots are distinguished from fleabitings by this Mark, that these have a red
point in their middle, which the Spots have not, and that they disappear by the
application of the Meal of Beans with Vinegar.

If these Spots are many, large, broad, and of a high Color, it is a good sign.
But if they are few in number, apt to retire, or of a Yellow, Green, Blew, or
above all of a Black Color, it is a desperate Case. If they break out before we
can discover any signs of Concoction, or after their eruption are followed by a
bleeding at the Nose, it is an ill Omen. If during the first Days of the illness
the Person walked about and exposed himself to Cold, it is an aggravating
circumstance. In general, all spotted Fevers are flow and less acute than
others.

The cause is the same, as that of other malignant Fevers, as also the general
Cure. What peculiarly belongs to spotted Fevers is couched under the following
Cautions.

1. Vomits are of excellent use. Purgation and oft-times injecting of Clysters
is noxious, if the Spots are already out. 2. Blood-leting is fatal. 3. In the
Beginning and Increase, Venice Triacle, and such like conpositions, may safely
be exhibited. But toward the height those of a fixed Quality are preferable.
4. If the eruption be Symptomatical, it ought not be promoted by Sudorifics,
but rather moderated by Acid Antidots. If it is Critical, following the signs of
Concoction, and affording some relief to the Patient, it ought to be gently
encouraged by Emulsions of the expelling Seeds. 5. A Looseness following the
eruption ought to be cautiously handled. It Is not fit to stop it directly: but
only to persist in the use of sweating Medicines; or if it occasion the retreat
of the Spots, then we may adventure to curb it gently. 6. Blistering Plasters
are of Sovereign use, especially if the Spots disappear unseasonably. 7. Wine
moderatly taken is not improper.

There is another sort of malignant Fever, called Purpurata, which approaches
to the nature of acute Fevers, both in timing its Crisis, and the Symptoms
that usher it in. Under the increase of the Disease the Person is seized with a
notable Heat, and pricking Pains all round the Breast, Shoulders, Neck, etc.
and the Skin becomes rough and red, and sometimes itches, and in the height of
the Disease is covered with little miliar Eruptions, which are apt to strike in
upon the least Cold whatsoever, And in the declension of the Disease fall off
like Scales. This Disease frequently attacks Women in Childbed, perhaps by
reason of the suppression of their Lochias. It seems to partake much of a
Scorbutic nature, and therefore Antiscorbutics mixed with other Antidors are
very proper. In fine, its Cure is the same as that of other malignant Fevers,
to which we may add, that all Purgatives, or Clysters, or the least degree of
Cold, ought to be nicely avoided.

CHAP. VI. Of the small Pox and Measles.
THE small Pox are not always malignant, as being only an effect of Nature's
endeavors to purify the Blood from the vicious remains of Milk sucked from the
Breasts in our infancy, and curdled into an Acid. Some fancy them to proceed
from the Corruption of Menstrual Blood, with which the Child is tainted in the
Womb. But the weakness of that thought is sufficiently evinced, by the unequal
propensity of Children to this Disease, and their being nourished with Chyle in
the Womb.

That the corruption of the Milk, and its degeneracy into an Acid, is the cause
of the small Pox may be inferred, from the Analogy that intercedes betwixt them
and the Scurfy stinking Ulcers in the Heads of Children, caused by vicious Milk.

This Acid causes the convulsions and tearing pains of the Back and other
Membrans of the Body, the piercing of the Skin, suppuration, and in short, all
the Symptoms of the small Pox, whether common or uncommon. Now the order of the
common Symptoms is as follows.

A gentle shivering is followed by a violent Heat, and heavyness of the Back
and whole Body, piercing beating pains in the Loins, a swelling, redness and
scorching pain of the Eyes, and an aptness to shed Tears, or void Serum, and
sometimes a weighty Pain in the Head; or a dry Cough, with a quick, frequent,
vehement and hard Pulse. The Respiration is oft-times difficult, the Throat
rough, and the Voice hoarse. The Person is disquieted, watches much, or dreams
of uncouth things, or doats and undergoes some epileptic motions. Sometimes he
vomits or bleeds at Nose, which is a bad Symptom in the height, though not in the
beginning of the Disease; or pisses Blood; or is seized with a Diabete or a
Looseness. The Urine is for the most part clear, by reason that the Serum moves
toward the surface of the Body. Sometimes indeed when the Blood and Humors
boil high within, it is muddy or white, and drops a sediment like Bran.

Of all these Signs there are three that are most certain, viz. a Pain in the
Loins or Back, and a distending Pain and watryness of the Eyes.

These Symptoms gall the Patient 'till the third or fourth day that little red
Spots appear; and then if they advance regularly, the Symptoms disappear. These
Spots sometimes vanish insensibly in a few days, and are called Measles;
sometimes they rise in the form of red Pushes, and by degrees become white in
the Center, with a purple or livid Circumference. Thus they come to suppurat,
though not without a sort of renewed Fever, and in the middle void corrupt
matter, and fall off like Scales, under the denomination of the Smallpox.

These Spots or Wheals chiefly possess the Hands and Face, and bloat 'em up,
and frequently leave behind 'em Ulcers in the Head and other parts of the Body,
especially if they do not come duly forth, or strike in unseasonably: In which
case an infinity of various Ills may ensue.

As for the Prognostics, they are accounted favorable when the Symptoms
disappear, or at least remit, upon the Eruption; when they break out speedily,
copiously, and all together; when the Pushes are large, foft, pointed at the
Top, round, separated from one another, of a red Color, becoming quickly white
in the middle, and retaining a red Circumference; when they are most numerous
in the extreme Parts, appearing about the fourth day, ripening quickly, and
finishing their Course by the fourteenth. The dangerous Symptoms are just the
reverse of these: To which we may add Pits or black Points in the middle of the
Pushes, a livid Circumference, the interjection or following of malignant
Spots, convulsive motions continuing after the Eruption, moist Hands while the
Arms are very dry; the distention and murmuring of the Belly, attended by
Anxiety and Unquietness (betokening the Inflammation of the Intestins) the
continuance of the Fever and difficult Respiration after the Eruption,
signifying that the Bowels Lungs, Midriff, and internal Parts are inflamed and
beset with Wheals; violent Pains of the Back, accompanied by an unaccountable
Weakness, and malignant Symptoms; pissing Blood, or voiding Blood either
upwards or downwards, Loosenesses and Bleeding at Nose following the Eruption,
etc. Sometimes indeed Bleeding at Nose in the beginning of the Sickness in a
large quantity, and without the least Interruption, and ceasing of its own
accord, is a favorable Circumstance. Some have observed that the Children of
Parents, who were pox'd before Marriage, are always in great danger when
attacked by the Smallpox. Those who dye of this Disease, are seized with
Quinsies, or a stuffing of the Lungs, Loosenesses, Dysenteries or Convulsions.
If they recover, the Eyes are in danger of being damaged; the Lungs and Guts of
being ulcerated; the external Parts of Imposthmes; and the whole Body of
Obstructions and Cachexies.

The Cure is performed by moderating the sharp Ferment, expelling it when
corrected, and mitigating the Symptoms. In order to a regular pursuit of these
Ends, let us observe the following Cautions.

1. We ought to distinguish the time of Separation from that of Expulsion.
During the former the Blood boyls high, and ought not to be spurred on by
expelling Medicines, (unless the Patient be very weak) but appeased and armed
against the Influence of the malign Miasma's, by absorbent fixing Ingredients.
But during the latter Alexipharmical and expelling Medicines, especially
Emulsions of the expelling Seeds, ought to be exhibited and persisted in till
the Pushes disappear.

2. During the Progress of the Disease, Purges or Clysters are highly
pernicious. In the beginning of the Fever, if it be very high and free of
Malignity, and if the sick Person's first Passages be stuffed, it is not
improper to exhibit a gentle Laxative with sweet Mercury. After the Declination
of the Pox or Measles, it is highly necessary to purge with the same
Ingredients, in order to prevent the Influence of the acid Remains.

3. If a Looseness happen after the Eruption, we ought to be cautious of
suppressing it, especially if the Fever be not malignant, and the Humors be
putrified within. In this case we ought still to persist in the use of
Sudorifics, which divert the Humors to the Surface of the Body. In other Cases
a symptomatical Looseness ought to be stopped by adding Astringents. If it
proceed from Worms it is frequently fatal.

4. Blood-letting (in Germany) is highly pernicious; unless the Patient be of a
full Plethoric Constitution, and seized with a Frenzy; and even then it only
takes place in the beginning before the Eruption.

5. Opiats are of excellent use for promoting Expulsion, mitigating the
pernicious Symptoms of the Nerves and lower Belly; and for encouraging the
swelling of the Hands and Face, which is a most favorable Circumstance in this
Disease.

6. After Recovery, the Lungs, Throat, Belly, and internal parts ought to be
armed against the influence of the remaining acid.

7. External Applications for preventing Scars and Pits, are very prejudicial,
especially before Maturation. The most useful External is Bracelets of Amber
applied to the Wrists, which promote the Expulsion.

8. If the Fever be high during the time of Separation, avoid too much Heat.
If the Patient be weak, and Nature unable to perform its part, artificial Heat
is not improper.

9. During the time of Separation the Diet must be thin. Wine is improper; the
Decoctions of Lentils, or of any sort of Pulse, are flatulent and prejudicial.
Let Gelly of Hartshorn be dissolved in small Beer, mixed with the Tincture of
Columbines, or, in which a Bag of Columbine and Turnep Seeds is infused, for
ordinary drinking. For Children let hot Horses Dung be infused in what they
drink for it promotes Sweat, and defends the Neck and Throat.

Having premised these Cautions, the next thing is to take a view of the
Materia Medica. For moderating the motion of the Blood, and mitigating the
Symptoms of the Breast and Belly, and promoting Expulsion, we use mineral
Unicorn, diaphoretic Antimony, Cinnabar of Antimony (of excellent use for
preventing Convulsions) and especially Unicorn's horn and Emulsion of the
expulsive Seeds, viz. The Seeds of Cresses, Columbines, Turnips, and Carduus
Benedictus. To which we add some volatile Ingredients, such as the Salt and
Spirits of Hartshorn Vipers and Human Blood, when the Acid afflicts the
Nerves, and the Pushes break out but slowly.

The specific Remedies of great Note, are Myrrh, and Castor, or their Essences,
prepared with Spirit of Wine tartaris'd. To which we may add Saffron, the Dung
of Animals, especially Horse's or Sheep's Dung infused in Wine: Figs, or their
Decoction, to which we add Millet Seeds, to qualify their loosening Virtue.

Take of Hartshorn prepared without Fire, and Diaphoretic Antimony, of each
fifteen grains; Myrrh, half a scruple. Make a Powder, to be exhibited before
the Eruption. If the Patient be troubled with a shivering just upon the point
of Eruption, add the Salt of Carduus Benedictus.

Take of Hartshorn prepared without Fire, and Cinnabar of Antimony, of each
half a scruple; Castor, three grains; Myrrh, two grains; volatile Salt of
Vipers, four or five grains. Make a Powder to be given after eruption, or when
the Pushes advance but slowly. Or,

Take of Hartshorn prepared without Fire fifteen grains; solar Bezoar, half a
scruple; volatile Salt of Hartshorn, five grains; Laudanum Opiatum, half a
grain. Mix for one Dose. In case of a looseness, or unquietness and malignity,
add two grains of Camphyr. Or,

Take of Scabious Water, an ounce and a half; Essence of Myrrh, a Dram;
Hartshorn prepared without Fire, a scruple; Mineral Bezoar, half a scruple;
Laudanum prepared by fermentation, a Grain; Syrup of Carduus Benedictus, three
Drams. Make a Potion The volatile Salt of Vipers, or that of Hartshorn,
Camphyr, Sennertus's Bezoardic Powder, Spirit of Treacle, and, in case of a
Looseness, sealed Earth, may be added by turns.

Take of the yellow part of Orange Peel, two drams; Citron Seeds, a dram; Seeds
of Columbines and Carduus Benedictus, Myrrh, of each half a dram; sweet
Almonds, a dram. With Viper-Grass-water make an Emulsion, and sweeten it. If
the Patient be much disquieted, add the Syrup of Poppies and Essence of Castor.

Take of the Tincture of Tartar, two drams; Essence of Myrrh, prepared with the
Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, a dram. Mix and exhibit forty or fifty drops a day
toward the height of the Disease, or when the Pusnes are well advanced, and
the Symptoms mitigate^. After a sufficient eruption, we ought to promote their
suppuration, and prevent Pits in the Skin, by exhibiting a Compound Powder of
Crab's-eyes, Hartshorn, Myrrh, and Salt of Carduus Benedictus.

Besides the direct indications of the small Pox and Measles, we ought likewise
to obviat their incident Symptoms, as unquietness and inolination to vomit, if
it be proper to stop it, by the Spirit of Hartshorn succinated, and Extract of
Treacle, mixed with Laudanum Opiatum; a looseness toward the height,
accompanied with a murmuring noise in the Belly, and frothy Excrements, by
sealed Earth, or Laudanum Opiatum and Diascordium, mixed with other specifics;
Watchings, Deliriums, and Convulsions, attended with a hardness of the Belly,
by exhibiting the Cinnabar of Antimony, or Spirit of Hartshorn succinated; or
injecting Clysters, anointing the Navel and pit of the Stomac with distilled
Oil of Amber; and, in the beginning of the Disease, injecting Clysters. A
bleeding at Nose ought to be promoted, if needs be, by squeezing or pricking
the Nostrils; or, if it exceed measure, restrained by applying dried Toads to
the Armpits, or mixing Narcotics with Absorbents, and avoiding all volatile
Ingredients. A Cough, or any disorder of the Breast, ought to be repressed by
Scabious Water mixed with Spirit of Sal-Armoniac anisated, and Laudanum
Opiatum, adding, before the eruption, incrassating Syrrups, such as those of
Coltsfoot, Jujubes, etc. and after the eruption, attenuating ones, such as
those of Tobacco, Mint, Hyssop, etc. A weakness and prostration of strength
ought to be repaired by exhibiting the Tincture of Coral mixed, with the Spirit
of Stag's Heart, or a Toast soaked in Rhenish Wine.

These Symptoms last mentioned precede the Eruption. Those which follow the
Eruption, are likewise to be accounted for. As if the Pox or Measles retire
unseasonably, and fall upon the nervous System, causing Deliriums, and
Convulsions, apply blistering Plasters to the Soles of the Feet, and exhibit
the Ashes of Scarlet Cloth in Wine. If the sharpness of the Humor threaten
Pits in the Face, exhibit Crabs Eyes and Myrrh inwardly; and apply outwardly
with a Feather, the Spirit of Wine tinctured with Myrrh, or Rose Water, in
which Sugar of Lead is dissolved, or the Plaster of Frogs Spawn with Sugar of
Lead: But all external applications before maturation are much suspected, for
fear of repressing the Matter. Limewater in which Sulphur is boiled, being
mixed with Rose Water, or a Cataplasm of the Meal of Beans and that of Lupines
and Ox Urine are of use for taking off the Scarrs. If a Salivation succeed to
the Eruption, let the Patient drink plentifully of Barley Water, or small Beer,
and likewise gargle his Mouth with it.

If the small Pox or Measles threaten Injury to the Eyes, either by settling in
the Apple of the Eye, or distending the Eyelid, let the Eye be washed with the
infusion of the Glass of Antimony in Plantan and Rose Water, with Tutty and
Sugar of Lead. If the Eyes be red and itch, apply a piece of raw Beef to the
Eye, renewing it every quarter of an Hour for some time. Or let a healthy Woman
chew Garlic, and breath upon the Eye; or wash the Eye with the juice of Chervil
or Rue, mixed with Fennel Water; or make a Collyrium of Plantan, Nightshade
and Rose Water, in which Sumac and Plantan Seeds are boiled, or the Rinds of
Pomgranats infused. The mucilage of Marshmallows extracted with Fennel Water;
or the infusion of white Vitriol and Tutty in Eyebright Water; or
Plantan-Water mixed with Frogs Spawn, and Sugar of Lead; are also very proper.
Or,

Take of Plantan-Water an Ounce; Eyebright and Rose Water, of each half an
ounce; prepared Emerald, twelve grains; prepared Pearls, six grains; Camphyr,
three grains; Saffron, four grains. Mix and drop it into the Eye. Some choose
to drop into the Eye, a drop or two of the Fat of Vipers.

If the Eyelids are beset with the Pox, and inflamed notwithstanding all these
Precautions; apply the Decoction of Line-seed, Fenugrec-seed, and Mallows, or
that of Melilot-Flowers, and Quince-seeds. Some apply Milk; but I cannot
approve their Practice, since it is apt to become Acid. If, after all, the Eyes
be injured, and remain so after recovery of the Pox, it is proper to use
Rulandus's Opthalmic Water, and apply Blistering-Plaisters to the Nape of the
Neck, and when that Blister ceases to run, apply two behind the Ears, mixing
one part of the Blistering Plaster with five or six parts of the Plaster of
Frogs-spawn, to keep the Blister open.

If the Pox injure the Nose or Ears, the former is relieved by applying Vinegar
of Roses impregnated with Camphyr, and anointing the Crusts within the Nostrils
(if there be any such) with fresh Butter, washed in Rose Water. The latter,
viz. The Ears are restored by putting into the Ears the Essence of Castor with
Cotton, or fumigating it with the Decoction of Castor, Myrrh, Coloquintida,
Fennelseed, and a little Saffron in Wine; and applying Blistering Plasters
behind them.

The Throat is frequently infested by the small Pox, and consequently
respiration disturbed. To prevent this inconvenience, let the Mouth and Throat
be washed with Goats Milk and Plantan Water, or the Tincture of Poppy-Flowers,
or with the common Gargles mixed with Horse's Dung, or the Juice of River Crabs
and Nitre. After the Wheals are open, 'twill not be improper to add Alum and
Honey of Roses. Plantan is also a noted Specific both against this Symptom, and
that of pissing Blood.

If the Tongue be ulcerated, apply Honey of Roses sharpened with Spirit of
Salt, or the following Liniment, viz. Take of the Flowers of Holyhocks, half an
Ounce; Pomgranat Flowers, two drams; choice Myrrh, a Dram; Alum half a dram;
with Honey make a Liniment, or Electuary.

If the Lips be much in trouble, anoint 'em with the mucilage of the Seeds of
Quinces. Sometimes the small Pox leave most obstinate Ulcers in the Head,
Breasts, and other parts, which elude all common methods, and yield only to
Mercurial Salivations.

The Scarlet Fever is generally referred to the Measles. It invades, for the
most part, Children, and is occasioned by an Ebullition of the Lymph, and
attended by the Symptoms of a Catarrh. It is in some measure acute, and after
three or four Days from its beginning, breaks out in the Neck, Shoulders and
Breast, either in the form of an equal redness resembling a Rose, or that of
dispersed red Spots, which fall off about the seventh Day like Scales. It is
cured as the Measles or small Pox, but has this peculiar property, that it is
followed by soft swellings in the Face and Legs, that last for eight Days after
its disappearance.

CHAP. VII. Of the Plague and Pestilential Fevers.
THE Plague is an exalted pitch of Malignity, compatible with any Disease
whatsoever. In this place we take it for an epidemical, catching, and highly
malignant Disease, proceeding from poisonous Miasma's in the Air, and attended
by fiery Botches, Bubo's, Carbuncles, or malignant Spots. This Miasm is volatile
and spirituous, and fir for encountering Men's Spirits, and defiling the vital
Spirit of the Air. Perhaps it approaches near to the nature of Arsenic. The
Passions of the Mind, Fear, and Apprehension, subterranean Damps let loose by
Earthquakes, Famine, corruption of dead Bodies, and such like, are its remote
causes. When this poisonous Miasm afflicts Mankind, it joins to the Human
Spirits, and disperses it self where these meet with the readiest reception;
upon which account, Relations are liable to the Contagion, though in distant
places; and the Beasts are secure, when Mankind falls an universal Sacrifice.

The Plague is not always accompanied by a Fever. When Nature is weak, it
yields to the oppression, and makes no Feverish resistance. The Symptoms are
the same as those of Malignant Fevers, raised to the highest pitch; to which
we may add swellings in the Armpits, Groin, behind the Ears, or in any
glandulous place, with a pricking shooting pain in the middle; Botches, and
Carbuncles in the Fingers, Nostrils, Eyes and Lips; sometimes fatal
Black-spors, or malignant Ulcers all over the Body; a sudden prostration of
strength, violent pains of the Head, without any cause, or following the
passion of fear, etc. the degeneracy of the Pulse from being large and swift,
to a small, languid, intermitting, unequal state; and a burning heat within,
but moderat on the external surface of the Body. An imminent Plague is foretold
from unwonted swarms of Insects resorting to a Country.

The Prognostics of a Plague are very fallacious: It Is an acute Disease, ending
sometimes in Twenty four Hours, sometimes in two, three, or seven Days; in
general, those who are scabby or Pocky are in least danger, as being defended
by their peccant Acid. Preceding Fatigue or Fear are bad Omens. Black livid
Spots are a worse Symptom, than Carbuncles, and these worse than Bubo's. Scars
or Marks of mortification are always fatal. Many and large Bubo's are a good
sign, as also copious Sweats. But cold Sweats, or many Carbuncles; coldness of
the extreme Parts, especially the Nose; a livid circumference surrounding the
swellings; Carbuncles growing upon Bubo's in places full of Tendons; the
imperfect eruption or retreat of the Tumors; a Hiccough succeeding to the
eruption; the white, blue, or livid Color of Carbuncles, while the Fever is
not abated; Pains of the Throat, and difficulty of swallowing, attending Bubo's
in the Neck, or behind the Ears; are all fatal Symptoms. If blistering
Plasters raise no Blisters, it is an infallible sign of Death in all Diseases.
If a Cautery applied raise a white Crust after the application, or if the place
be dry, or not covered with Pushes, and the Botch continue to spread further,
or if Issues dry up of a sudden, it is a desperate case. Carbuncles in the
Stomac, Guts, Bladder, Eyes, and Nostrils, are plain indications of Death.
Anxiety of the Breast without a Fever, frequent sneezing, a Looseness,
Hiccough, Vomiting, Convulsions, Hoarseness, a flux of Blood by Urine or
Salivation; and in short, all the dismal circumstances of malignant Fevers
(related above) are the Companions of fatal Plagues. A continual Costiveness,
and numerous Pushes, filled with laudable Matter, appearing after the
Application of a Cautery to any part, are looked upon as hopeful Signs.

The Cure divides it self into two Branches. The first is that of preserving
from imminent danger; the second rescues from actual Oppression. Preservatives
regard either the Air, the common Vehicle of Contagion, or the Bodies of
People. As for the former, the Air is purified by the shooting of Cannon, by
burning Gunpowder, or Nitre and Sulphur with Amber, Myrrh, Camphyr, Pitch,
Benzoin, and Juniper Berries; by throwing the Mineral acid Spirits, or Vinegar
in which Vitriol and Verdigrease are infused, together with Camphyr, upon hot
Bricks; by burning of Goats Horns, and filling the Air with ungrateful Smells,
such as that of a House of Office, of Hogs Dung, etc.

The other sort of Preservatives, arm the Body and Spirits against the assaults
of the contagious Miasms. For this end, we ought to avoid fasting or going
abroad before eating. Butter and Rue Leaves, and a draught of good generous
Wine, upon which Camphyr has been kindled, are fit to be taken in a Morning: as
also the Mineral acid Spirits, and the acid Juices of Fruits; but above all,
Vinegar impregnated with the Virtue of Camphyr, Myrrh, Juniper Berries,
Zedoary, and other aromatic Simples. Next to Vinegar are the sulphurous balmy
Ingredients, especially Sulphur, Myrrh, and Amber, which cover the Spirits from
the attacks of the morbific Matter, and ought to be taken in acid Vehicles. To
these we may add Opium and Diascordium. Venice Treacle, and such like hot
Compositions ought to be cautiously used, and always dissolved in Vinegar.
Sugar of Lead also given with Camphyr from four to ten grains, is of excellent
use, but it is very volatile, and, if indiscreetly used, may accelerat the
Disease.

Externally, there is nothing equals the cutting of Issues. A Sponge wet with
Aromatic Vinegar impregnated with Myrrh and Camphyr, may frequently be applied
to the Nostrils. Let Ginger and Zedoary, or Troches made of Myrrh and Camphyr,
and Tragacanth dissolved in Vinegar, be often chewed and held in the Mouth. Let
the Temples, Wrists, and Breasts be anointed with the Apop^ectic Balsam, mixed
with Camphyr; let Sala's magnes Arsenicalis, mixed with Benzoin dissolved in
Spirit of Wine, be formed into Tablets, and hung in a scarlet Cloth-Bag upon
the Breast. If the Contagion proceed from subrerranean Damps, let dried Toads
be hung over the Breast; If it proceed from the Air, let Spiders stand in their
room. Some recommend crude Mercury calcined by the fumes of Lead for the same
purpose.

The direct Cure of the Plague consists in expelling the poisonous Miasma's by
Alexipharmacal Medicines. For the regular performance of which, the following
Cautions will be of use.

1. Let Sudorisics be repeated every eight Hours even after the eruption of
Bubo's or Carbuncles; and after sweating, exhibit a Cordial Draught mixed with
acid Spirits, for thickning the Blood, and rallying the dispersed Spirits.

2. Avoid sleep in time of sweating, and for that end, apply Vinegar mixed with
Camphyr, or Castor, to the Nostrils.

3. If the Sudorific cannot procure Sweat, let a hot Loaf of Bread be excavated
and filled with Venice Treacle and Spirit of Wine camphoris'd, and applied to
the Stomac, or Navel, the under Crust being taken off.

4. If obstinat Watchings threaten Deliriums, and prevent Swea^, let Laudanum
Opiatum be added to Sudorifics, in order to procure sleep after sweating.

5. If the fermentation be faint and low, Venice Treacle and Mithridat are
proper. But if the Fever be high, and attended by a violent heat, they are
fitly exchanged with Antimonial Powders, and lixivious Salts.

6. Acids mixed with Sudorifics are always proper.

7. Blistering Plasters are applied with extraordinary success to the Neck,
Legs and Arms. They ought to be very sharp, and after they are removed, the
Blisters kept open with the Plaster of Melilot, covered with the Powder of
Cantharides. But if the Bladder be inflamed, or the Urine hot; if the Patient
be very weak, or with Child, or look for her Terms, they are improper.

8. Blood-letting is always pernicious.

9. In the beginning of the Disease Vomits are very useful. They ought to be
mixed with Sudorifics. Purgatives and Clysters are not safe.

10. If the Patient be molested with a vomiting, so that Sudorifics cannot be
retained in the Stomac, let Sweat be forced, by applying a hot Loaf as above,
and covering up the Body and Face.

The Specifics that are used in this Disease, are Camphyr given in substance,
or its Oil mixed with Oil of Amber, and that of Citron Peel, called Heinsius's
Oil; Ivy-Berries, given to a Dram in Vinegar and Wine; Juniper and Elder
Berries, and the Rob of either given in Vinegar; Garlic Heads bruised and
exhibited in Vinegar; the Blood of a Stork, or its volatile Salt; the Spirit of
Hartshorn sharpened with its own volatile Salt, and given to a Dram; the volatile
Salt of Vipers (above all) sprinkled with Oil of Amber, and mixed with Camphyr;
Man's Ordure applied externally to Bubo's, and given internally with the
Patient's own Urine; Sulphur or its Flowers given to a Dram in an acid Vehicle;
or rather the fixed Sulphurs of Antimony, which in this case surpasses all
other Medicines; the Oil and volatile Salt of Amber; and Diascordium given to
two drams in Aromatic Vinegar.

Take of the Flowers of Sulphur, half a dram; Cinnabar of Antimony, fifteen
Grains; Camphry, six Grains. Make a Powder. The volatile Salt of Vipers, or that
of Hartshorn, or prepared Amber may be added by turns.

Take of the Rob of Juniper, three ounces; Diascordium and Mithridat, of each
an ounce and a half; Venice Treacle, half an ounce; Flowers of Sulphur, two or
three ounces; Myrrh, three drams; Frankincense, six drams; Camphyr, two drams;
Saffron, half a dram; Juice of Citrons, half an ounce. Make an Electuary. Dose
a dram and a half in a convenient Vehicle.

Take of the Water Carduus Benedictus, an Ounce and a half; Vinegar of Wine,
six drams; Diascordium, a dram and a half; Camphyr, six grains; Syrup of the
Juice of Citrons, half an Ounce. Make a Potion for one or two Doses.

Take of hot Verdigrease a Pound, sprinkle it with three Ounces of distilled
Vinegar; distill through a Retort in Sand, with an intense heat; then add to
the Spirit thus distilled, a double quantity of rectified Spirit of Tartar; and
half a dram of Camphyr, and a little Opium for every Ounce of the compound
Spirit; and let all stand for digestion. This is called Elixyr Antiloimicum,
and is of excellent use.

Besides the universal Cure of the Plague, it is requisite also to have a
peculiar regard to its incident Symptoms. As for Bubo's, or swellings of
Glandules, they require the application of attracting, ripening, and cleansing
Ingredients. If they be black and livid, and threaten a Gangrene, they ought to
be cut up with a Lance, without waiting for maturation; otherwise 'twere
proper to endeavor their maturation, and attract the Poison, by applying
roasted Onyons, mixed with Mustard-seeds; Or in case of great Pain, the Juice
of Onyons mixed with Venice Treacle and Soot. Man's Ordure, or a Melisot
Plaster, mixed with the Powder of dried Toads, and that of Amber, from which
Spirit of Wine has been thrice evaporated, are much approved for the same use.
But of all Plasters, Sala's Magneticum Arsenicale, is the best. It Is prepared
thus,

Take of crude Antimony, yellow Sulphur and white Arsenic, of each two Ounces.
Set them in hot Sand in a Phiol 'till they melt and become a dusky Mass. Then
take of this Mass, Gum sagapanum, Gum Ammoniac, and Galbanum, of each three
Drams; Turpentin, and Wax of each half an Ounce; distilled Oil of Amber, two
Drams; dulcifi'd Spirit of Vitriol, a Dram. Dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, then
strain 'em through a Linen Cloth, and thicken 'em again. Melt the Turpentin
and Wax apart, then add the Gums, and make a Plaster according to Art.

This Plaster will raise a malignant Crust, which ought to be taken off by
applying the Ointment of Basilicon, mixed with Venice Treacle. If the Skin be
thick, and the swelling lie so low that the Plaster cannot reach it, let a
sharp blistering Plaster be first applied; or, if that be ineffectual, a
Cautery of quick Lime, and Spanish Soap, that so the Plaster may operat more
freely. If it cause an Inflammation, let foft'ning Cataplasms be applied above
the Plaster, 'till the Crust come off. After the swelling is opened, it ought
to be cleans'd by the Infusion of Birth-wort, Myrrh, Aloe, and Saffron in
Spirit of Wine Tartaris'd; Or Balsam of Peru, and Balsam of Sulphur, mixed with
Treacle; and applying emplastrum Album, mixed with Oil of Tobacco. After it is
sufficiently cleans'd, apply Rulandus's Plaster Diasulphuris for
consolidation. In all Compositions relating to pestilent glandulous Swellings,
Mercury, Vinegar, Opium and Lead ought to be avoided.

Carbuncles are the beginning of a Mortification, which displays it self with a
purple Color, surrounded with a red or livid Circumference, incroaching
gradually upon the adjacent parts, 'till the mortified part fall off. In order
to prevent their spreading, let a Circle be drawn round 'em with an Emerald
stone, 'till the part become livid; then touch the point or top with Butter of
Antimony; and when the Crust appears, apply Sala's Plaster, called Magneticum
Arsenicale. Some choose to open it first with an actual Cautery, and then apply
either this Plaster, or attracting and emollient Cataplasms of Garlic, Water
Germander, Marshmallows, Meal of Lentils, Berries of the Herb Paris, Pigeon's
Dung, Black Soap and Honey; or, in case of great pain, the Plaster of Hounds
Tongue: But, after all, be sure to avoid fat things. After the Matter is
evacuated, apply a Cataplasm of Comfrey Roots boiled, or the Ointment of
Basilicon, with Balsam of Sulphur and Treacle, or a Cataplasm of Comfrey Roots
boiled.

The symptom of Heat is but seldom violent in Malignant Fevers, or at least
ought not to be much restrained, for fear of repressing the cuticular
eruptions. If necessity require that it should be moderated, Antimonial Nitre,
and all nitrous Medicines taken inwardly, and applied outwardly with Juice of
House-leek and Rose Water to the Wrists, Forehead, and Temples, will answer
the Design.

Headaches, Watchings, and Deliriums are frequently the Companions of
pestilential Fevers. If they happen in the beginning, they require a Cure; but
if their first appearance be put off 'till toward the time of the Crisis, it is
not safe to oppose 'em. If the hinder part of the Head be particularly
affected, it signifies a peculiar disorder of the Head and Animal Spirits,
independent of the Fever. If the Headache seize chiefly the fore part, or be
attended by anxiety of the Breast, and unquietness, it proceeds from the
Stomac, and ought to be prevented by Vomits, and sometimes Clysters in the
beginning of the Disease. However, for mitigating these Symptoms, let
Cataplasms of Rue-leaves, Raddish-roots, Salt, Pigeons Dung, and Elder Vinegar
be applied to the soles of the Feet, and palms of the Hands; or the Temples and
Forehead fomented with the dissolution of Nitre in some convenient Water, or
anointed with the Ointment of Alabaster, and expressed Oil of Poppies, but so
as to have a care of stopping the Pores, and hindering transpiration. Inwardly,
exhibit the emulsions of the Cold Seeds, Poppy Seeds, etc. An^ add Opium to the
other Specifics, after the first two or three Days are elapsed.

If a Drousiness and inclination to sleep attend the Pest, let Opium, Treacle,
and all Compositions partaking of it, be avoided; let Tincture of Caster and
Vinegar be frequently taken inwardly, and applied to the Nose; or Frankincense,
Bayberries, and Pepper, beaten up with the Yelk of an Egg, be applied to the
Forehead.

A symptomatical bleeding at Nose, is cured by applying a Toad under the
Armpits, washing the Hands and Feet with Vinegar; applying to the Forehead,
Neck, and Temples, Cataplasms of Chalk and Potters Clay, beat up with Vinegar;
and giving inwardly large quantities of Nitre, Spirit of Vitriol, Spirit of
Salt, and Opiats mixed with astringent Juleps. After the Bleeeding is stopped, a
gentle laxative may be exhibited, if other Circumstances allow of it. Thirst is
also abated by Nitre, especially Nitrum Antimoniatum, or clarified Whey, with
Juice of Citrons mixed with the Spirit of Salt, and Gelly of Hartshorn. A
gnawing at Heart, and vomiting, is cured by the following Electuary.

Take of the Conserve of Mint vitriolated, Conserve of the Pulp of Citrons, of
each an ounce and a half; preserved Citron-peel, and Diascordium, of each six
drams; Confection Alkermes, two drams; Salt of Wormwood, a dram; with the Juice
of Quinces. Make an Electuary. In the mean while, foment the Stomac with a
mixture of the Spirit of Wine, Apoplectic-water, Venice Treacle, and Camphyr;
or anoint it with expressed Oil of Nutmegs, and the distilled Oils of Wormwood
and Mace, and apply afterward the Plaster of Caranna, or that of Tacamahac,
mixed with Venice Treacle, and Balsam of Peru.

A Looseness or griping of the Guts attending a Plague, are accounted for, by
exhibiting Diascordium, Opium, absorbent Powders, Extract of Treacle, or that
of Tormentil, Camphyr, Vinegar, and dulcifi'd Spirit of Salt. A suppression of
Urine happening about the Crisis, is a token of critical sweats. If it assault
the Patient at any other time, let the Pubes be anointed with Oil of Scorpions,
and Ointment of Marshmallows, and all blistering Plasters omitted. Swooning,
palpitation of the Heart, and anxiety proceeding from the Stomac, are
alleviated by absorbent Powders. If they proceed from clotted Blood, or the
convulsive motion of the Spirits, let the Confection Alkermes, Castor, Spirit
of Hartshorn, and that of Sal-Armoniac, be exhibited: externally sprinkle the
Face and Temples with cephalic mixtures, joined to Castor and Vinegar of Roses.

A Prunella, or Quinsey is mitigated by applying outwardly to the Neck, a Bag
quilted with Elder-flowers, and Safron sprinkled with Spirit of Sal-Armoniac;
or gargling the Mouth with the Decoction of Germander, Self-heal, and red Roses
in Barley-water, mixed with Nitre and Sal-Armoniac.

As for the Spots resembling Flea-bitings, which frequently appear in the Back,
Arms, and Legs, the above mentioned Sudorifics, especially Myrrh, Castor,
Camphyr, and the volatile Salts, are most proper. All manner of Cold must be
carefully avoided, and the Body rubbed all over every Day, with a Bag of hot
Salt, or salt Petre, and cupping-glasses frequently applied to the Back, Arms
and Legs, and frequently taken off.

SECT. XVI. Of Disorders relating to the motion of the Blood, from the Heart to
the Extreme Parts.
HAving thus dispatched the Disorders relating to the Fermentation or intestin
motion of the Blood, we come now in order to consider those of its circular
progress. The Blood receiving new Life in the Lungs, throws it self with fresh
vigor into the left Ventricle of the Heart, inlarges its Capacity, and
distends its Fibers. This distention or irritation of the Fibers of the Heart,
occasions an unwonted crowd of Spirits, which repair thither from the Brain,
contract the whole Heart, straiten its Cavity, and impetuously squeeze out the
Blood into the great Artery. In like manner, the distention of the Artery,
caused by the eruption of the Blood, solicits the Spirits to sally out, and
contract their offended Fibers, and drive the blood forwards, 'till it arrive
at the Veins; through which it steers an easy Course to the Heart, moving,
without offense or irritation, from narrow Passages into broader Channels; so
that the Veins, whose Tunicles are soft, and not over-touchy, are in no danger
of being provoked to Contractions, by a languid impoverished Mass.

This successive contraction and dilatation of the Heart and Arteries, called
by the Ancients Systole and Diastole; the former occasioned by the Spirits
repairing to them, and the latter by the violent irruption of Blood, are what
we call the Pulse. This we generally inquire after, where the Arteries are most
accessible, viz. About the Wrists, Temples, and Ancles, in order to discover
the state of the Blood. And if we find the Artery much dilated by turgid Blood,
we call it a large Pulse; if the if the Blood move forcibly and impetuously, we
term it strong; if the Arteries yield to the touch, and do not seem to resist
or rebound, we style it a Soft Pulse: If the Blood move swiftly, the Pulse is
Frequent; and if the Heart and Arteries be suddenly, and much irritated, it is
Quick: Now Small, Weak, Hard, unfrequent and flow Pulses, are the direct
reverse of these.

Circulation is of use to renew the strength of the Blood in the Lungs, and
supply all the Parts of the Body with Nourishment. For it is the united Mass of
Blood and Chyle that furnishes the spermatic parts with Chyle or milky
imperfect Blood, and those that are sanguin with finished Blood, according to
the natural Demand of the respective Parts.

CHAP. I. Of the Palpitation and trembling of the Heart.
WHEN the Blood circulats through the Heart, it occasions a regular Systole and
Diastole. But a palpitation of the Heart is a disorderly convulsive, unequal,
vehement Contraction, and sometimes scarce perceivable in the Arteries, though,
at other times, exalted to that pitch, that it makes an audible noise. A
trembling of the Heart is a weak imperfect Contraction.

Both are equally owing to the irritation of the Heart, but with this
difference, that a palpitation is attended by a violent and resisting strength,
and a trembling by a yielding weakness. This irritation is sometimes the effect
of the sharpness, or over-bearing quantity of Serum, or of Worms in the
Heart-purse; or of little Wheals or Excrescences within and about the Heart, or
great Arteries; sometimes it proceeds from little Clotts of Blood left by the
vicious Mass in the Heart, or from a provoking Acid prevailing in the Mass of
Blood, as it passes along or from its irregular and unequal turgescence. Upon
which account, the suppression of the Terms, the Scurvy and Hypocondriac
Sickness are frequently followed by palpitations of the Heart. Sometimes it
takes its rise from the slow and stagnating condition of the Blood, and by
consequence, from whatever crosses or thwarts the circular progress. But of all
its Causes, the most frequent, is the occasional disorder of the Nerves and
Animal Spirits, occasioned either by Fear, Anger, strong Smells, etc. Or by
hysteric and hypocondriac Passions, and the indisposition of the Spleen: For
the Nerves of the Heart, and those of the lower Belly, especially of the
Spleen, entertain a mutual Commerce; by virtue of which the contraction of
these Nerves is continued to the Heart, and in its progress, resembles the
ascent of Fumes or Steams from the Spleen and Intestins. The facility of this
communication is much inhanc'd by the scorbutic or acid Constitution of the
Blood, which is equally disposed to provoke both the Nerves of the Heart, and
those of the Bowels.

As for Diagnostics. A palpitation of the Heart is discovered by laying one's
Hand upon the Breast. If it proceed from a Dropsy of the Pericardium, or
Obstructions in and about the Heart; the Pulse is small and slow, respiration
difficult, and the Body inclining to a Consumption, and Hectic Fever. If it
proceed from Worms in the Heart-Purse, it returns without manifest cause, the
Breast is molested with gnawing, pricking, corroding pains; the Patient is
frequently troubled with a pale Countenance, intermitting Pulse, and a
prodigious unquietness, and sometimes sudden swoonings, or epileptic Fits. If
it take its rise from the hypocondriac Disease, it is frequently interrupted;
and when it comes, is ushered in by a murmuring noise in the Belly, or attended
by disorderly Symptoms in the Abdomen, and a sense of constriction of the
Heart, as if it were squeezed betwixt two Hands. If it flow from a scorbutic
Original, it does not invade when the Person lies quietly in Bed, but upon the
least motion of Hand or Foot, displays it self, and is frequently accompanied
by swoonings. A trembling of the Heart is attended by a prostration of
strength, and an unequal, weak, languishing Pulse.

The Remission or intermission of the Pulse, following a Palpitation of the
Heart, prognosticates Swoonings. If a Palpitation proceed from a scorbutic
cause, or accompany malignant Symptoms, it is very dangerous. If it be
occasioned by Worms in the Pericardium, or Excrescences in the Heart or
adjacent parts, it is incurable. If it happen in one's Youth, it prevents Old
Age.

The Indications for Cure, are to remove the irritating cause. Opium impairs
only the sense of irritation, but has no influence upon the cause it self;
wherefore it ought to be very cautiously used, especially, considering that a
Palpitation or trembling is frequently attended by a notable weakness. In
hypocondriac, or Scorbutic cases, perhaps it may not be improper. Blood-letting
is also dangerous; yet if the stagnation of the Blood give rise to the Disease,
or if the Patient be young, and the Blood boil high, it is in some measure
allowable; as when a Palpitation is caused by Fear, suppressing of wonted
evacuations, or a violent commotion of the Body.

Of all Palpitations of the Heart, those of a convulsive Character, that spring
from Scorbutic, or Hypochondriac causes, or, in a word, from prevailing Acid,
are the most frequent, and require a particular regard. Earthy Ingredients,
Steel, and volatile Salts, are Medicines most in use, against these and all other
sorts of Palpitations. The Tincture of Coral, prepared with a Menstruum of
May-Dew, or Snow, and mixed with some cordial Liquor, is an universal Specific.
Now, of the Cordial Ingredients, Baum is the Head. Its Spirit, or primum Ens,
or the Essence of Amber-grise extracted with it, is an admirable support for
decaying Nature. The Leaves of Baum, and those of Borrage, sprinkled with
Rose Water and Vinegar, are applied outwardly to the Heart, with good success.
Next to Baum are Cloves, Citrons, Orange-peel, Rosemary, Zedoary, Elecampane,
Dill, and their various productions. The Essence of Saffron given inwardly, and
a Bag of Saffron and Camphyr hung over the pit of the Breast, are of good use.
The Essence of Ambergrise and Mosch, are celebrated Medicines; but Ambergrise
injoys a stupifying quality, which may be extinguished by putting it into
fermentation, as in the preparation of Spiritus Rosarum Ambratus. Besides,
there are some studious Men, and hysteric Women that are easily offended by
this, and all other oily volatile Salts; in the room of which, we may substitute
the meagre thin Salts, such as the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, and dulcifi'd Spirit
of Nitre. The Essence of Juniper Berries prepared with their own Spirit; the
carminative spirit de tribus; the volatile Salt of Vipers; the spirit and
volatile salt of Hartshorn; the spirit, volatile Salt, and distilled Oil of
Amber; the Essence of Castor mixed with Camphyr, the Oil of Cinnamon, the Syrup
of the filings of Steel, Whey, and all anti-hypocondriac Ingredients are much
approved. Externally, in a Hysteric or Splenetic Palpitation, we apply the same
things as are proper against the Causes.

Take of prepared red Coral, native Cinnabar, and chalybeat diaphoretic
Antimony, half a scruple; volatile salt of Hartshorn, three grains; distilled
Oil of Cloves, a drop. Make a Powder.

Take of the Tincture of Coral prepared with the spirit of Stags-heart, two
drams; the spirit of Roses impregnated with Ambergrise, a dram. Dose thirty or
sorty drops in Cinnamon Water.

Take of Cinnamon Water impregnated with Quinces, an ounce; the Cordial-water
of Saxony an Ounce; Essence of Juniper Berries, two drams; Essence of Saffron,
half an ounce; Spirit of Venice Treacle camphoris'd, a dram; distilled Oil of
Cinnamon (for Men) or of Amber (for Women) four drops, shake and mix them. Dose
a spoonful or two.

Oft-times not only the Heart, but the Arteries, especially that leading to the
Spleen, and that of the Temples, are seized with a palpitation. The cause is an
inflammation of the Place, or stagnation of the Blood, or Convulsions of the
Spleen and adjacent parts, affecting the Tunicles of the Artery. The first two
are removed by Sudorifics, and the last by Steel and anti-hypochondriac
Medicines.

CHAP. II. Of Swoonings.
THere are three kinds, or rather degrees of Swooning; viz. Lipothymia,
Syncope, and Asphyxia. In a Lipothymia, beside that the Pulse is weaker and
less, the Senses both internal and external are eclipsed, and animal Motion,
both voluntary and natural, does in a manner fail; all which symptoms go easily
off again, and the Patient is restored to health. In a Syncope the symptoms are
more tragical, the Pulse, Sense and bodily Motion are quite extinguished,
Respiration is scarce perceivable, the Heart is much oppressed, a cold clammy
Sweat and Paleness covers the Body; and sometimes the Excrements come away of
their own accord. In an Asphyxia all things are yet worse; so that the Patient
lies as one dead, without any Pulse, or sign of Life. Now in order to discover
the cause of this diminution of the Pulse and want of Strength, we must call to
mind, that the vital force of our Body is founded radically in the Blood, but
exerts it self by its most subtle, active and moveable part, called the
Spirits; which being volatiliz'd by the inspired Air in the Breast, like Rays
of Light, are diffused through the whole Body, either in a vital Capacity,
together with the Blood in the Arteries, or separately by the Brain and Nerves,
under the Character of animal Spirits.

When therefore the Blood, by reason of its less quantity, or viscidity and
acidity, or want of active Salts, is unfit to undergo the vital Fermentation in
the Breast, the Spirits must of necessity fail; whence ensues a weakness and
languishing, that steals on by degrees. This vicious constitution of the Blood
is oftentimes occasioned by some error in Diet after acute Diseases, or follows
the indiscreet management of chronical Distempers, supposing the Blood to be
robbed of its Spirits, and the Chyle to be over power'd with Crudities, arising
from the weakness of the stomachical Ferment and flatness of the Bile.

But if on a sudden the vital fermentation of the Blood in the breast is
interrupted, and by consequence the luminous Ray of the vital and animal
Spirits fail; or if incident external Objects pour disorder and confusion on
the animal Spirits: then follows a sudden prostration of Strength, and
cessation of Sense and Motion, which according to its various degrees, is
called either Lipothymia, Syncope, or Asphyxia. Now the vital fermentation of
the Blood is interrupted, either by immoderat evacuations of any Humor or
Juice such as the Blood, seminal Liquor, hydropic Water, corrupt Matter, etc.
or by its coagulation, occasioned by Poison, or the unfriendly miasms of
corrupt Matter issuing froman Imposthume in the Heart.

The external Objects that disorder the Spirits, are such as excite violent and
sudden passions of the Mind, as Frights, Grief, Joy, Anger; also strong and
disagreeable Smells, the sight of Animals to which we have a natural Antipathy,
and whatever affects the upper Orifice of the Stomac, which by consent
influences all the other Nerves of the Body: Upon which occasions, the Spirits
are hindered in their wonted motions, either by oppression or fixation, as in
sudden Frights; or dissipation, as in excessive sudden Joy; or deviation, as in
Cramps and Convulsions of the Heart.

A weakness and languishing without any manifest cause, prognosticats the
sudden invasion of Diseases, especially those of a Scorbutic Character. If it
succeed to acute Diseases, it threatens either a Relapse, Dropsy, or
intermitting Fever. In the beginning of any Disease, it is a sign of Malignity.

Syncope's and Lipothymi's are more or less dangerous, according to the measure
of their duration and the character of their symptoms; and if after the use of
suitable means the Patient is not awaked, they prove dangerous: Those
occasioned by an effusion of Blood, or other Humors, are safer than others
that spring from an internal acute Cause. If they are attended by anguish of
Heart and restlessness, they proceed from the Stomac, and are less fatal when
the left side of the orifice is affected. In fine, the more clammy and copious
the cold Sweat is, so much the more dangerous is the Syncope.

The Cure is compassed by the continued use of volatile Aromatic Medicines,
which promote the vital Fermentation, exalt the Blood, sharpen the unactive
Bile, remove the clamminess of the Blood; and withal, restore the digestive
force of the Stomac. Such are the Spirit of Wine, or generous Wines,
impregnated with vegetable Aromatics; as,

Take of Rosemary, curled Mint, of each a Handful; Sage and Baum, of each half
a handful; Roots of the genuin Acorus, Elecampane and Fennel an Ounce; the four
lesser hot Seeds, of each a Dram; Cinnamon, Cubebs, Cloves, Mace, of each two
Drams; cut, bruise, and tie them in a Bag, to be infused in Wine; of which take
a draught in the Morning fasting, and at Meals. In scorbutical and
hypochondriac cases, Scurvy Grass, Cresses, Peper-wort, etc. may be added,
together with some drops of the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac anisated, dropped into
each draught.

We may also use stomachical Essences and Elixirs, Aqua Vitae, aploplectic and
epileptic Waters, etc. Volatile oily Salts, and a hundred such like, to be taken
thrice a Day, Morning, Noon, and at Bedtime; and also before eating.

Now as to sudden fainting and swooning, we must endeavor, when the Fit is
present to remove it, and when it is over, to prevent its relapse.

There are three sorts of Medicines in use during the Fit. viz.

1. Spirituous, sulphurous and oily ones; such are all inflamable Aromatic
Spirits prepared by fermentation, distilled Aromatic Oils, and compound
apoplectic Waters.

2. Spirituous Alcali's, sharp volatile urinous Spirits and Salts, which are
always the better for being well charged with Oil.

3. Sharp volatile Acids, especially Vinegar, which wakens the Senses, and
rallies the dissipated Spirits. Sometimes we join 'em to Opiats, for staying
the convulsive motions of the Spirits.

Thus the Principal Remedies used in a Syncope, are Generous Wines; Cinnamon,
its Water and distilled Oil, and all its preparations; all Apoplectic Waters;
Spirit of Lilly of the Valley prepared by fermentation; spirit of Venice
Treacle, both simple and compound; distilled Oil of Cloves; Cordial and
Apoplectic Balsams; all volatile Salts; spirit of Stagg's Heart, spirit of
Hartshorn prepared with Amber; spirit of Roses prepared with Amber; to which,
if the Salt of Vipers, or that of Amber is added, it is almost an infallible
Remedy.

Moreover, the Elixir of Citrons, or their Spirit, sharpened with the volatile
salt of Hartshorn, the quintessences of Baum and Angelica; the Essence of
Saffron mixed with a grain or two of volatile Salt of Hartshorn; the Tincture
of Coral prepared with spirit of Stagg's Heart; the Tincture of Gold, the
volatile Salts impregnated with distilled aromatic Oils, such as rectified
spirit of Sal-Armoniac, joined with aromatic spirit of Wine, are all of
excellent use, if exhibited in convenient Vehicles, such as Baum-water prepared
with Wine, Pennyroyal and Cinnamon Water; Aqua Vitae, or Matthiolus's Elixir
vitae, Water of Stagg's Heart, Mynsicht's hot cordial Water; and for Women,
Swallow-water with Castor, etc. to which may be added, Camphyr, or spirit of
Treacle camphoris'd.

As for Acids, we use spiritous and Generous Wine, the Juice of Citrons, Juice
or Syrup of Rasberries, conserve of the Pulp of Citrons mixed with Diascordium,
Vinegar impregnated with Castor, Vinegar of Marigold-flowers, or the Flowers of
the Lilly of the Valley, or those of Elder, of Rue, etc. As for Narcotics,
Helmont's Laudanum Opiatum, (in a small Dose) Venice Treacle, Mithridat,
Extract of Treacle, and such like Compositions are proper.

In the use of these Remedies, we must have a principal regard to the
antecedent Causes: For example, if the Syncope is caused by poison, proper
Antidotes must be added, and a Vomit exhibited, especially when the Poison
lurks in the first passages: When the Cause is lodged in the Stomac, or
Abdomen, Vomits are also proper. Hysteric causes require Zedoary, Castor,
volatile Salts, and other Hysteric Remedies.

Externally the same Remedies are applied to the Nostrils, Temples, Pulse,
Lips, and pit of the Stomac: The Water of Lilly of the Valley, the Apoplectic
Balsam, Oil of Cinnamon, and that of Citrons, Oil of Amber, and Oil of Cloves
are the common Specifics for that use; some say that Fumigation with Amber
alone, is of notable efficacy.

If the Syncope and Lipothimia proceed from unreasonable evacuations, excessive
Sweating, Heat, Labor, Fatigue, Anger, Joy, or ungrateful smells; let Acids be
exhibited, as also a Vomit, if there be occasion. The Swoonings of malignant
Fevers are accounted for, by exhibiting Camphyr in a small quantity, mixed
with Laudanum Opiatum, and other Antidots. When they are occasioned by frights,
excessive Bleeding, or immoderat sadness, spirituous oily Remedies take place;
and if the Paroxism is dangerous, a Vein may be opened: If we fear a Syncope
from an excessive flux of the terms, Opiats joined with Acids, and prepared
Coral, are of excellent use. For Old Persons, there is nothing equals the
following Powder, Viz.

Take of Ambergrise, or Musk, eight grains, which dissolve in twelve drops of
Oil of Cinnamon, and half a Scruple of Oil of Cardamums; add prepared Pearl,
half a Scruple; whitest Sugar Candy, two ounces. Make a Powder.

SECT. XVII. Of Nutrition.
THE eternal motion of our active Principles, disturbs the repose of the solid
Parts, unties their Bonds, and exposes 'em to decay. In order to repair this
their loss, the Blood laden with Chyle, being finished in the left Ventricle of
the Heart, sets out from thence, and makes a Tour round the Body; it visits
every Part, and measures out suitable Recruits, which are strained through the
Pores of the Part, and nourish it by way of apposition; or else ferment with
the Guardian Spirits that defend the Place, and being thereby coagulated, and
transformed into a likeness with the Part, consolidat and give occasion to its
growth.

Thus all the Members of the Body are either augmented in our Youth, or
nourished and preserved from decay, during the remainder of our lives. Now, the
hindrances of a regular Nutrition, are such as relate either to the deficiency
or want of due Nourishment; or to its redundancy, or to its depravation.

CHAP. I. Of a Consumption and Phthisic.
NUtrition is deficient when the Bones, Cartilages, and Membranes wither; and
the Fat and muscular Flesh, which are only capable of Consumption, are
accordingly consumed. If the Fat alone be melted down, it amounts to no more
than a leanness; but if the dewy Muscles are consumed without restoration, we
call it a Tabes, or formed Consumption.

The Causes of a Consumption relate either to the Spirits or nutritious Juice.
The former are the deficiency or dissipation of the Spirits; the one caused by
the vicious Crasis of Blood, or Indisposition of the Brain; the other by
Fatigue, Venery, Study, or Grief. Those relating to the nutritious Matter, are
first its defect, occasioned by the scarcity or want of proper Food, and
consequently of Chyle; The obstruction of the Vasa lactea, the Schirrous Tumors
of the Pylorus, or those of the Mesentery, so frequently met with; the
compression or wounding of the Ductus of the Breast; all which cut off the
communication of the Chyle with the Blood; Worms in the Guts sucking up the
Chyle: Excessive evacuations of the nutritious Juice, either in Company with
the Blood, in excessive Bleedings, or otherwise by Loosenesses, immoderate
Sweats, runnings of the Reins, Whites, Ulcers, and excessive Venery. The second
cause relating to the Nutritious Juice, is its depravation, occasioned either
by a weak digestion in the Stomac, or the saltness and viscidity of the Blood
or Lymph, that follows Acute or Intermitting Fevers, or retains to Scorbutic,
and Hypocondriac Constitutions.

In fine, the Crudities of the Stomac, and degeneracy of the Blood, are the
common causes of a Consumption, and reciprocally promote one another. The
former occasion a saline putrid taste in the Mouth, and provoke the Lungs and
Larynx to Cough, as they pass after joining the Blood. The latter, viz. The
degeneracy of the Blood, renders it unfit for nourishing the Parts; and is
occasioned either by the crudity of the Chyle, or the Ulcer of some Bowel or
external part that taints it as it passes. In which last case, it procures a
Phthisic.

A Phthisic therefore is generally taken for a Consumption, arising from the
Ulcer of any Bowel or external part, as of the Reins, Liver, and especially the
Lungs, which are most liable to be vitiated by the Air, and the recrements of
degenerat Blood. It Is distinguished from a Vomica of the Lungs by this Mark,
viz. That the latter is a close Ulcer, enclosed within its own Membranes, and
filled with laudable Pus; whereas a phthisical Ulcer is open, and voids sordid
corrupt Matter.

Though a Phthisic be generally imputed to an Ulcer of the Lungs, yet it may
arise from the Corrugation, Schirrus, or any other disorder of the Lungs or
Bowels, that disturbs and depraves the Blood. Its remote causes are: the
acrimony and saltness of the Blood or Lymph, which is frequently owing to
Crudities from the Stomac; and was represented by the Ancients, as a Catarrh or
defluxion from the Head; Wounds, Bruises, clotted Blood, or heterogeneous
Matter in the Breast, Inflammations of the Lungs or Pleura ending in
Suppuration; the Corrosion of the small Pox; corrosive steams, as those of
Aquafortis, Quicklime, etc. Drinking of Acid Tartarin Wines or Vinegar;
smoking Tobacco, irregular Passions of the Mind, etc. A Phthisic propagats it
self by a hereditary Succession, and is so very contagious, that the Breath of
a Phthisical Person will corrupt the Lungs of another, and convey its virulency
through the Breasts of a suckling Woman.

The signs of a Consumption are these, a sharp Nose, hollow Eyes, low Temples,
the Laps of the Ears contracted, the Forehead dry and hard, the Complexion
pale and livid, the Ribs and Shoulder-blades bend outward, the Cartilage of the
Breast is bowed, the Backbone sharp and prominent, the Belly falls low, the
Hips are loose or quite consumed; the Legs, Arms, Feet, and Hands are dry; the
Knuckles protuberant, the Nails bowed, the Skin wrinkled and flaggy, the Urin
is covered with Fat, the Veins of the Body are every where apparent, and the
Hairs fall off. Nocturnal Sweats are common to all Phthisical Persons; and
melting loosenesses and swellings of the Feet, conclude the Tragedy.

If a Consumption or Phthisic proceed from an obstruction of the Glandules of
the Mesentery, intercepting the Chyle, the Belly is swelled, and molested with
a hollow heavy Pain; the region of the Navel is hard, and the Excrements are
liquid or mixed with Chyle. If it proceed from a weak digestion, or crudities
from the Stomac; the Symptoms observe this order, viz. After much care, anger
drinking, or some such Error in the use of the not natural things, there insues
a prostration of strength and inappetency, especially an aversion to meat; in
the Morning an uncooth taste invades the Mouth, which, by degrees, becomes
saltish, and is attended by a dry tickling Cough; in process of time, the taste
of the Mouth becomes putrid, and resembles that of Ashes, or rotten Meat; the
dry Cough prevails toward Night, and brings up some thin watery Matter;
respiration is rendered difficult, and the Breast oppressed; especially after
eating, at which time the whole Body, especially the palms of their Hands are
molested with Heat. The Pulse is always quick, frequent, and small. After some
time, all these Symptoms increase, the Cough angments, and copiously brings up
a viscous white, then yellow, green or livid, and at length a true purulent
Matter; whereupon Night-sweats, a Hectic Fever, and a gradual decay ensue. In
fine, if a Phthisic of the Lungs be not externally occasioned, or depend not
upon a preceding Disease, such as a Pleurisy, or spitting of Blood, it always
flows from the Stomac.

From this Induction, we may infer, that in the beginning of a Phthisic, the
Cough does not always proceed from the Lungs, but from the Stomac: Nay,
sometimes though the Lungs be ulcerated, if the Matter do not irritate the
Bronchia, there insues no Cough at all. Besides, the Matter which is
expectorated by coughing, is not always bred in the Lungs, as being sometimes
taken up from other ulcerated Parts by the Blood. In which case, it is a
difficult matter to trace out the part to which the Ulcer belongs. But in
general, if it lodge in the Abdomen, the Symptoms of the Belly do discover it.
If the Cough bring up no purulent Matter, we conclude that the Phthisic is
owing to a Schirrus, or some such disorder among the Viscera. Now the purulency
of this Matter is discovered by its sinking in Water, whereas that which is
only viscid, being porous and dilated with Air, swims above. To conclude, if
the Lungs are exulcerated, the Cough sounds hollow and deep; and if they be
much consumed, are voided by pieces. If the right side be chiefly affected, the
sick Person cannot lie but on the right side, and e^contra.

A confirmed Phthisic or Consumption is incurable; while it is yet but growing,
there are some hopes; especially, if the Stomac is not much disordered. If it
proceed from hard swellings in the Lungs, Schirrus's or Ulcers in the Bowels,
from the Scurvy, the Whites, Dropsy, or running of the Reins, it is seldom
cured. If the Cough disappear of a sudden, it is a tragical Omen; as also if the
Hairs fall off, and the feet swell, or if the expectorated Matter stink when
thrown upon burning Coals.

The Cure is compassed by removing the various Causes; mitigating the Symptoms,
and projecting a method for nourishing the Body. For which end let the
following Cautions be heedfully minded.

1. There Is no Remedy whatsoever that equals Vomits, especially in the
beginning, nor any case in which they are nor convenient, except that of a
spitting of Blood, and extreme Weakness.

2. Purgation, Bleeding, and issues are of no use. The first is pernicious, and
augments the Cough; or if in the beginning of a Phthisic, it be absolutely
necessary to cleanse the first Passages, Rhubarb is the most proper Ingredient;
the second is never allowable, unless a suppression of Blood require it; the
third was introduced of old, in compliance with the exploded Fancy of a
Phthisic's being caused by a Catarrh^ distilling from the Brain, which now we
justly refer to the Stomac.

3. Sugar, Honey, and all sweet Syrups are hurtful. They putrify in the Stomac,
weaken its digestion, and pro^^ore the corrosion of the affected Bowel.

4. A scorbutic Consumption is admirably accounted for by a Milk Diet,
especially that of Goats Milk, mixed with vulnerary and anti-scorbutic Syrups.

5. Though an inveterat Phthisic do not admit of a perfect Cure, yet the Life may
be drilled on by a Milk Diet, using vulnerary Medicines, and changing the Air.

Milk is a Sovereign Remedy, when the Disease proceeds from a sharpness of the
Blood or Lymph; it both cleanses with its Whey, and heals with its Butter.
Indeed if it spring from the corruption of a Bowel, or default of the Stomac,
it is improper, as being apt to curdle and putrify in a depraved Stomac. Goats
Milk, mixed with the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, or that of Sal-Armoniac, is of
excellent Use in Scorbutic cases; but Woman's Milk sucked immediately from the
Breasts, without being exposed to the Air, and the Butter made of it, are
preferable to any other. It will not be amiss to add a little Sugar, or
Conserve of Roses to prevent Curdling. And when Persons are confined to a Milk
Diet, they ought to take of it three or four times a Day, and use some exercise
after taking it, in order to promote its quick distribution; and, in the
interim, eat nothing else but Raisins, or Food of very easy digestion. Note,
before the use of Milk, it is advisable to exhibit a Vomit.

The Yelks of Eggs dissolved in Wine, and mixed with a little Amber-grise, are
of admirable use in Venereal Consumptions.

The Decoctions of Elecampane-roots, with Raisins and Liquorice, and a little
Spanish Wine, are of noted efficacy against all Phthisics; to which we may add,
Sweet Almonds, and Emulsions of Milky Seeds, Oysters, River-Crabbs mixed with
Butter, Cockles, and all temperat Ingredients. In the beginning of the Disease,
especially when it proceeds from the Stomac, Acids, such as the Spirit of Salt,
Nitrum Antimoniatum, Terra foliata Tartari, distilled Vinegar with Crab's-eyes
dissolved in it; Sal-Armoniac, etc. are recommended upon the acount of their
Stomachical Virtue. But, after the confirmation of the Disease, or an Ulcer in
the Lungs, both these, and all Spaw-Waters ought to be equally avoided. And as
for the sharpness of the Blood and Lymph, which vitiats the Lungs, and is
generally the Cause of those Phthisics that the Ancients refer to Catarrhs from
the Head; Sulphur is a proper Remedy. It contains both Acid and Balmy Parts;
the former are pernicious, and ought to be carefully separated from the latter.
Thus, the Flowers of Sulphur nicely prepared, and the Balsam of Sulphur
prepared with distilled Oil of Aniseeds, are incomparable Medicines. If a
Hectic and Night-Sweats prevail, perhaps the Balsam of Sulphur prepared with
distilled Oils, may prove too hot; in which case let it be prepared with the
Oil of Sweet-Almonds, adding but a few drops of distilled Oil of Aniseed, which
last alone is a noble Pectoral. Or the heat of the Balsam may be restrained, by
adding the Sugar of Lead, or the Anti-phthisical Tincture of two Parts of
Vitriol of Steel, and one of Sugar of Lead infused in rectified Spirit of Wine,
or the dewy Phlegm of Vitriol, that is free of Acidity, rectified upon its own
Caput mortuum. The Tincture of Boodstone, or that of the Sulphur of Vitriol,
are also fir to be added.

In the room of Common Sulphur, some choose the Mineral fixed Sulphurs, such as
Diaphoretic Antimony; Poterius's Antihectic, and all preparations from Antimony
fixed with Tin and Steel* To these we join other Balmy Ingredients, viz. Amber,
Aloes, Myrrh, especially when the Phthisic is not far advanced, nor the Hectic
very troublesome; Together with the pectoral specifics, viz. Tragacanth,
Elecampane Roots, Sperma Ceti (given to half a dram in a Potch'd Egg) Orris
Roots, the Conserve of Roses, Bole-armenic, sealed Earth, Boodstone, and the
Mushroom of a Willow (given to half a dram in the Conserve of Ground Ivy) all
which are very useful for tempering the acrimony of the Blood and Chyle. But
before we commence the use of Specifics, a Vomit ought to be exhibited, for
cleansing the first Passages.

The Decoctions of Woods, especially China and Sassafras together with
Elecampane, Liquorice, Raisins, and Vulnerary Ingredients, are of singular
efficacy in this Case. Their Rosinous Sulphurous substance is at once
qualified for tempering the sharpness of the Humors, evacuating the corrupt
Matter, and cleansing the Ulcer. But whoever would reap benefit by these
Decoctions, must resolve to Drink nothing else.

Narcotics, especially the Pills of Storax are of good use for promoting the
Maturation and Concoction of the matter in the Lungs, curbing the dry Night
Coughs, and preventing Night-sweats. Phthisical Persons admit of large Doses,
and persist long in the use of 'em without detriment. Toward the height of the
Disease, when Respiration is difficult and a great deal of Viscous matter lies
ready for expectoration, it is convevient to discontinue their use.

In regard of the ulcerated Bowel, the vulnerary Specifics, and the baling
Ingredients abovementioned, are calculated for its relief. Ground Ivy,
Chervil, Scabious and male Speedwel, especially the first, or its Juice, ought
never to be omitted. Some commend Indian Cresses and Rosasolis. In Scorbutic
Cases it is proper to add Antiscorbutic Ingredients.

If the Hectic do not Prohibit the use of Balsams, we may add the Balsam of
Sulphur, Balsam of Peru, Turpentin dissolved with the yelk of an Egg, Myrrh,
etc.

Some recommend the Decoction of Pennyroyal. Others the volatile Salt of
Hartshorn and its Spirit tinctured with Balsam of Sulphur, the Spirit of Ants,
the Spirit and volatile Salt of Man's Urine, and the like; but if the Disease be
inveterat, and the Lungs ulcerated, they are very improper. Perhaps after
chronical Diseases, or when the Chyle is not distributed through the Body, they
may be of some use.

The dry tickling Cough and Night-sweats, that usually molest Phthisical
Persons, are abated by incrassating Medicines, mixed with Opiats. But Treacle
and hot Compositions ought to be avoided.

For cleansing the Ulcer in the Lungs, and bringing up the viscous Matter, the
Syrup of Tobacco ought to be mixed with the other expectorating Ingredients.
And if the Matter stink, or if the Person spit very much, let Myrrh and Honey be
always added. But if a Fever or melting Looseness accompany a Phthisic, let
Honey be avoided, and absorbent earthy Powders exhibited.

The Food of Phthisical Persons ought to be such as yields a substantial
glutinous Juice, such as Eggs, Raisins, Oysters, River Crabs, and Milk. They
ought to avoid drinking much, and what they Drink may be impregnated with Fumes
of Sulphur. Of Wines the sweetest are the best. As for Air; those that are
emaciated and withered, require a thick Sulphurous Air; whereas those that are
otherwise find their account in breathing in a clear dry Air.

It remains now to subjoin a few Receipts, in order to exemplify the
complication of the abovementioned Ingredients.

Take of Sal-Armoniac and Nitre purified, of each half an ounce; the Powders of
the Roots of Liquorice, and Florentine Orris, of each an ounce. Mix and Exhibit
as much as will lie upon the point of a Knife Morning and Evening, remembering
still the Cautions abovementioned, with respect to Acids.

Take of the Roots of Cuckow-pint, four ounces; Roots of Florentin Orris, three
Ounces; Flowers of Benzoin, an ounce and a half; Flowers of Sulphur, an ounce;
Poterius's Antihectic, two ounces; with a sufficient quantity of Sugar make a
Powder, to be given to a dram before Supper, and at Bed time, in the Decoction
of China Roots, for tempering the Acrimony of the Humors.

Take of the Kernel of the Pine Apple, half an ounce; white Poppy Seeds, two
drams; with Scabious and Coltsfoot Water, make an Emulsion, to which add of
Ivory prepared without fire, half a dram; prepared Crabs Eyes, and Mother of
Pearls, of each a scruple; and sweeten it with Pearled Sugar.

Take of Diaphoretic Antimony, a dram and half; Flowers of Sulphur, half a
dram* the Powder Diaireos, and Diatragacanthon Frigidae, and prepared white
Amber, of each a dram extract of Elecampane, half a dram; Balsam of Sulphur
Anisated, half a dram* Sugar dissolved in Fennel Water, four Ounces. Make
Tablets, of which take eight thrice a Day, followed by a Draught of the
Decoction of Ground Ivy and Chervil.

Take of the Conserve of Ground Ivy, an ounce; Crabs Eyes and Poterius's
Antihectic, of each half a dram; prepared Amber, two scruples; Benzoin, a
scruple; with Willis's Syrup Diasulphuris make an Electuary; and add some
grains of Laudanum Opiatum, if it be Convenient.

Take of Guajacum Wood, three ounces; Guajacum Roots, and China Roots, of each
an ounce; Elecampane and Burdock Roots, of each two ounces; Juniper Berries,
three drams; Leaves of Speedwel, two handfuls; Ground Ivy, a handful. Infuse
'em for twenty four Hours, in twelve pound of fair Water. Then Boil the half
away, and add toward the end Anis and Fennel Seeds, of each an ounce and a
half; Liquorice Roots, an ounce. Strain the Liquor, and exhibit a Draught every
Morning, adding twelve drops of the Turpentine Balsam of Sulphur, or forty of
that prepared with Oil of sweet Almonds.

Take of Ground Ivy, Chervil, and Male Speedwel, of each a handful; Elecampane
Roots, an ounce and a half; Roots of Florentine Orris, an ounce; Anis-seeds,
three drams; Fennel-seed, two drams; Figs four in Number; Corrants, an ounce
and a half; Liquorice Roots, six drams; boil them in Water for a vulnerary
Decoction, to be sweetened with the Syrup of Ground Ivy. And add to every
Draught forty drops of Elixyr Proprietatis, or half a dram of Sperma Coeti, or
some drops of the Essence of Gum Ammoniac, mixed with the Tincture of Sulphur.

Take of Poterius's Antihectic, a Scruple; Sugar of Lead, half a scruple;
Extract of Saffron, four or five grains; Laudanum Opiatum, two or four grains.
With Balsam of Peru make Pills, for two Doses, to be taken at Night to prevent
Coughing and Sweating in the Night time.

Take of prepared Amber, half a scruple; choice Myrrh and valatil Salt of
Amber, of each five grains; Laudanum Opiatum, a grain or two. With the Essence
of Myrrh make Pills.

Take of the Conserve of Ground Ivy, Conserve of Scabious, of each an ounce and
a half; fresh Pine Apples, half an ounce; Ivory prepared without fire, a dram;
Poterius's Antihectic and Flowers of Sulphur, of each two scruples. With Syrup
of Tobacco make an Electuary, for attenuating and expectorating Viscid Matter.

Having dispatched the general Consumption of the Body, 'twill not be improper
in this place to take notice of the Dryness or Decay of particular parts of the
Body, occasioned by whatever intercepts the Blood or Spirits in their Passage
thither, or weakens and exhausts the innate Spirit of the Part, whose office it
is to ferment and assimilat the nutritious Juice. Hence Palsies, Convulsions,
Dislocations, Falls, Bruises, Wounds, etc. are its usual Causes. As for Cure;
Wurzius his Arcanum of Alum is a Catholicon against all dried or withered
Parts. It Is thi^.

Take of Plumous Alum, and melted Salt, of each equal Quantities, melt 'em
over a strong Fire. Then set 'em to Cool, and they will condensat into a Stone,
upon which pour Water to dissolve the Salts, and precipitat the Arcanum. Of
which, take three ounces, and mix 'em with an ounce and a half of the Oil of
Bricks, and four ounces of the Oil of Human fat, distilled with the Ashes of
Vine-tiwgs. Make a Liniment, and anoint the Part after rubbing.

If the dryness of the Part be occasioned by a Wound or Efflux of its
spirituous Juice, temperat hot things, and such as are moist, or enriched with
a Dewy Juice, are best. Hence some order the Part to be drenched in the Blood
of an Ox just killed, and fomented with the Decoction of the Feet, Head, Liver,
and Lungs, and other joints of a Sheep or Calf, boiled to Rags; or anointed
with the Juice of River Crabs, mixed with the Oil of sweet Almonds; or with an
Ointment of equal quantities of the fat of Herns, the fat of Frogs, and that of
Hogs. If the dryness be caused by a Palsy or Compression of the Tendons,
without any visible Wound or Hurt, hot irritating things are most proper; as if
the part be strongly rubbed down three or four times a Day with green Nettles,
till it become Red and Hot, and then covered with the Liniment of the Arcanum
of Alum, or fomented with the following Water.

Take of the seeds of Roman Nettles, one pound; the Roots of Horse Radishes
bruised, from four ounces to half a pound; Roots of Cuckow-pint, four ounces;
long Pepper, three ounces. Digest 'em in white Wine fourteen Days, in a Balneum
Mariae, shaking the Vessel often. And then distill the Spirit, which is of
excellent use when the part is num'd and stupid.

If a Defluxion at Catarrh falling upon the part give rise to its decay, let
Sudorifics be taken inwardly; and the Spirit of Ants, and that of Earth Worms,
rectified with some Alcalin Salt, or the Aqua Articularis, mixed with the
spirit of Sal-Armoniac and Oil of Soap, or the Ointment of Agrippa, be applied
outwardly, the part being first rubbed down, till it become red or sensible.

CHAP. II. Of Immoderat Nutrition or Corpulency.
IF the nutritious Juice be too copiously distributed through the Body the
Muscles and Joints are extended, and for want of room are disabled to recoyl
and contract themselves with due nimbleness, and the Belly being over-charg'd
with Fat and Juice, inlarges its Dimensions. So that the true Cause of
Corpulency or fatness is the temperat softness of the Blood, the less
Consumption of the Nutritious Juice, by reason of a slow Fermentation, and the
late assimilation of the Chyle in company of the Blood, giving it opportunity
to be coagulated and appropriated, by the peculiar acid Spirits that guard the
respective Parts.

The remote Causes of fatness are abstinence from Drink, especially Hoped Beer,
or Ale made of Malt; or whatever dilutes the Nutritious Juice, and consequently
promotes its exhalation; drinking moderatly Ale made of Corn, which has a
peculiar fattening Virtue; eating much Bread, which promotes the Fermentation
and Digestion of Food; much sleep, freedom from Care, Exercise, and Venery.

Corpulency squeezes the Spermatic Vessels, and causes Barrenness, nay it
oppresses all the Vessels in the Body, retards the Motion of the Blood,
anticipats the matter that should be converted into Spirits, cramps all
muscular Motions, and accelerats Death.

The Cure is compassed by preventing the immoderat increase of Chyle, or
evacuating it before its Assimilation to the Part, or melting and diluting it
with Serum after its appropriation. The first design is answered by a spare
thin Diet, and eating of salt Meat. The second and third by Purgation with
Extractum Catholicum, and sweet Mercury repeated till it salivat; or the Pills
of Aloes, and Elixyr Proprietatis, which was known among the Ancients for a
drying Medicine. Now that which they called Drying, is nothing but the melting
down of the Nutritious Juice. Hence Myrrh, Gentian, Wormwood, Cresses, and all
Diuretic or Diaphoretic Ingredients are of use, by reason of their attenuating
resolving Quality. But Vinegar of Squills, Tartar, Tartar Vitriolated, Nitre,
and all Acids, are entitled to a preference. Bleeding, Issues, chewing
Medicines, the Decoctions of Woods, Venery, and in a Word whatever attenuats
the Nutritious Juice, and dilutes it with a serous Vehicle in order to
evacuation, either by Urine, Sweat, or otherwise, is recommended against
Fatness. Only this Caution ought to be taken notice of, that sudden and liberal
Evacuations are apt to weaken fat People. To Conclude, I subjoyn a Recipe for
Pills that are much approved.

Take of the Gum of the Juniper Tree, two drams; Choice Myrrh, Shavings of
Lignum Sanctum, extract of Wormwood and Aloe, of each a Scruple, Coagulated
Spirit of Vitriol, half a dram. Make Pills.

CHAP. III. Of a Depraved Nutrition.
ART. 1. Of a Cachexy, Leucophlegmacy and Anasarca.
IF the Chyle or Nutritious Juice is not duly digested and assimilated to the
Blood, it Tinctures it with a pituitous Crudity, Stifles its saline particles,
and cramps its due turgescence; whereupon the Skin is discolored, and the
Muscles instead of receiving elaborat nourishment, are stuffed and bloated up
with crude matter, and so rendered flaccid: This we call a Leucophlegmacy. And
if this crude vicious Juice obstruct the Glandules of the Muscles, or if the
Lymph be upon any account obliged to Stagnat, the Blood becomes serous, and a
Collection of Serum or Water lodged under the Skin causes an Anasarca. Now a
Cachexy is a general Term importing the Crudity of the mass of Blood, and its
weaker Fermentation, which give rise to these two Diseases. The remote Causes
are want of motion, care, grief, suppression of the Terms, chronical Diseases,
suppression of Urine, the French Pox; and in a word, whatever weakens
Digestion, and stifles the Fermentation of the Blood.

The Symptoms observe the following Method. The Cachectic Person grows Pale,
and in some measure Livid; his Face, and in process of time, the whole surface
of the Body is swollen; upon any quick motion or walking up an ascent he is
troubled with a shortness of breath, and palpitation of the Heart and temporal
Arteries; an universal Weariness seizes the Joints, and after eating, Anxiety
and a sense of Compression oft-times invades the Breast; the Appetit, which at
first is good, decays by degrees, the Pulse is unequal, small, frequent and
weak; the Urine crude, pale, and watery; and toward the height of the Disease
becomes thick, and deposits a white Sediment; and finally the Person is seized
with a slow Fever, scarce perceivable by himself, and is oft-times thirsty and
costive.

Thus far the Disease is only denominated a Cachexy. But afterward the whole
Body becomes very turgid, especially the Feet and Belly, the Skin thick and
pale, and when pressed by one's Finger receives durable Pits, which entitle it
to the Character of a Leucophlegmacy: Whereas an Anasarca requires that these
Pits should quickly disappear, and that a shining Color cover the swelling.

Cachexies are apt to invade Women, or those who confine themselves to a
sedentary Life; and if the Woman be past the season of her Terms, they prove
very tedious: If they succeed to acute or intermitting Fevers, or mismanag'd
chronical Diseases, they are not easily cured.

The Cure consists in attenuating, correcting, and evacuating the Crudities of
the first Passages, whetting the Bile, vanquishing the vicious acid, and
strengthening the Stomac. For these Ends we ought to be cautious of giving
strong Purgatives, or forcing the Cure too violently. The better way is to
proceed by degrees, first to prepare the Crudities of the first Passages by
digestive Salts, such as the Hypochondriac digestive Salt, given to half a dram
twice a day, Tartar vitriolated, Sal-Armoniac, and the Tincture of Tartar;
mixed with absorbent Powders, viz. Coral, sealed Earth, Bezoardicum martiale,
and Poterius's Antihectic (made of the Regulus of Antimony, Tin and Nitre.)
Then to exhibit a Vomit, such as the Conserve of Hedge-Hyssop, given from a
dram to two drams; or the Decoction of Hedge-Hyssop in Wine, etc. Or if a Vomit
be improper, to order a gentle Purge of the Extract of Esula, or Juice of
common Orris, mixed with sweet Mercury, and Preparations from Gum Ammoniac.

The first Passages being thus cleans'd, we advance to Chalybeats, which ought
to be continued for several Weeks, a gentle Laxative being interlac'd every
Week, and the Patient remembering always to stir and move after taking 'em. If
the peccant Acid be very rank, and the Stomac strong, we may give the filings
of Steel, in Substance, or the natural and artificial Waters; otherwise
chalybear Rhenish Wine, impregnated with Aromatic Herbs, or rather the Extract
of Steel prepared with Juice of Apples, or that ascribed to Mynsichtius, or the
Tincture of the Vitriol of Steel, and Bezoardicum Martiale, will answer the
Design.

After the use of Steel is the proper Season for exhibiting the Infusions or
Decoctions of the sharp, bitter Aromatic Herbs and Spices, to which we add some
gentle Laxative, especially Rhubarb, which retrieves the Choler, and subdues
the Acid. The Ingredients of this Nature are Wormwood, Agrimony, Turmeric,
lesser Centory, Carduus Benedictus, Elecampane and Cuckow-pint Roots; Rosemary,
Hyssop, Mint, Horse-Radishes, Cresses, Scurvy Grass, Cinnamon, Galangal,
Zedoary, Cloves, Ginger, etc. The Rob of Juniper, and Pulp of Raisins are much
approved for the same effect; and if we add to them Extract of Steel, they
prove more effectual. And after all, toward the end of the Cure, we order the
Patient to take every Morning and Evening some drops of volatile saline Spirits,
till he become perfectly well; such are the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, or Elixyr
Proprietatis prepared with it, the Essence of Wormwood, the carminative Spirit
de tribus, the Nephritic Tincture, the Spirit of Hartshorn succinated, etc.

In a perfect Anasarca the same Remedies are convenient. To which we may add
the Lie made of Wine, and the Ashes of Wormwood and Broom; sudorific Decoctions
of Woods and Juniper Berries, and that of Swallow-wort, and Elecampane; the
Seed of St. John's Wort given to a dram in Wine, or diuretic Infusions and
Decoctions of Asarabecca, Briony, red Chiches, etc. mixed with Emmenagoga in a
Suppression of the Terms, (which frequently follows a Cachexy or Anasarca.) In
scorbutic cases, let Earthworms be added to the Aromatic Decoctions.

Externally Burdock Leaves bruised, and applied to the Joints and soles of the
Feet, are very useful. The natural sulphurous Baths are of known Efficacy; as
also the dry Bagnios; or in the beginning and declination of the Disease, the
way of procuring Sweat by kindling Spirit of Wine. Some order the cachectic
Body to be put into hot Sand. As for the Forms of prescribing, they are as
follows.

Take of Tartar vitriolated, two scruples; salt of Wormwood, and prepared Crabs
Eyes, of each a Scruple; distilled Oil of Turpentin, six drops. Make a
digestive Powder for three Doses, to be exhibited before vomiting.

Take of Quercetanus's Pills of Ammoniac and sweet Mercury, of each fifteen
grains; Extract of Troches Alhandal, a grain and a half. Make Pills for a
gentle Purge. It Is also very proper to add the Extract of Steel to all purging
Pills.

Take of the Filings of Steel, one part; Cinnamon in Powder, two parts; Sugar,
three parts. Make a chalybeat Powder. Dose a dram.

Take of the Pulp of Raisins, six ounces; Extract of Steel prepared with Juice
of Apples, three ounces; choice Rhubarb, three drams; with the Syrup of Apples
make an Electuary. The solar Liquor of Steel may also be taken from twelve to
thirty drops; or the solution of Steel in Juice of Apples mixed with spirit of
Scurvy Grass, to fifty drops.

Take of Fumitory, Wormwood, and Rosemary, of each a handful; Elecampane, and
Fennel roots, of each six drams; picked Senna, an ounce; black Hellebor roots,
six drams; choice Rhubarb, three drams; the four greater hot Seeds, of each a
dram and a half; Orange and Citron Peel, of each three drams; Galangal and
Ginger, of each a dram; salt of Tartar, two drams. Make a Bag to be infused in
Wine, of which let the Patient take a draught twice or thrice a day after
having finished the course of Steel.

Take of the Species Diacurcumae, four scruples; choice Rhubarb, two drams;
Powder Diarrhodon, Abbatis, and Diagalangae, of each a scruple; with Syrup of
Wormwood make Pills. Dose a dram.

Take of Elixyr Proprietatis without the acid, an ounce; Essence of Wormwood,
and that of lesser Centory, of each two Drams. Mix them to be used in the
Declination of the Disease, to fifty drops every Morning in a warm Vehicle; and
followed by fifty drops of Spirit of Sal-Armoniac mixed with double its
quantity of the carminative Spirit de tribus, taken after dinner, and at bed
time.

ART. 2. Of an universal Dropsy.
A Dropsy is a Collection and Extravasation of Serum, causing a Distention,
Tumor, and Softness in the external parts. Sometimes a viscous Humor
accompanies the Serum, and then it is a spurious sort of Dropsy, complicated
with an Anasarca. A Tympany goes generally by the name of a Dropsy, but for so
much as it proceeds from Wind, we refer it to the Chapter of Wind in the
Stomac. A Dropsy is called universal, when it proceeds from the general
Infirmity of the Body. A particular Dropsy is owing to the infirmity of that
Part from which it receives its Denomination. The most common sort of Dropsy
is that called Ascites, which begins at the Feet, and in a short time reaches
the Belly and Scrotum.

This Serum, whose Extravasation causes a Dropsy, for the most part is
deposited into the respective Cavities, by the Blood circulating in the
Arteries. It Is true the Rupture and Obstruction of the lymphatic and milky
Vessels, may cause a Stagnation or Extravasation: but that happens by accident.
Whereas the standing and direct source of Dropsies is the vicious Crasis of the
Blood, as being unqualified for digesting and assimilating its Serum; and its
languid Motion, giving the Serum an opportunity of squeezing through the
Vessels, especially about the Capillary Arteries, where the influence of the
Heart (the primum mobile) is but very small, and more easily communicable to
the thick resisting Blood, than to the weak yielding Serum. Now that the slow
motion of the Blood will occasion a Transmission of the Serum, is plainly made
out by Dr. Louer's Experiment of tying a Ligature about the Vena Cava, under
the Heart; and that the vicious Crasis or Crudity of the Blood occasions an
imperfect Turgescence, and a weak Propulsion from the Heart, is too evident to
need a proof. I grant that there are some melting Dropsies that proceed from
the Colliquation of the Humors originally contained in the part, without the
assistance of foreign Serum, as in Hectic Fevers, and after hot acute
Diseases; but these are not proper Dropsies, as being only Symptoms of a
Colliquation.

According to this Hypothesis, we need not be at a loss to scan the Influence
of remote Causes. It Is an obvious Conjecture, that whatever weakens Digestion,
accumulats Crudities, enfeebles the natural Functions, and, in a word, all
Chachectic Disorders are apt to degenerat into Dropsies. The suppression of
Urine and that of insensible transpiration, are either the Causes or
inseparable Companions of a Dropsy. Nay, I doubt much if an universal Ascites
can ever take place, unless the Kidneys be disordered. And it is a notorious
observation to this purpose, that whoever drinks much, and does not piss
proportionably, may justly make account to encounter a Dropsy e're he dies;
and that whoever attempts the Cure of a Dropsy without Diuretic Medicines, is
but lamely equipped for his Office. The drinking of Brandy and Sulphurous
Liquors that melt down the Humors, sharpen the Lymph, and relaxat the Stomac;
the inconsiderat use of cold Water, immediately after violent Heat; the
suppression of any wonted Evacuation, and excess of any Flux, whether of Blood
or other Humors; the attenuation of the Serum, by the use of Mercury; the
Jaundice, and inactivity of the Bile; Chronical Agues mismanag'd; Asthma's,
Phthisics, and Spitting of Blood, and in fine, whatever weakens Nature, renders
the Blood incapable to assimilat the Chyle, or retards its circular Motion, and
disturbs its due Targescence: these I say, are the natural Authors of a
Dtopsie. The tumors of the Mesentery, Liver, and other Bowels do generally
accompany this Disease, but oft-times are rather effects than Causes.

The Symptoms of a Dropsy display themselves after this method: The Feet at
first begin to swell, and receive Pits by the pressing of one's Finger; in the
Night time the swelling abates, but regains new force the succeeding Day. By
degrees it reaches to the Abdomen, and Scrotum, and frequently affects the
Prepuce and Testicles. The Water thus enclosed in the Belly sometimes possesses
one side, sometimes both, and as the Person turns in his Bed it rolls, with a
noise, and sometimes visibly, from one side to the other; in the mean while the
Breast, Neck, and upper Parts waste and decay. The Face and Hands sometimes
swell. An itching, and oft-times a scab, molests the Skin; and spots or wheals
beset the Legs. A slow Fever pursues him, and increases toward the Evening.
The Pulse is small, frequent, and a little hard. An unquenchable Thirst, loss
of Appetit, straitness of the Breast, shortness of Breath, especially in the
Night time, and a dry Cough oft-times usher in a Dropsy.

Big bellied Women are oft-times apt to suspect a Dropsy without occasion. The
signs which serve to undeceive 'em are these. In a Dropsy the Face is pale and
Livid, the Eyes are robbed of their sparkling Vigor, the Water contained in the
Belly Floats to and again, falls as the Woman turns her self, and is very
weighty. The swelling is soft, equal, and bends downward; it does not impair
the Flux of the Terms, but diminishes the quantity of Urine, and gives it a
high Tincture, and causes a violent Thirst; all which Symptoms are contrary to
those of Being with Child.

The Hydro^ic Water is not always of the same Color, as being either Green,
Yellow, or Blackish, etc. But it is generally salin and sharp, apt to corrode
the Bowels, and to cause Ulcers on the Legs, or to cast a Froth like Lather,
when mixed with other Water; nay the distention and stiffness of the Membrans
inwrapping it seems to argue that it ferments within, and provokes them to
Contractions.

As for Prognostics. If a Dropsy follow Chronical Diseases, or indiscreet
Purgation, or invade those whose strength is decayed; if it be attended by
unspeakable Thirst, Coughing, Schirrus of the Bowels, difficult Respiration,
scarcity and redness of Urine, hardness of the Belly, extreme inappetency, or a
melting Fever, Ulcers or livid Spots in the Legs, Black Excrements (when the
Person does not use Steel) These I say are dismal Circumstances, whereas the
Reverse of 'em are looked upon as hopeful Signs. Convulsions and Apoplexies
succeeding a Dropsy are very fatal.

The Cure turns upon two indications. 1. To remove the stagnating Serum. 2. To
prevent its further increase by retrieving the due Crasis of the Blood, and
fortifying the Stomac, in order to a regular Chylification.

The first is answered by Evacuations, and abstaining from Drink.

Of evacuating Medicines, Purgatives are the first, especially the Roots of the
Common Flower-de-luce, and Elaterium, or the Juice of the wild Cucumber. The
former does not only evacuat but enjoys also an alterative Virtue; and is given
to three drams in Infusion, or its Juice expressed, to half an ounce, with a
scruple of the Powder of Soldanella. Elaterium, or its Extract prepared with
Spirit of Wine Tartaris'd, given to fifteen grains, is fitly joined with sweet
Mercury. The Infusion or Decoction of half an ounce of Bryony, with Salt of
Tartar, is of excellent use against Dropsies of the Womb. When the Serum is
mixed with viscous Humors, Coloquintida, or the extract of Troches Alhandal
ought to be added. The lunar Pills made of the Crystals of well refined Silver,
prepared with Spirit of Nitre or Aquafortis; or Mercurius Vitae rendered
Laxative, by mixing it with sweet Mercury, are also noted Purges against
Dropsies. To which we may add the Rosin of Jalap, the Infusion of a handful of
the Flowers of Acacia in Whey, the Syrup and Conserve of Peach Flowers; Gutta
Gamba, given in Powder to sixteen grains, or its Rosin given to twelve grains;
the Infusion of two or three drams of Hedge-Hyssop, or its Conserve given to
two drams, Syrup of Buckthorn, and the Rinds or Leaves of Elder. The proper
season for exhibiting Purges to Hydropic Persons is immediately before the new
Moon, when the Disease of it self relents; But if the Hydropic Water lodge in
the Purse of the Caul, or duplicat of the Peritonaeum, or Vesicles of the
Mesentery, and not in the Cavities of the Womb, Purgation is of no use: And
withal we ought to remark that Purgatives ought to be mixed with Stomachical
Specifics, especially Wormwood; and not too often repeated, by reason that they
melt down the laudable Humors as well as the bad, and so indirectly strengthen
the Disease; especially if they do not operat quickly after Administration.

If the Hydropic Person Vomit easily, or be molested with a shortness of
Breath, Vomits are useful. But they ought to be given in large Doses, otherwise
they do not Operate. Opiats in general are pernicious, though in some singular
Instances they may pacify the Spirits, appease the irritated Fibers of the
Kidneys, and so indirectly promote an Evacuation by Urine.

Diuretics are the choicest evacuating Remedies. But they ought not to be
exhibited till after the use of Laxative, attenuating and opening Ingredients,
nor used without the addition of Chalybeat or Corroborating Medicines. Asarum,
Wormwood, Elecampane, and Gentian lead the Van. The Juice or Infusion of
Celandin the greater, is a celebrated Specific; to which we may add the
Decoction of Swallow-wort in Wine or its Extract, it being peculiarly
calculated for such Dropsies as proceed from Scrophulous tumors in the
Mesentery. Hore-hound is much recommended against a Hydropical Jaundice. The
Infusion, Decoction, or Juice of Garlic is a powerful Diuretic, as also
Turmerick and Madder. The Decoction, Infusion, Spirit and Rob of Juniper Wood
and Berries are of excellent use, and seem to claim a Preference before the
Decoctions of Guajacum and Sassafras. The Juice of the Herb Kali given to half
a dram is much applauded, but it ought not to be taken above three Days in a
Week, for fear of over doing.

In those Dropsies which approach to Anasarca's, fixed Salts are of good use,
and perhaps preferable to other Diuretics. But in an Ascites it is not improper
to shift 'em, for those of a volatile nitrous Character. The Heads of the fixed
sort are the Lixivious Salts of Vine-Twigs, Bean-stalks, Juniper and
Lime-tree-wood. The volatile, are all the volatile preparations of Tartar, the
Spirit and Flowers of Sal-Armoniac, or Elixyr Propritatis prepared with it, and
the volatile Salt of Hartshorn; Poppius bestows large Encomiums on the Spirit
of Urine, rectified with Spirit of Wine Ambergrise and Mosch, and given to half
a dram, Morning and Evening; nay, Man's Urine, or that of Sheep is very
effectual among poor People. Crollius recommends Goose-Dung given to a dram in
distilled Urine.

The Spirit of putrifi'd Earthworms, given to sixty drops, twice or thrice a
day in Wine impregnated with Juniper Berries; or the Liquor that flows, per
deliquium, from Earthworms putrifi'd with Moss of Earth, and baken with Dough
in an Oven, given to a spoonful twice a day; the Powder of dried Toads, the
Heads and Guts being thrown away, given to a Scruple three or four times in one
Day, but so as to intermit three or four days before it be used again; the
Liquor which drops, per deliquium, from Cockle-shells, coagulated with Spirit
of Salt; the Powder of greasy Beetles, or of Hog-lice; these are all approved
for their anti-hydropic Virtue.

Sudorifics are not proper in an Ascites, by reason that they heat and fret the
Serum, and dissolve the Blood, so as to occasion a further effusion of Serum
into the Cavities. In case of an Anasarca, or when the Serum stagnates in the
Glandules and Bowels, they are useful, and ought to be given in small
quantities, lest a stronger force should weaken the Patient. Juniper-Wood,
Millet-seeds, and Vegetable Aromatics, together with volatile Salts, are the
most proper Ingredients; and ought to be administered in a liquid form.
Sometimes Mercurial Salivations are also of use in desperate Dropsies.

After the internal Remedies for evacuating the hydropical Serum; we come in
the next place, to what assistance external Operations can afford. If the Navel
be much raised, we apply aperients to it; and if they do not open it, we tap it
with a Needle. A Paracentesis is also frequently performed on the side of the
Belly with good success. But we ought to remember, that in Dropsies, the
Peritonaeum is very thick; that it is dangerous to take out above eight or ten
Ounces of Water at once; that if the Disease be confirmed, and the Bowels beset
with Schirrus's or already corroded by the Water; and if the larger Lymphatic
Vessels be broken, or if the Dropsy be universal, a Paracentesis is of no use.
Sometimes, if Nature tend that way, the Scrotum opens of it self, or if it do
not, it is artificially opened with a Cautery or a Lance. But it ought to be
carefully defended, by proper Preservatives, from a Gangrene; to which it is
very liable. Slight scarrifications of the Legs are oft-times of good use; but
the Wounds must be gently handled, and frequently fomented with the Spirit of
Wine camphoris'd, in order to prevent a Gangrene. If Blisters rise in the Legs,
we apply Cole-wort Leaves to 'em; nay, oft-times the Leaves of Water-Plantane
bruised, and applied, raise Blisters of themselves, which void a great deal of
Serum. Blistering Plasters are used with good success; but they ought to be
cautiously applied to the outermost Parts, because they extinguish the native
heat, and promote a Gangrene. Upon which account, Caustics, which fortify the
Part with an Eschara, and do not attract the Humors so violently, are more
proper. But if the Disease be confirmed, and if the Person be weak and cold,
then they may introduce a Gangrene, or, at least, will only give vent to the
Water under the Skin, as not being able to extend their influence to the
Cavities. Some choose to pair the Nails of the Toes very close, and tie strait
Ligatures upon the Parts. The former Stratagem drains the Water, and the latter
cuts off all further Supplies, and forces the imprisoned Matter either to
retire into the Lymphatic Vessels, or march out by the proper Passages.

Having thus dispatched the first Indication, we are arrived at the second,
which was to corroborat the Stomac, and Crasis of the Blood; for which end,
chalybeat Medicines ought to be mixed with the above mentioned Ingredients,
especially to Wormwood and Ground Ivy; which last is of excellent use both
inwardly and outwardly. The Salt of Wormwood coagulated with the Spirit of
Salt; the Tincture of Tartar, Tincture of the Vitriol of Steel, the Terra
foliata of Tartar, and the Lapis Fulminaris, pounded with Alcohol of Wine, and
mixed with the Powder of Snakes Cast-Coats, are much applauded for the same
purpose.

If the Fibers of the Skin be weak and relaxated, it will not be improper to
Bath it with the Spirit of Wine and strong Waters; as for astringent
Fomentations, I doubt they do more harm than good. If the Vessels or Organs be
broke, we may add vulnerary Ingredients to the above mentioned Specifics. If
the difficulty of breathing be very troublesome, it is usual to give a dram of
Sperma Caeti in Spanish Wine, after vomiting. If Hydropical Persons be extreme
thirsty, we must be very cautious of pleasing them, or answering their demands,
since abstinence from Drink is the better part of the Cure. Nitre melted in the
Mouth, Wine tempered with Juice of Citrons, the dulcifi'd Spirit of Salt,
Vinegar diluted with Chalybeat Water, and the Decoction of Juniper Berries in
Whey, given for ordinary drinking, are of use for mitigating this Symptom.

In the mean while, it will not be improper to inject Clysters of hydropical
Purgatives, and aromatic Ingredients, or of Herrin-Pickle, or of a Child's
Urine, impregnated with carminative Seeds in case of Wind; or mixed with
Turpentin and Nitre. Nor will it be amiss to apply discussive Aromatics to the
soles of the Feet, Belly, and Cod. Such are the Leaves of Celandin the greater,
Bags quilted with aromatic Seeds and Bran; Man's Ordure; Goats Dung boiled in
Mint-Water, or mixed with Man's Urin in the form of a Cataplasm; Horse's Dung
mixed after the same method, with Meal of Barley and Vinegar. Quick-lime-Water
mixed with Spirit of Wine is of excellent use for bathing the Legs, Belly, and
Scrotum, especially when a Gangrene is threatened, by the appearance of Spots.
Cataplasms made of Cockles bruised together with their Shells, and mixed with
Goats-Dung, are particularly recommended by Thonerus. If these Cataplasms prove
uneasy, they may be shifted for aromatic Oils; such as the Oil of Scorpions,
distilled Oil of Juniper, Oil of Bays, Oil of Toads, mixed with the Ointments
Agrippae, Martiatum, etc. Or, an Ointment made of Sulphur, Quicklime, and the
Extracts of sharp Plants. Some commend Bathing, but it is only of use against
Anasarca's.

It remains only to annex a few Recipe's for illustrating the Method of
prescribing.

Take of the Extract of Elaterium, fifteen or twenty grains; Rosin of Jalap,
from two to five grains; Troches Alhandal, one or two grains; distilled Oil of
Juniper, two drops. With Essence of Wormwood make Pills for a Hydropical Purge.
To which we may premise the Tincture, Spirit or Salt of Tartar as a Digestive.

Take of the Conserve of Peach-Flowers, a dram; twelve grains of Mercurius
vitae, mixed with fifteen grains of sweet Mercury; Extract of Elaterium, a
grain or two. With the Syrup of Buckthorn, make a Bolus for one Dose.

Take of the Rob of Juniper, an Ounce and a half; Extract of Steel prepared
with Juice of Apples, half an ounce; Powder of Rhubarb, two or three drams;
with Cinnamon Water make an Electuary for corroborating the Stomac.

Take of Swallow-wort Roots, two ounces; Leaves of Celandin the greater,
Hore-hound and Wormwood, of each a handful; Citron and Orange-peel, of each six
drams; Seeds of the Ash-tree, of Cumin, Fennel, and Annis, of each two or three
drams; Juniper Berries bruised, an ounce and a half; Galangal, Cloves, Ginger,
of each a dram; Salt of Tartar, six drams; infuse them in Wine. Of which, let
the Patient take a Draught frequently.

Take of the Salt of Vine-twigs, or that of Pigeons Dung, of each a dram;
Powder of Toads, two scruples. Make a Powder for two Doses.

Take of the carminative Spirit de tribus, half an ounce; Spirit of
Sal-Armoniac, two drams. Mix. Dose half a dram twice a day.

Take of the Decoction of Camomil Flowers, half a Pound; Man's Urine, three
Ounces; lenitive Electuary, six drams; distilled Oil of Turpentin, a scruple.
Make a Clyster.

Take of the carminative Decoction, six Ounces; Man's Urine, three ounces;
Yest, a Dram; common Salt, a scruple; Honey of Roses, an ounce. Make a Clyster.

Take of Cockles and their Shells bruised, a Pound; Powder of Caraway-Seeds,
two ounces; Goats Dung, an ounce. Make a Cataplasm, to be applied to the Belly
and Cod.

Take of the Ointment of Sowbread, an Ounce; Ointment of Agrippa, half an
ounce; Oil of Scorpions, an Ounce and a half; distilled Oil of Toads, three
drams. Mix for a Liniment, and anoint the Belly frequently.

ART. 3. Of the Yellow, Black, and White Jaundice.
A Jaundice is a cachectic disposition of Body, attended by a preternatural
Color of the Skin; it is caused either by the corruption of the Chyle in the
Stomac; or its vicious fermentation with the Bile and Juice of the Pancreas in
the Duodenum; or by the immediate putrification of the Mass of Blood. The first
cause defiles the Mass of Blood, and taints it with various Recrements
according to the manner of its corruption. Hence Milk curdled in the Stomacs of
Children, Summer-Fruits, Cucumbers, Fish, etc. being converted into a musty
Crudity, will cause a Jaundice, by mixing the corrupt Chyle with the Blood,
which being unfit for nourishment or assimilation, is thrown out in a serous
Vehicle upon the Glandules of the Skin, and sometimes upon internal Glandules.

The Jaundices which follow Fevers, or extreme bleeding, which are attended by
vomiting of yellow corrupt Matter, musty Belchings, Heart-burnings, and
Excrements colored as in a healthy state, seem to arise from this cause, and
are accordingly cured by Vomits, and bitter stomachical Medicines.

The second Cause takes place when an Acid prevails, and the Bile is lazy or
unactive, and either cannot make good its secretion through the Liver, and
consequently recoils into the Blood; or, when separated, stagnates in the
Gallbladder, and settles into Stones, so as to cause an Obstruction of the
Passage: Hence sulphurous strong Liquors, that exalt the Oil of the Bile, and
cramp its active Volatile Salt, are frequently charged with causing a Jaundice.
Sometimes the Convulsions of the neighboring Membranes may contract the
Gallbladder, and so shut up the Passage, upon which account Vomiting,
Colic-pains, Hysteric Passions, and hard Labor in Childbearing, are observed
to introduce this Disease. The prevalency of an Acid in the Duodenum, arising
either from the austere Recrements of the Stomac, or the degeneracy of the
Juice of the Pancreas, will also pervert the Chyle, and consequently the Mass
of Blood. So that the greatest part of Jaundices are wholly owing to a
preternatural corrupt Acid in the Stomac or Duodenum, and the inactivity or
imperfect distribution of the Chyle.

As for the third Cause, viz. The immediate putrefication of the Mass of Blood,
it is occasioned by Poison, birings of Vipers or Mad Dogs, malignant Ulcers,
suppression of the Terms, the Scurvy, etc. And when a Jaundice springs from
this cause, the Stomac, Bile, and Color of the Excrements continue in their
natural state.

Now any of these three Causes will occasion a preternatural color of the
Skin, which always attends the Jaundice. For the Blood being vitiated and
tinctured with corrupt Recrements, precipitats and throws 'em out in a serous
Vehicle upon the Skin, where the miliar Glandules are most plentiful; and these
vicious particles tincture the Skin, according to their various texture. If an
urinous Oil prevail, the Color is yellow; if an Acid from the first Passages,
it becomes green or black, and frequently a yellow Jaundice is converted to
that of a Green or Black Color, by the growing prevalency of the Acid. It Is
true, the Ancients fancied that the Yellow Color proceeded from a redundancy
of Bile, and the Black from a melancholic Humor, imputed to the Spleen. But
Experience teaches us, that the genuin Bile is apt to cause a red Color; that
such Medicines as whet and volatilize the Bile, are proper against this
Disease; that a Yellow Jaundice becomes Black without any influence from the
Spleen, and that there are several Yellow Jaundice's, in which the Bile is not
redundant nor stopped in its passage, as those which proceed from corrupt Chyle
bred in the Stomac, etc.

The Jaundice is called Secondary, when it follows other Diseases; and if it be
accompanied by signs of Concoction, it is Critical; if not, it is Symptomatical.
But if it be independent, and come of it self, it is a Primary Disease; and is
ushered in by these Symptoms. First, a pressing straitning Pain girds the
Breast, weariness possesses the Limbs, a loathing invades the Stomac, the
respiration becomes difficult; and Giddiness, Headaches, and Swoonings
sometimes close up the rear. The Urin at first is pale, afterward (when the
Blood begins to precipitat its Recrements) it becomes thick, obscure, as of a
dark red Color, and dies a Cloth yellow like Saffron. The Whites of the Eyes
being enriched with many little Arteries, appear Yellow; the Mouth is dry, and
frequently molested with a bitter taste, and aversion to Ale. Sometimes a
Fever accompanies a Jaundice, and sometimes it does not. When the Bile is
stopped, the Belly is costive, the Excrements White, and a violent pain molests
the right Hypocondrium, as being supposed to proceed from Stones in the
Gallbladder. In other cases, the Belly is open, and the Excrements represent a
bilious Color. A Jaundice is dangerous when it is Black, or proceeds from a
prevailing Acid, or succeeds to Chronical Diseases, Quartan Fevers,
obstructions of the Liver or Spleen, or stones in the Gallbladder; in which
last case, though cured, it frequently relapses. When the Urin becomes thich and
Black, it prognosticates a happy delivery.

The Cure consists in correcting the Acid and austere Ferment, proceeding from
the Stomac and Intestines: or retrieving the due texture and distribution of
the Bile; and promoting the separation of the heterogeneous Particles. To
obtain these ends, let an Antimonial Vomit be first exhibited. Purgation is
improper, especially when the Vessels of the Gall are straightened, rather than
obstructed; in which, the Vomits themselves are not so useful as in other
cases. If it be needful to clear the Passages, Gum Ammoniac, and Tartar
vitriolated, or some such laxative, will suffice.

Of Specific Alteratives, the filings of Steel, or its Extract prepared with
Juice of Apples, or chalybeat Wine, and prepared Boodstone, which partakes
much of Steel, are much the best; to which we join the Juice, Infusion, or
Decoction of Celandin Roots in Wine; the Essence, Extract, or Decoction of
Hore-hound; the Powder of Colombine-Seeds; the Conserve of the Flowers of
Broom, and St. John's Wort, the Powder of Madder Roots; the Tincture, or
Effence of Swallow-wort; the Decoctions of Silver-weed, Agrimony, Wormwood,
lesser Centory, Southernwood, the five opening Roots, etc. Some recommend the
Decoction of Raisins and Straw-berry-leaves, for ordinary drinking.

Besides the Vegetable Specifics, Earthworms or Woodlice, given in Powder to a
Dram; or the Spirit prepared from 'em; the Spirit and Tincture of Tartar, the
carminative Spirit de tribus, the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, Spirit of Man's
Urine; and the Urine it self drunk with the Juice of Hore-hound; are of noted
efficacy. The Dung of Geese, or that of other Animals, given in Powder to a
dram, is much approved. Some recommend the Stone taken out of the Gall of an
Ox, given to a dram; And the Bezoar Stone; or the Lapis Fulminaris, given to
half a dram. Some order three or four living Lice to be swallowed.

In the declination of the Disease, gentle Laxatives mixed with the above
mentioned Specifics, are allowable, especially Rhubarb given in Powder or
Infusion; or the Infusion of Senna with Salt of Tartar; or the Flowers of
Acacia, or those of the wild Plum-Tree, infused in Wine, or in the ordinary
Drink. In a Black Jaundice, the Extract of black Hellebor, mixed with that of
Steel, and Gum Ammoniac, is very useful.

These are the internal Medicines, proper to be given against a Jaundice, as
being all calculated for sharpening the Bile, subduing Acids, and promoting a
regular chylification: In the use of which, we ought still to continue 'till
the Urin become thick and black.

Externally some apply the Leaves of lesser Centory, or Celandin Roots to the
soles of the Feet; and bathe the Body in hot Water, impregnated with Specific
Plants, in order to open its Pores; or rub it all over with Bags of the Meal of
Barley and Beans dipped in hot Water. Cataplasms of the Leaves of Hore-hound,
Celandin Roots, and Misleto of the Oak, beaten up with Wine and Vinegar, and
applied to the Feet, are of excellent use for big-belly'd Women, who dare not
venture upon the use of internal Specifics.

It remains only to annex a few Examples of Recipe's.

Take of Aloes and Extract of lesser Centory, of each a scruple; Extract of
Troches Alhandal, six grains; Mercurius vitae, two grains. Make Pills for four
Doses.

Take of Columbine Seeds, six drams: With Celandin-Water make an Emulsion; to
which add Powder of Ivory, a dram and a half.

Take of Columbine Seeds in Powder, six drams; Saffron, one dram; Tartar
vitriolat, half a dram. Make a Powder for seven Doses, to be taken in Rhenish
Wine.

Take of chalybeat diaphoretic Antimony, and Turmeric-Roots, of each half a
dram; volatile Salt of Hartshorn, half a scruple. Make a Powder for two Doses.

Take of Madder-roots, and those of Celandin, of each an ounce; Leaves of
Hore-hound, and tops of Wormwood, of each a handful; Salt of Tartar, two drams.
Make a Bag to be infused in Wine.

Take of the Pulp of Raisins, half a Pound; choice Rhubarb, three drams; Tartar
vitriolated, two drams. With Syrup of Cichory with Rhubarb make an Electuary.

ART. 4. Of the French Pox.
THE Symptoms of the French Pox display themselves most in the part, through
which the virulency is first conveyed. If a Nurse be infected by a sucking
Child, her Breasts are first attacked; if the Disease be contracted by lying in
Bed with a fowl Person, the Skin and surface of the Body are the chief place
where its Retainers assemble. If the Embraces of a foul Woman give Being to it,
the Yard, Groin, and adjacent Parts are the first Scene of its tragical
appearance. About two or three days after the Venereal Adventure, a Heat and
Inflammation seizes the Genitals, the Urine scalds, a sharp corroding Matter
issues from the Yard, inflames the Prepuce, and besets it with Pushes, which in
tract of time degenerat into Ulcers; Bubo's, or hard swellings appear in the
Groin; Red yellowish Spots are observed in the Belly, Breast, Back, and
Privities, which when pressed, assume a whitish Color, but quickly retrieve
the former. In process of time, the Wheals or Ulcers spread over the Body,
especially the Forehead, Face and Palate; their Color is livid, inclining to a
Yellow; sometimes they are dry, scaly, and of an unequal surface; at other
times they void sharp corrupt Matter, which frequently corrodes the spungy
Bones of the Nose and Palate. The Bones are covered with hard stony Concretions,
and the Limbs tortured with violent Nightpains, but so as that the Joints are
free; and in inveterat cases, become corrupt and rotten. Little Swellings
called Condylomata, cover the Breech, and crusty Warts invade many parts of the
Body. The Palms of the Hands, and Soles of the Feet are chopp'd and molested
with a burning Heat; the Hairs fall off from the Head, Eyelids, etc. the Palate
of the Throat being relaxated or corroded, alters the Voice; the Ears tingle;
and in fine, the whole Body becomes mangy and sordid, and, by degrees, moulders
away. The Symptoms of Women differ not from those of Men, excepting what
regards the form of their Genitals.

The material cause of the Pox is a corrosive acid Ferment joined to a viscid
Vehicle, which affects chiefly the glandulous and nervous parts; it depraves
the Lymph and Serum, the nutritious Juice of the Bones, and the dewy Liquors of
the whole Body; it corrodes the solid parts; twitches the Membrans, and is
every way qualified for being the Bane of Life, and Ruin of Mankind. It Is very
infectious, and ofttimes propagats it self among Bed-fellows, by Sweat or
Matter issuing from the Ulcers, by kissing when the Lips are ulcerated, by
hereditary Succession, and many other ways, besides that of perfect Enjoyment.

If it be inveterat, or hereditary, or return after Salivation; if attended by
the Scurvy, or obstructions of the Bowels, or troublesome Catarrhs; and if the
Bones of the Head are corroded; it is not easily cured. Dry hot Constitutions
are more in danger than those whose Bodies are moist and open. The forwardness
and Suppuration of the Bubo's facilitats the Cure. If the Blood drawn forth
become florid; and free of those livid bluish Spots that use to appear in its
surface, and withal be not over serous, it is a testimony of a perfect Cure.

The Cure of the French Pox, which consists in attenuating the viscid Humors,
correcting and extinguishing the Acid, and evacuating both, is obtained either
by sudorific Decoctions, or mercurial Salivations. The former are calculated
for a recent Pox, and bilious, scorbutic, or melancholic Constitutions, to whom
Mercury is so pernicious; and ought to be preceded by Purgatives. The most
noted Ingredients are Guajacum and Sassaperilla. The Dose of the former ought
to be enlarged for cold Constitutions; and that of the latter, for such as are
hot. To these two I choose to add Juniperwood.

The other Specifics are Burdock Roots, Soap-wort, Sassafras, Box wood, Mastic
wood, Oak wood, Arsmart, etc. The common Vehicle for sudorific Decoctions is
Water; but when the Stomac is weak, we may add Wine toward the end of the
Decoction. For emaciated Persons, some boil 'em in Whey. When these Sudorifics
are first used, we ought not to be too hasty in forcing the Patient to sweat;
but to wait some days 'till the Humors are gradually prepared, and the Body
incline to it. Besides, if they happen to operat more by Urine, than by Stool,
it is not proper to recall the Humors that move that way; nay on the contrary,
we ought to add Diuretics, and endeavor to discharge the virulent matter by
the Passage to which Nature directs. When the Humors are sufficiently prepared
and disposed for sweating, the Patient may be moderatly covered up, and the
Virtue of the Sudorific promoted by drinking warm Broth (the Decoction it self
being also drunk warm) or kindling Spirit of Wine; and while he continues thus
to sweat daily, let a Purge be exhibited every seventh day.

Take of the shavings of Guajacum, six ounces; the rinds of Guajacum, two
ounces; Sassaperilla roots, two ounces; shavings of Sassafras, an ounce; quick
Silver purified by the addition of an Alcali, and Antimony in coarse Powder,
both tied in a Bag, of each a Pound. Macerat them in common Water for forty
eight Hours; then boil them till two thirds be evaporated. Some add Soap-wort,
Hyssop, Speedwell, Liquorice Roots, Raisins, Burdock Roots, Fennel Seeds, etc.
The Dose of such a Decoction is from four to eight ounces, according to the
circumstances of the Patient: To be taken only in the Morning for two or three
days without sweating. But after these preparatory Days are over, let the
Patient be put into a dry or wet Bagnio, according as his Constitution is moist
or dry, about an hour after taking a Dose. And after an Hour's sweating, let
him retire to a Bed, where the Sweat may finish its progress of its own accord.
But in the mean while the Sweat must be carefully rubbed off, and the Sheets or
Clothes shifted after sweating, and well washed and air'd before they be used
again. This method must be persisted in for four or six Weeks, till all the
Symptoms disappear, and the Disease be totally rooted out. In the Interim let
the Diet be thin and dry. A second Decoction of the same Ingredients may be
given for ordinary drinking; and Raisins, or some such light thing, for Supper.

If the Disease be inveterat, it will be needful to raise a Salivation by the
use of Mercury; since sudorific Decoctions cannot of themselves reach the Cure,
though they may still be useful during the progress of the Salivation, for
attenuating and preparing the Humors: But they must be so ordered, that they do
not procure Sweat. The best preparation of Mercury for internal use, in order
to salivat, is the red Precipitat from Quicksilver dissolved in the Spirit of
Nitre and Alum, given to four grains, and repeated twice or thrice. Sweet
Mercury is rather a Laxative, unless it be fixed by frequent Sublimation, and
mixed with Yelks of Eggs. But the most effectual way of procuring a Salivation,
is that of inunction with mercurial Ointments. As,

Take of Quicksilver purified, six ounces; Hogs Fat, not salted, a pound. Mix
them exactly and add of the Gelly of Ox Feet, half on ounce; Turpentine, three
ounces; distilled Oil of Turpentine, an ounce, make an Ointment. With which
anoint the Soles of the Feet, Palms of the Hands, Wrists, Ancles, Elbows,
Knees, and Backbone, from the Shoulders down to the Os sacrum, twice a Day for
three successive Days. Two ounces of the Ointment will suffice for each
inunction, and about the fourth Day if the Salivation advance one inunction
more will serve. If it do not, we must continue to anoint; and if all prove
ineffectual, we ought to observe nicely where the Impediment lies. If the
Stagnation and Viscidity of the Humors about the Breast retard the work, let a
Vomit be exhibited; If want of strength and Spirits, let the sudorific
Decoctions be Administered. The Salivation being obtained must be continued till
the Saliva become foetid, and viscous, and apt to fall to the bottom in a
Vessel full of Water, or stick to its sides. If the Salivation exceed its due
bounds, let Opiats, Clysters, and Purgatives be used, as also Gold both held in
the Mouth, and given inwardly.

After the Salivation is over it will be requisite to shift the Bed-Cloaths and
wearing Clothes, and to continue the use of the Decoctions of Woods. Which if
the Salivation was imperfect may recall the Nocturnal Pains, by driving the
remaining Acid, dissolved by the Mercury, into the external Parts, but their
continued use, with that of Mercury will overcome 'em. Purgation is also proper
after the Salivation.

Before the Commencement of the Cure, as well by a Salivation as by Sweating,
it is not amiss to cleanse the first Passages by Vomits and Purges, that so the
humors may be more pliable, and the troublesome Symptoms of the Breast
prevented. If the Pox be inveterat, or if the virulent Matter be fixed in the
external Parts, one or two Purges will suffice; since we ought to be cautious
of recalling the humors to the Center. When the Matter is joined to the fluid
Juices, repeated Purgation is of use. For which end, Coloquyntida and sweet
Mercury are the topping Ingredients. As,

Take of the extract of Black Hellebor, and sweet Mercury, of each fifteen
Grains; Scammony Sulphurat, and extract of Troches Alhandal, of each two
grains. With Essence of Fumitory or that of Woods; Make Pills.

Take of the Conserve of Fumitory, a dram; Rosin of Jalap, Sulphurat Scammony,
of each six grains; Turbith Mineral, four grains. Make a Bolus.

Some add Purgatives to the Sudorific Woods; as likewise volatile Salts, urinous
Spirits, and Cinnabar of Antimony, together with the extracts and distilled
Oils of Woods. As,

Take of the shavings of Guajacum, four scruples; Diaphoretic Sulphur of
Antimony, a sctuple; volatile Salt of Vipers, twelve grains. Make a Powder for
two Doses. Or,

Take of Matthiolus his Quintessence, half an ounce; Spirit of Venice Treacle,
a dram; Clyssus of Antimony, half a dram; Spirit of Guajacum, two drams. Mix
for a Dose, to be poured into each draught of the Sudorific Decoction.

Before we take leave of this Subject, it will be requisite to consider the
Symptoms, and account for their particular Cures. The first that offers it self
is the Clap, or virulent running of the Reins. This Symptom appears frequently
by it self without the Pox, but if it be not speedily cured degenerats into it.
The cause of it is some sharp Miasma's proceeding from Ulcers in the Womb,
which in the time of Coition insinuat themselves through the Urethra and enlarged
Pores of the Yard, into the Prostatae, and by fermenting corrupt their watery
Juice, which in time becomes Corrosive, Ulcerats the Glandules, and Excoriats
the Urethra and Prepuce. Hence the Symptoms of a Clap are, a violent pain about
the Root of the Yard, where these Glandules are seated; a continual Efflux of
discolored matter, as being first yellow, then green and blue; the
Inflammation and ofttimes Ulceration of the Nut of the Yard, the Corrosion of
the Urethra, followed by Caruncles, an insufferable Heat of Urine and a
squeezing Pain girding the Yard, especially in the Nightime, or when it
attempts Erection. If a Clap continue long it Excoriats and Wastes the
Glandules, and sometimes the malign ferment reaches the Stones, and causes
their Swellings and Bubo's.

The first step toward the Cure, is to cleanse the Body by purging with
Coloquintida, the extract of black Hellebor and sweet Mercury, or rather the
green precipitat prepared with Quicklime; which though it may seem at first to
exasperat the Symptoms, yet it lays the Foundation of the Cure. After
Evacuation we proceed to Balmy, cleansing, and healing Ingredients, in regard
of the Ulcer of the Prostratae. Such are the distilled Oil of Turpentine, the
Turpentine Balsam of Sulphur, joined to Quercetanus's Clap Water, the Juice of
Lemons mixed with Spirit of Turpentine and Camphyr, the Balsam prepared of
Sugar of Lead and Oil of Turpentine, Oil of Juniper, extract of Tormentil,
Rosin of Guajacum prepared with Tincture of Tartar, the Decoction of
Quicksilver in Water, the Balsam of Peru, and above all that called Capaivi,
or its Essence prepared with Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine. Some commend the
infusion of Cantharides in Wine. To these we may add the Bone of a Cuttle,
Diaphoretic Antimony, Chalybeat Bezoar, and whatever subdues a prevailing Acid.
If the Infection have already reached the Blood, it will be needful to
administer Decoctions of Woods, and the above mentioned sudorifics, mixed with
the Essences of Woods, and Tincture of Coral.

Take of Turbith mineral, six or eight grains; With Conserve of Roses make a
Bolus.

Take of Extractum Catholicum, fifteen grains; the green precipitat Mercury,
six grains; extract of Troches Alhandal, two grains; with the Essence of Woods,
or distilled Oil of Amber make Pills.

Take of the extract of Tormentil, an ounce; Sugar of Lead, half an ounce;
Camphyr, two drams. With distilled Oil of Turpentine. Make Pills.

Take of the Balsam of Sulphur, prepared with Oil of Turpentine, two drams;
Balsam of Capaivi, a dram. Mix Dose fifteen drops, twice a Day.

Externally for cleansing the Ulcers, we inject Quicklime Water, in which
Aloe, Myrrh, Honey of Roses, Sugar of Lead, and sweet Mercury are dissolved. If
the Ulcers tend to a Cancer we add Vnguentum Aegyptiacum; or if an Ulcer appear
in the Nut of the Yard, we wash it with a solution of sublimat Mercury in the
same Water. If the Testicles are inflamed, we apply Cataplasms of the Meal of
Beans and Cuminseeds boiled in Vinegar and Water, and mixed with Litharge; or
anoint 'em with a Liniment of the Balsam of Sulphur, Oil of Cummin, and
Ointment of Marshmallows; and if any hardness remain, discuss it with a
Plaster of Gum Ammoniac and the Plaster of Hemlock. The Plaster de Ranis
with Mercury is of excellent use for other places; but for the Testicles it is
not so proper, for fear the Mercury should extinguish their ferment. If the
Prepuce be inflamed, foment it with the Phlegm of Vitriol, or Dissolution of
Sugar of Lead in Lime Water.

A Clap in Women is cured after the same manner, and attended by Symptoms of
the same Nature.

The next Symptom we take notice of, is that of Bubo's or Glandulous swellings,
occasioned by the S^agnation of viscid Lymph. Their suppuration ought to be
promoted by applying Sala's Magnetic Plaster, or Toads soaked in Vinegar, or
the Plaster de Ranis with Mercury, softened with Oil of Guajacum or foetid Oil
of Tartar, or the Plaster of Hemlock, mixed with Soap. When the Bubo's are
sufficiently softened, let 'em be opened, with a Caustic, or a Lance, and kept
long open by applying the Balsam of St. John's wort, with Oil of Tartar, and
the Plaster Opodeldoch. If either the Suppuration or Cleansing advance but
slowly, Cupping-glasses are of use, for attenuating the stubborn Matter. But
after all, if there be any ground for suspecting a Cancer, we must lay aside
the thoughts of Suppuration, and endeavor the Cure internally, by administering
first the Decoction of Guajacum, then Purgatives, and in the last place the
Spirit and Salt of Vipers: And if these prove ineffectual, by the universal
Method for the Pox.

As for the Pushes and Pimples that attend the Pox, it is convenient to wash
'em, with the Decoction of Woods, and Oil of Tartar; and touch 'em gently with
some Spirit impregnated with the Tincture of Copper, or with the following
Mixture. Take of Plantane Water, six ounces; Sublimat Mercury, four scruples;
Alum, half an ounce. Mix and apply with a Feather. This mixture is also proper
for the Swellings of the fundament; unless they be very large, in which case we
Root 'em out with Ligatures, or with a Knife, and apply the mixture to the
remains. Warts are removed by applying Oil of Vitriol or Aqua Fortis.

The Ulcers usually disappear after Salivation. Otherwise they are cleans'd by
applying the Solution of Sublimat Mercury in Plantane Water, or an Ointment of
common Oil, Ceruss, Red Lead, Sublimat Mercury and white Wax. After they are
sufficiently cleans'd, as the laudable Color of the Pus and sides of the Wound
will discover, we apply the Decoction of Woods and vulnerary Plants, with Sugar
of Lead and Lime Water, and the Plaster Diasulphuris with that of Norinberg.
The external Ulcers of the Yard are treated after the same manner. If they are
internal, we inject the abovementioned Liquors, or put in a Wax Candle covered
with the foregoing Ointment. For those of the Womb, the same method will
suffice. As for Ulcers of the Mouth and Palate, we must take care that the
Caustic when applied be not swallowed down; if they are seated in the upper
side of the Palate, we inject the healing Decoctions through the Nose. Such are
the Decoctions of Plantane, Self-heal, Scabious, of each a handful; red Roses,
two little handfuls; Sarsaperilla, an ounce; Guajacum and red Sanders, of each
six drams; Sumac, half an ounce. To two pound and a half of the strained
Liquor, we add two ounces of the Syrup of dry Roses, and as much of that of
Mulberries. The Ulcers of the Nose ought to be first washed with emollient
Decoctions and Oils, by reason of their Crust; and then with the Astringent
Vulnerary Decoctions, mixed with Alum and Lime Water.

The Chops of the Hands and Feet are washed with the Decoction of Woods, sweet
Mercury, and Quicklime; to which if the Chops be hard, we add emollient
Ingredients; after washing we anoint 'em with Sublimat or sweet Mercury, and
the Oil of Tartar, incorporated with Vnguentum Enulatum.

If the Bones be Rotten, we scrape 'em with a Knife, or, if that method prove
successless, we apply a hot Iron, and then wash 'em with Spirit of Wine. The
Bones of the Palate must be covered with a Plate of Silver or Gold. For pains in
the Bones remaining after the general Cure, we apply the following Plaster.
Take of Vigo's Plaster, with a quadruple quantity of Mercury, an ounce and a
half; Expressed Oil of Nutmegs, and Opium dissolved in Vinegar, of each half an
ounce; thickened juice of Tobacco, and common Cinnabar, of each an ounce;
Saffron, six drams. With Turpentine make a Plaster. If a swelling remain after
the Pains are over. apply Clouts dipped in fresh Butter boiled in Wine till it
Evaporat.

The hard stony Concretions that frequently beset the Bones yield to a
Salivation, interlac'd with preparations from Vipers and Antimony. Externally
we apply Vigo's Plaster, with a quadruple quantity of Mercury, softened with
the distilled Oil of Guajacum, or the following Composition. Take of Diachylon,
with Gums, and Oil of Olives, of each four ounces; new Wax, an ounce; black
Pepper, half an ounce; common Salt, two drams; Spanish Flies, a dram;
Mustard Seed, a scruple; thickened Honey, two scruples: Make a Plaster to be
applied above a piece of very fine Linen, and tied fast to the part, the
Linen underneath being changed twice a day. If these hard swellings are very
painful, apply a Liniment of the Oil of Turpentin, distilled Oil of Guajacum,
Quicksilver and Opium: Some apply a Plate of Lead covered with Mercury; or a
Plate of malleable Mercury prepared thus. Take of Lead a Pound, and melt it;
while it is yet liquid, put a Bar of Iron into it 'till it begin to thicken.
Then shift the Iron, and put an ounce of Quicksilver into its place, where
'twill congeal. After it is thus congealed, separate it with a Knife, and boil
it thrice in a Pound of Oil, till the Oil be set on fire every time.

If this Method prove ineffectual, apply blistering-Plaisters, and cut Issues
above the Part, or open the Tumor with an actual Caustic, and keep it open for
a long time.

The Scab and Tetter that sometimes attend the Pox, are removed by touching 'em
with the solution of sublimat Mercury in Arsmart-Water; and applying the Oil of
Tartar per deliquium, with Hogs-fat.

The Headaches are cured by applying Vigo's Plaster, with Mercury, Castor,
and Laudanum Opiatum; or by trepanation, if the Venereal virulency be
extinguished. The tingling in the Ears is cured by injecting the Infusion of
Guajacum, Castor and Mint in Asses Urine, or the following Essence.

Take of Sassafras Wood and Lavender-Flowers, of each a Dram; Guajacum-Bark and
Castor, of each half a dram; Cloves a scruple; Spirit of Wine, three Ounces.
Digest for some Days, and strain the Essence for use.

ART. 6. Of the Hypocondriac and Scorbutic Diseases.
There Is a sort of Cachexy that frequently reigns in our Northern Climats,
whose Symptoms appearing mostly in the Hypocondria, have Christened it the
Hypocondriac Evil. And when its Symptoms are very fierce and exalted, it is
entitled the Scurvy; a Name given it by the Saxons in North-Germany, who are
most liable to it. The better part of Authors upon this Subject, being amused
with its Symptoms and Effects, have vainly fancied to establish its original
Seat in several Bowels, that are only accidentally concerned. For if they
traced it to its state of Infancy, and first Beginning, they had pitched upon
the Stomac for the place of its Nativity; and the Acid Viscous Crudities that a
faulty Digestion occasions, for its Causes.

For our further satisfaction in this matter, we shall briefly run over its
Symptoms: And if we find that they owe their Being to an Acid Crudity in the
Stomac, shall reckon that we have made our point good: In the first place, the
Appetit is oft-times over-keen in Hypochondriac Persons, their Digestion being
weak, and followed by Convulsive or Weighty pains in the Stomac, Belchings,
Wind and noise, especially in the left side of the Belly, where the Colon is
straightened; they are always Costive, and Laxatives operate better in them than
proper Purgatives: If an Artificial or Natural Vomiting happen, they throw up
Acid Matter, which stupifies the Teeth, and corrodes a Copper Vessel, so as to
render it rusty: After eating, they are oft-times seized with a gnawing pain in
the Stomach, reaching along the Back, from the lower part to the Neck of the
Gullet, (which some miscall Nephritic Pains) as also by sudden flushings in the
Face; wringing pains in the Guts, palpitations of the Heart, perturbation of
Mind, and a difficulty of breathing, occasioned either by viscous Crudities
distending the Stomac, or Convulsions of the Midriff and Muscles of the Breast,
or Wind in the Abdomen hindering the descent of the Midriff. In process of time,
hard Tumors sometimes infest the Intrals, and the convulsive Contractions of
the Fibers of the Branches of the Arteria Caeliaca cause beatings about the
Loins. While their Stomac is empty, they are apt to be giddy, and dull; they are
liable to Headaches, loss of Memory, Fear, Grief, awkward Dreams, and vain
Imaginations. Their Pulse is very inconstant, and all their Symptoms liable to
periodical Exasperations. Frequently they are sensible (as it were) of Fumes
rising upward from the Belly, and the Paroxysm resembles a Hysterical Fit. In
the Paroxysm the Color and Consistence of their Urine is inconstant; but when
it is over, returns to a natural Order. These are the Symptoms of Hypochondriac
Persons; but all of 'em are rarely to be seen in one Person. The most certain
Symptoms that always attend, are Gripings and Wind in the Guts, a weak Stomac,
Costiveness and perturbation of the Head.

The Symptoms being thus premised, let us now enquire after their Cause. The
first Cause is a vicious Acid in the Stomac, enlarging the Appetit, but unfit
for Digestion. Hence ensues an Acid Crudity in the first Passages, which
depraves the Crasis of the Blood, prevents the due separation of volatile
Spirits upon which the Lymph becomes Acid, and the Bile inactive.

These are the sources of all the preceding Symptoms, since Wind, Noise,
griping in the Guts, and costiveness, are the natural result of a viscous. Acid
in the first Passages; as flushings in the Face arise from its effervescence
with the Bile. The Convulsions of the nervous Membranes in several parts of the
Body, are the effect of its irritation; its Crudity impairs the due
fermentation of the Blood, and causes a palpitation of the Heart, and
difficulty of breathing; it depraves the Nutritious Juice of the Bowels, which
settles into hard Swellings, and occasions a degeneracy and austerity in the
Spirits; hence Fear, Melancholy, irregular Thoughts, and uncooth emotions ensue.

The remore causes that promote Crudities, are acid Liquors, or salt Victuals,
or such as are dried in Smoke; since both partake of the Acid Spirit of Salt or
Soot: Want of motion to promote Digestion, and the speedy assimilation of
Chyle; nocturnal Study or Care exhausting the Spirits, impoverishing the Blood,
and rendering the Lymph Acid. So much for the Symptoms and Causes of the
Hypocondriac Disease.

When this depravation, derived from Acid Crudities in the Stomac, is carried
so high, that the Blood, Lymph, and all the Juices of the Body are notably
perverted, and the vicious Acid becomes volatile, malignant, and apt to multiply
its influence by Contagion or Hereditary Succession, it is styled the Scurvy;
and is generally attended by such a numberless train of various Symptoms, that
it is customary to charge it with every uncommon Symptom even of other Diseases.
The peculiar Qualities of this scorbutical Ferment, are these. 1. An aptness to
attack the Glandules, and pervert their Lymph. 2. A mortal Enmity to the
nervous Systeme; as appears by the following enumeration of its Symptoms.

Scorbutical Persons are troubled with a weariness, weakness, sense of weight,
and a dull obscure pain in the Limbs. Their Appetit is either too fierce, or
quite dejected: Their Gums are liable to Excrescences, Swellings, and Ulcers;
and when rubbed, void either a saltish, bloody, or serous humor; their Teeth
are loose and corroded; their Mouth stinks; their Spittle is very salt, and
sometimes plainly Acid, especially in a Morning; they are oft-times molested
with Nocturnal Sweats; and Red, Yellow, or Black Spots upon the Arms and Legs,
sometimes as small as Flea-bites, sometimes as large as a Crown-piece; and
sometimes the Limbs are beset with rough scaly Swellings like Measles; their
Skin oft-times itches, and when it is scratched, becomes red, or tends to a
sordid Ulcer.

Their Urin is high colored, or precipitats a red sandy fleshcolour'd
sediment, or fastens red friable Sand upon the sides and bottom of the Urinal;
a fat Crust or Skin swims on the top, and if looked upon side-ways, appears
parti-colour'd like a Peacock's Tail; after the Urine is thrown out, the Urinal
retains a blueish Color, which is not easily washed off.

They are infested with a difficulty of Breathing, and wandering Pains gird the
Loins and Back, and wring, nay, sometimes distend and harden the Belly; and are
oft-times followed by red Pimples in the Skin, which disappear suddenly.
Sometimes they are seized with nocturnal Pains in their Limbs, shifting from
the Arms to the Feet, and e contra. After violent wringing Pains, their
external parts frequently become paralytic. Sometimes Convulsions and
Hysterical Symptoms seize 'em. Sometimes settled fixed pains invade the Head and
Limbs, especially in the Nightime; and resemble those of the French Pox.
Sometimes their Legs are infested by hard stony Concretions that are void of
pain, unless they walk: The Stomac is frequently provoked to vomiting; and
their Guts to bloody Stools, which are voided without gripings, and after the
other Excrements, and so are easily distinguished from the Bloody Flux or the
Piles. They are also liable to frequent effusions of blue or greenish Blood
from other parts of the Body; and to a St. Anthony's Fire in their Legs, which
if indiscreetly managed, becomes a Gangrene or a malign Ulcer. Their Pulse is
unequal frequently very small, and oft-times intermits. When the Disease is
inveterat, they are subject to Catarrhs, Defluxions, Excoriations, Ulcers, and
Consumptions.

From these premises we draw this Conclusion, that the immediate cause of the
Scurvy is a volatile saline Acid, which irritats the Nerves and Membranes,
sharpens the Lymph, Debauches the innate Spirits of the parts, and perverts the
equal temperature of the Blood. The remote Causes are the Sea-Air impregnated
with salin Acid Vapors, salt and viscous Food, Laziness, Weakness of Digestion,
Infection, a hereditary Conveyance, and the influence of Chronical Diseases.
Charleton distinguishes a hot Scurvy proceeding from a Sulphur and a fixed
Salt, from that which is Cold, and springs from an Acid; as likewise Willis,
who refers the cause of hot and cold Scurvy's to the prevalency of Sulphur or
Salt. But all these differences proceed only from the various Constitutions of
Patients, thwarting or promoting the efforts of the scorbutical Cause.

A Scurvy frequently joins it self to other Distempers, in so much, that
without a particular regard to it, they cannot be cured. The Signs that argue
for the presence of it, are these,

1. The Heat and tickling of the Gums, and effusion of salt, watery, or stinking
Blood.

2. A purple Half Moon under the Eyes.

3. Little red Spots like Flea-bites on the Thighs and Legs.

4. The weakness of the Knees.

5. The stinking of the Mouth, especially when the Stomac is empty.

6. Sudden and unaccountable Flushings all over the Body.

7: The flame-Colour of the Urine, without a Fever; or red friable Sand
sticking to the bottom or sides of the Urinal.

If the Scurvy be recent it admits of a Cure. If Inveterat, it requires a
continued Use of proper Medicines for a long time; and frequently terminates in
fatal Dropsies, Cachexies, Obstructions of the Bowels, or Consumptions. If a
difficulty of breathing attend it, it is very dangerous, and frequently finishes
the Tragedy in a Swoon. Costiveness and suppression of the Piles or wonted
Evacuations are bad Omens. A weak and unequal Pulse is less to be feared than
in other Diseases. Black Urine, without a Fever, is well looked upon, as being
a sign of the solution of the Disease. Red Spots are a good Sign. But Black,
Livid, or Blue ones and Ulcers are very bad. Night-sweats with florid
eruptions, frequently give relief. The Symptoms of a Scurvy are oft-times
mutually exchanged: Thus wandering pains are shifted for a fixed Headache; the
Colic and Convulsions for a Palsy, or inconstant Swellings; grievous pains for
a Lethargy, etc. A hot Scurvy, or such as proceeds from bad Diet, and has fixed
Symptoms; is not easily Cured. A Looseness attending a Scurvy is an unlucky
Companion. In fine, all Prognostics relating to a Scurvy are very uncertain;
for sometimes dismal Symptoms disappear on a sudden, and meeker Signs are
surpised by Death.

The Cure of Hypocondriac and Scorbutical Diseases consists in Correcting and
Evacuating the Crudities of the first Passages, fortifying the Stomac,
retrieving the due Crasis of the Blood, and restoring all wonted Evacuations to
their former Course. In order to compass these ends, let the following Rules be
heedfully minded.

1. Blood-letting and Issues are of no direct use. Sometimes indeed,
indirectly, a Scorbutical Catarrh may reap Benefit from the latter; as the
Headache and fixed Pains in the Legs, may justify the former.

2. Diuretics are always proper, and a plentiful evacuation of Urine was ever
observed to give relief. In the beginning of the Disease gentle Diuretics are
best, for fear of draining the Morbifical cause out of the first Passages into
the Vessels. Such are the volatile and fixed Alcali's, viz. Arcanum Duplicatum,
Spirit of Earth Worms, Tincture of Tartar, Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, etc.

3. Dry Vomits given in large Doses, ushered in by Digestives; and in case of
Costiveness, proper Clysters; are the Basis of the Cure of the Hypocondriac
Disease. In a formed Scurvy they are improper, as being apt to stir up and
exasperate the sharp scorbutical Juices.

4. Purgatives waken the Symptoms of the Belly, and upon that account are
justly avoided. But Laxatives are very useful.

5. Attenuating Gums and other such Ingredients, are always useful for cutting
the viscous Humors that give Being to the Hypocondriac Diseases

6. The Belly ought to be always kept open.

7. When Aperients, by opening and unlocking the Obstructions of the Bowels,
cause a Flux or Dysentery; let the Guts be corroborated by Elixir Proprietatis,
Tincture of Coral, etc.

8. Chalybeats and dry Absorbents are not always of equal use in the
Hypocondriac Disease; for, if the Bowels are molested with hard Swellings,
moist, liquid Aperients are preferable.

9. Antiscorbutics are useful against the Hypocondriac Disease as well as
against the Scurvy.

10. Bilious Constitutions, or such as are ruled by a Volatile sharp Alcali, are
oft-times offended by volatile Anti-scorbutics, and oily Aromatics. Wherefore
it is advisable in that case, to qualify the former with Spirit of Nitre or
Whey; and shift the latter for meagre thin Salts, and Chalybeat Absorbent
Powders.

11. Vinegar is pernicious. But the acid Juices of Fruits are allowable.

12. Volatile, sharp Antiscorbutics, ought always to be ushered in, and
sometimes interlac'd, with chalybeat Powders, or alcalin Salts.

13. When the scorbutical Acid is corrected, and the Stomac able to digest,
Milk mixed with Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, or that of Scurvy Grass, is of
excellent use; it tempers the Acid, qualifies the sharp Salt, and bedews the
nervous parts. For Hypocondriac Persons it is not so proper as Whey.

14. Sweet Mercury is fitly mixed with Laxatives for Hypocondriacal Persons;
but it is pernicious to such as are Scorbutical, though Antimony be very useful.

Having premised these cautionary Rules, we proceed to the Method of Cure. In
which, digestive Preparatives lead the van. Such are Cetrach, Hyssop, lesser
Centory, Sassafras, Myrrh, China-root, and the fixed Salts of Plants;
Crab's-eyes, Castor, Amber, Coral, Steel, and Absorbent Chalybeat Powders;
excepting the Powders of Stones partaking of Steel, such as Boodstone, the
Lodestone, etc. since the number of their astringent earthy parts surmounts
that of the Chalybeat, and joins with the Acid in the first Passages into a
styptic Body, causing Costiveness. From the above mentioned Ingredients, we
draw several Preparations, such as the Extract of Steel; the tinctures of the
Vitriol of Steel, of Tartar, and of the dross of the Regulus of Antimony; The
Hypocondriac Digestive Salt, ( viz. the Caput mortuum of the Spirit of
Sal-Armoniac) Tartar vitriolated; the Terra Foliata of Tartar, (prepared by
impregnating Salt of Tartar with Vinegar, then dissolving it in spirit of Wine,
and drawing off the Spirit) Poterius's Antihectic, Chalybeat Bezoar,
Elixir-Proprietatis prepared without an Acid, and especially Arcanum
duplicatum. For Example,

Take of Fennel and Mint-water, of each an Ounce and a half; the solution of
Steel, with the Juice of Apples, half an Ounce; Magistery of Coral prepared
with the Juice of Citrons, a dram; Syrup of Orange-peel, six drams. Mix, and
exhibit two or three spoonfuls Morning and Evening, for correcting a
Hypocondriac Acid.

Take of the aperient Crocus of Steel, half a dram; Arcanum duplicatum, a
scruple; Salt of Wormwood, half a scruple. Make a Powder for three Doses.

Take of the aperitive Tincture of Steel, two drams; Spirit of Scurvy Grass, a
dram; Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, half a dram. Mix. Dose fifty drops.

After these preparatives are used for a Week or two, it is time to administer a
Vomit of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, mixed with the Spirit of
Scurvy Grass. Or thus,

Take of Dorncrellius's Anti-scorbutic Water, two Ounces; spirit of
Scurvy Grass, half a dram; emetic Tartar, three or four grains; Extract of
Steel, half a scruple. Mix, etc.

Next in order are gentle Laxatives, especially in a hot Scurvy; such are the
Pills of Ammoniac, or those of Tartar mixed with sweet Mercury, which is of
excellent use against Costiveness: For Resinous Purgatives ought to be avoided,
as being endowed with an astringent quality. Wherefore Aloes, whose Gummy part
is of good use, ought always to be dissolved in a watery Vehicle, that so its
Rosin may be separated. Sometimes we mix Laxatives with Specific Alteratives,
and continue their use for some time. And whet 'em if there be occasion, with
Coloquintida or Troches Alhandal. Raisins, Prunes, Tamarinds, and ripe sweet
Apples, or their expressed Juice, are of great efficacy against Costiveness:
But Sugar and other sweet things ought to be carefully avoided. Rhubarb or
Cream of Tartar, sharpened with Powder of Jalap, are recommended to such as are
of a juicy Constitution. As for the forms of Receipts, they are as follows.

Take of Quercetanus's Pills, called Melanagogae, a Dram and a half; Extract of
Senna Leaves, half a Dram; Rosin of Jalap, a dram and six grains; Tartar
vitriolated, thirteen grains; volatile salt of Amber, a scruple; the Seeds of
Mustard, Scurvy Grass and Garden Cresses, of each half a dram. With some
Antiscorbutic Water, make Pills. This is the Composition of Timaeus his
Antiscorbutic Pills, of which, a scruple or half a dram is a Dose.

Take of the Pills of Hiera with Agaric, twelve grains; Gum Ammoniac, dissolved
in Vinegar, half a scruple; Scammony sulphurated, two grains. With the Essence
of Steel make Pills.

Take of Quercetanus's Pills of Ammoniac, a scruple; sweet Mercury, fifteen
grains; Extract of Troches Alhandal, two grains; the distilled Oil of Caraways,
two drops. With the Essence of Gum Ammoniac make Pills. The Vitriol of Steel
calcined white, and the Extract of Steel prepared with Juice of Apples may be
added by Turns. The Extract of black Hellebor is also a proper Basis for Pills.

Take of the Aperitive Crocus of Steel, a scruple; Scammony sulphurated, and
Salt of Tartar, of each five grains. Make a Powder.

Take of the fresh Leaves of Scurvy Grass, Garden Cresses, and Rose-mary, of
each a handful; fresh Horse Radish Roots, an ounce and a half; picked Senna
Leaves, an ounce; choice Rhubarb, half an ounce; Crude black Hellebor, three
drams; Juniper Berries, six drams; Cinnamon and Galangal, of each a dram and a
half; Salt of Tartar, three drams. Tie 'em in a Bag to be infused in Wormwood
Wine, of which let the Patient take a draught Morning and Evening.

Take of Wormwood, three handfuls; lesser Centory, two handfuls; black Hellebor
Roots, three ounces; Polypody of the Oak, an ounce and a half; Bark of the
Ashtree and white Tartar, of each half an ounce; filings of Steel, three drams.
Sprinkle 'em with nine Drops of the dulcified Spirit of Nitre, and tie 'em in a
Bag to be infused in Wine.

Take of picked Senna Leaves, two drams; Polypody Roots, three drams; black
Hellebor Roots, two scruples; Ginger, half a scruple; Salt of Tartar, a
scruple; infuse 'em for the space of a Day in Whey, then boil 'em gently. To
three ounces of the strained Liquor, add of the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, a
scruple; Syrup of Apples, three drams; Mix for one Dose.

Take of Corants, two ounces; Bruise and boil them in Water; adding while the
Water is yet hot, picked Senna Leaves, three drams; Violet Flowers, three little
handfuls; Cream of Tartar, a dram. Let 'em stand for some time in a hot place,
then strain the Liquor for use.

Take of the Pulp of Corants, three ounces; Arcanum Duplicatum, a dram;
purified Sal-Armoniac, and the Powder called Diatrion Pipereon, of each two
Scruples. With the Syrup of Apples make an Electuary for nine or twelve Doses.

After Purgatives we subjoyn Emollient abstergent Clysters; especially those of
Carminative Ingredients boiled in Child's Urine, against Hypochondriac pains in
the Belly; those of Milk and Turpentine, against Nephritic pains; and those of
Whey or rather of Milk injected every other Day in a confirmed Scurvy. As,

Take of Cows Milk, nine ounces; Lenitive Electuary, an ounce; Electuary of
Bay Berries, half an ounce. With the yelk of one Egg, make a Clyster to be
injected at Bedtime, and retained all Night. Some inject the Decoction of Elder
Flowers and Henbane Leaves in Milk, against Scorbutical Pains.

The Patient's Body being thus prepared we advance to Alteratives. Such are
Steel and all fixed Salts, or whatever subdues an Acid. To these we join either
the Aperients, Diuretics, and bitter Stomachical Aromatics, or the Spirituous
volatile Salts. Thus the filings of Steel, all its Aperitive Crocus's, the
vitriol of Steel calcined, the solar Liquor of Steel, the natural Spaws
consisting of Steel dissolved in Sulphur, the Tincture of the vitriol of Steel,
the solution of Steel prepared with the juice of sweet Apples and mixed with
the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, Chalybeat Diaphoretic Antimony, Chalybeat Bezoar,
the Bezoar Stone, etc. These I say are all of good use. But when the Bowels are
stuffed or threatened with hard swellings they are improper. Besides while Spaw
Waters are drunk, 'twill be requisite to defend the Stomac by some Stomachical
Ointment or Plaster.

Next to Steel are the bitter Plants, dedicated to the Stomac and Spleen; such
are Fumitory, lesser Centory, Juniper Barries, Wormwood, Agrimony, Cuckow-pint,
and Elecampane: Their Decoctions, Essences, and above all their fixed Salts,
and the Salt taken from the Caput Mortuum of the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac.
Mynsichtius's Arcanum Duplicatum is of excellent use, especially when the
Person is liable to flushings and sudden Inflammations. Elixyr Proprietatis
prepared without an Acid, and mixed with the Spirit of Scurvy Grass and that of
Sal-Armoniac is also proper. The volatile Salt and Spirit of Tartar; the
Tincture of Tartar mixed with the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, and given to forty
Drops; the Garminative Spirit prepared from Tartar, Nitre, and Spirit of Wine;
the Spirit distilled from a Mixture of Quicklime, Spirit of Sal-Armoniac and
Spirit of Wine impregnated with Aromatics; the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, mixed
with Antiscorbutic Spirits; and espepecially the Liquor of the Terra Foliata of
Tartar, mixed with Spirit of Sal-Armoniac; are very much approved both in the
Hypocondriac and Scorbutical Distemper, especially when the Person is liable to
Heats and Flushings, and apt to be offended by the Oily Aromatic Ingredients:
In which case purified or Antimonial Nitre is also useful. Nay some are very
diffuse in their Encomium's upon a mixture of Nitre, and the Powder Diacumini.
The forms of Alterative Recipe's are such as these following.

Take of the Conserve of Fumitory, an ounce and a half; Confection Alchermes, a
dram and a half; Crude Steel pulveris'd, three drams; Magistery of Coral
prepared with the Juice of Citrons, a dram. With the Syrup of Apples, make an
Electuary.

Take of the Essence of Gum Ammoniac, half an ounce; Spirit of Sal-Armoniac
mixed with Oil of Sassafras, two drams. Dose fifty drops.

Take of Elixyr Proprietatis, prepared without an Acid, half an ounce; Spirit
of Sal-Armoniac mixed with Oil of Cloves, two drams; Spirit of Scurvy Grass, a
dram and a half. Dose forty drops thrice a Day.

Take of Fumitory Water, two ounces; Borrage and Bugloss Waters, of each an
ounce; Carminative Spirit de tribus, two drams; prepared red Coral, a dram;
Syrup of red Poppies, half an ounce. Mix and exhibit a spoonful now and then in
the Hypochondriacal Fit.

The Specifics that are peculiarly devoted to the Scurvy, are of two sorts. 1.
Such are the volatile sharp Ingredients that amend the indisposition of the
Blood. 2. Balmy Oily Medicines that repair the losses of the solid and nervous
Pasts. Of the first sort are Scurvy Grass, Marsh Trefoyl, Water Cresses,
Celandin, Pilewort, the Herb called Trinity, Arsmart especially its distilled
Water, Horse Radishes, Mustard-seeds, and those of Garden Cresses, Rockets,
Scurvy Grass, and Columbines. To these we add the Juice of Sorrel, Citrons,
Oranges and such like Acids, to temper the volatile sharpness that frequently
offends young hot Constitutions. Of the latter sort are the Buds and Bark of
the Pine or Fir Tree, the Pine Apple, or Pine Wood, Sassafras, Guajacum, China
Roots, Juniper Wood, Winter Cinnamon; the Rinds of the Ash-tree, Tamarisk,
Citrons and Oranges; Water Germander, Fumitory, Wormwood, Elecampane, Zedoary,
Galangal, Angelica, Lovage, the Fruit of the Knotberry-bush and its Electuary,
Cacao Nuts; the flowers of Broom, St. John's wort, Elder and Saffron;
Earthworms, and Goose Dung given to a dram in Wine,

The Antiscorbutics of the former sort being volatile, will not admit of Decoction.
Upon which account we choose to infuse 'em in Wine for Cold, in Whey for
Bilious, and in Milk for dry withered Constitutions. As,

Take of fresh Scurvy Grass, Fumitory and Watercresses, of each a handful;
Horse Radish Roots, three ounces; fresh Elecampane Roots, an ounce; Corants,
six drams. Cut, bruise, and tie them in a Bag, to be infused in Wine, Whey, or
Milk, of which exhibit a draught thrice a Day. If they be infused in Wine,
'twill be proper to add half a dram of Crab's-eyes to every draught, for
preventing the bad effects of the acidity that prevails in Wine.

Take of fresh Scurvy Grass and Watercresses, of each a handful; Elecampane
Roots, an ounce and a half; Acorus Roots, an ounce; Shavings of Sassafras, and
Filings of Steel, of each two ounces; Orange-peel, Citron-peel, and Galangal,
of each two drams. Tie 'em in a Bag as above. If we desire to render 'em
Purgative, we add Senna Leaves, black Hellebor, Rhubarb, and Salt of Tartar.

Take of the Juices of Scurvy Grass, Watercresses, and Fumitory, of each three
ounces; Ci^^ons and Wood Sorrel, of each two ounces; clarified Goats-whey,
three pound. Let 'em stand till they become clear, then strain the Liquor, and
give five ounces for a Dose twice a Day, adding to every Draught a convenient
quantity of the Essence of Steel, prepared with the Juice of Apples.

Take of the Chalybeat Cachectic Powder, two drams; Cuckow-pint Roots, and
Arcanum Duplicatum, of each a dram; distilled Oil of Scurvy Grass, eight drops.
Make a Powder.

From the abovementioned Simples we draw Spirits. First by Fermentation, then
by frequent Cohobation upon fresh Ingredients. These Spirits digested with the
extract of Steel, or with the extract and thickened juice of the other
Ingredients, yield noble antiscorbutic Essences, that are given from half a
dram to a dram. To these we frequently join the distilled Oils of the same
Plants, and the volatile Spirits of Animals, especially the Spirit of
Sal-Armoniac, and that of Earthworms.

Of the balmy Antiscorbutics that are calculated for the disorder of the Nerves
and solid parts, Sassafras, China Roots, the wild Pine Tree, and the Pineapple
are the most noted. As,

Take of the Buds of the wild Pine Tree, two ounces; China Roots sliced, an
ounce; infuse 'em in two pounds of Ale, and boil 'em till the half evaporat.
Exhibit a draught of the strained Liquor warm, Morning and Evening, in order to
sweat. Juniper Berries, Fir-tops, and Raisins, are also proper Antiscorbutics.

The extract of Juniper Berries, or the thickened decoction of the Pineapple,
reduced to Essences with the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, are admirable for this
purpose, being given from forty to fifty drops. But withal we ought to take
notice, that all Remedies prepared from the Pine Tree are enriched with a
plentiful volatile Oil that dejects the Appetit, and if too long used causes
Fevers, Pushes, or cuticular Eruptions in young People.

But both the Indications of subduing the scorbutical Acid, and relieving the
solid parts, are admirably accounted for by a Milk diet. The time of exhibiting
Milk, is after the general Evacuations, and the use of Steel. Goats Milk is
accounted the best, and for those who are feverish we choose Whey. If the
Patient be of a lean dry Constitution, and if the scorbutical Acid be fiery and
sharp, Milk alone is best: But otherwise we boil antiscorbutical Ingredients in
the Milk, or add their Juices and Spirits. As,

Take of Goat's Whey a quart, and boil it in a close Vessel with a handful of
fresh Fumitory leaves. Then strain it, and add to every draught twenty drops of
the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, and a little Sugar to prevent its curdling. Thus
let the Patient continue the use of it for some time, interlacing a laxative
every fourth day, remembering always to walk after taking it, in order to
promote Urin, and abstain from Wine and acid Liquors. This method of infusing
or boiling antiscorbuticks in Milk, ought to be followed during the Spring and
Summer; but in the Autumn Wine is the more proper Vehicle.

The general Cure of the Scurvy being thus dispatched, it remains to account
for its particular Symptoms. These are,

I. The Laxity, Swelling, Bleeding, Ulceration, or Putrefaction of the Gums.
For removing such Inconveniences, we use Gargarisms, Tinctures, Powders, and
Ointments. The Gargarisms are made of the juice of Sage and Scurvy Grass; or
the Decoction of Sage and Scurvy Grass, in Milk, Whey, or Wine. Or of
Privat-wood, Pine Tree tops, Cresses and Alum; in Milk, Whey, or Wine. To
which we add by turns, Snake-weed Roots, Tormentil, Birthwort, Myrrh, Lac,
Spirit of Salt, etc. As,

Take of Sage-leaves, three handfuls; Scurvy Grass and Watercresses, of each
half a handful; Flowers of Mallows, two handfuls; Polipody Roots six drams.
Boil them in two pound of fair Water till the half be consumed. Then strain the
Liquor, and add of the Honey of Roses, an ounce and a half; burnt Alum, a dram;
purified Nitre, three drams; sealed Earth, and Florentin Lac, of each a dram.
Mix for a Gargarism. If the Gums are putrified, boil Lesser Centory, Plantan,
Savin, Water Germander, Roses, Birthwort Roots, and Mastic, in austere Wine;
and add to a pound and a half of the strained Decoction, an ounce and a half of
the Ointment Aegyptiacum, and a dram and a half of crude Alum.

Take of Plantan, Self-heal, and Rose Water, of each four Ounces; Tincture of
Roses, Spirit of Scurvy Grass, of each two drams; Spirit of Salt, Spirit of
Vitriol, of each a scruple. Mix and rub the Gums.

After Gargarising the Mouth, it is proper to rub the Gums with Tinctures,
especially Mynsichtius his Tincture of Lac, which may be improved by adding
Myrrh, and shifting the Phlegm of Alum for that of Vitriol. The following
Tincture is also very effectual, viz. Pour warm Water upon Quicklime, and boil
it, then let it stand till it be clear, and strain it. Draw off this strained
Lie till a Salt remain at bottom. Now take of this Salt three drams; of the Gum
Lac, two drams; Cyprus Vitriol, six Grains; Rosemary and Sage-waters, of each
an ounce and a half. Mix, and dissolve with a gentle heat.

As for Powders; Take of Snake-weed, and Tormentil Roots, and the Rinds of
Pomegranats, of each a dram; Bloodstone, Frankincense, Burnt-allum, and
Sal-Armoniac, of each half a dram; make a Powder for rotten Gums. Or sprinkle
it with the distilled Oil of Cloves, and Spirit of Scurvy Grass. Note, all
stony or tartarin things are pernicious to the Gums.

If the Mouth or Gums are beset with Ulcers, apply the following Liniment. Take
of crude Alum, a dram and a half; Sage-leaves, three drams; Roots of Florentin
Orris, a dram and a half; Myrrh, half a dram. With Honey make a Liniment.
Borellus recommends Alum, with the Oil of Sulphur and Conserve of Roses. If
the Ulcers are malignant and stinking, apply the Ointment of Columbines, with
the Juice of Sage, and Spirit of Salt; or the Ointment Aegyptiacum diluted with
Honey, or Platerus's green Waters. Note, the Spirit of Vitriol always makes the
Teeth black.

II. Scorbutical Tooth-aches are cured by applying the Decoction of Pine Tree
Leaves with Spirit of Scurvy Grass; or the Juices of lesser House-leek and
Scurvy Grass, with the Decoction of Henbane, Rosemary, Rue, Plantane, Sage,
Snakeweed and Fearn. If the Pain reach the Temples and Face, foment 'em with
the weaker Spirit of Scurvy Grass, mixed with the Spirit of Earthworms.

III. The spots on the Skin ought to be promoted by exhibiting inwardly the
volatile Specifics, mixed with absorbent Powders, and the Tincture of Columbine
Flowers, or Emulsions of its Seed, or the Antiscorbutical Tincture of Coral. If
the Spots be red, we add acid Juices; if blew or livid, Scurvy Grass and
volatile Ingredients. Externally if they disorder the Skin, and are apt to
excoriat, apply, after sweating, a Liniment of Mustard-seeds mixed with
Vinegar; or, if that be too sharp, with the Oil of sweet Almonds, and fresh
Juice of Citrons. The Ointment of the Roots of Florentin Orris, and white
Hellebor, mixed with the Oil of sweet Almonds, is looked upon by some as
infallible for this purpose. If the Skin itch, and be molested with little
miliar Eruptions, exhibit the Decoction of Pine Tree Buds; and let the Hands
and Feet be licked by a Dog.

IV. The fixed pains in the Legs are removed by bleeding in the Arm; applying
Blistering Plasters near the affected part; exhibiting Sudorifics, especially
the Decoctions of Woods and Pine Tree Buds, the Essence of Sassafras, Spirit of
Scurvy Grass, Spirit of Venice Treacle camphoris'd, and Spirit of Elder-berries
mixed with the Essence of Opium and Laudanum Opiatum; and by fomenting the part
with the Spirit of Juniper-beries camphoris'd, Spirit of Earthworms, and Aqua
Articularis; or by soaking it in Tanner's Lie, mixed with Man's Urine; or in
hot fermenting Wine; or in the Decoction of Ants; the Person being put to a
warm Bed immediately after. Some recommend the Decoction of Sage, Chamomil and
Elder-flowers, Watercresses, and Henbane-leaves, in Milk or Whey for a
fomentation; or the Rob of Juniper, mixed with the thickened Juices of
Watercresses, Camomil and Elder Flowers, in the form of a Cataplasm; or hot
dry Bags of Millet-Seeds, Salt, Bran, Wormwoodtops, and Chamomil Flowers; to be
applied to the Parts; however, if all prove ineffectual, we must have recourse
to the natural Hot Baths, or Artificial ones of Sulphur and Quicklime.

V. The Colic Pains, or those resembling the Nephritic, as proceeding from the
Cramp and Convulsion of the Guts and the Mesentery (which is seated in the
Loins) are Cured by cleansing the Guts, and appeasing the tumultuous motions.
The first design is compassed by Raisins, Goats-Whey, Oil of sweet Almonds, and
the Decoction of Marshmallows. Pugatives are very pernicious. But, if the Pain
be recent, and not very violent, we may venture to exhibit a gentle Purge,
mixed with Opium, the Body being first prepared by Digestives. If the
irritating matter be hot and sharp, Whey, in which China-Roots,
Borrage-Flowers, and Clove-Gilli-flowers are boiled, the Emulsions of cold
Seeds, Sugar of Lead, or the Antiphthisical Tincture, and earthy absorbent
Powders are proper; but if the Urine be laden with a sandy Tartar, all
Lenitives are in vain 'till that be removed by meek Diuretics, such as
Turpentin, the Syrup of Marshmallows, etc. In other cases we exhibit the
Volatile oily Salts, mixed with Opiats, especially the Spirit of Nitre dulcifi'd
with the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, the carminative Spirit de tribus, and the
Spirit of Earthworms. Or thus,

Take of Dorncrellius his Carminative Water, and the Antiscorbutic Water, of
each two Ounces; the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, and the carminative Spirit de
tribus, of each a dram; the Essence of Opium, half a dram; Syrup of
Orange-peel, an Ounce.

Emollient Anodyn Clysters, are also very proper; I mean such as are usually
prescribed against Colic and Nephritic Pains, especially those of the Decoction
of River-Crabs. But if they do not quickly give relief, it is advisable to set
'em aside, for fear of inflaming the Guts, and to foment the Belly with the
Decoctions designed for 'em. It Is also usual to anoint the Navel with the Oil
distilled from Galbanum and Turpentin, and then apply either a hot Brick, or
the Plaster of Galbanum, mixed with the Balsam of Peru. P^terius's Plaster
Diasulphuris applied to the Loins, is of good use; as also Fomentations, or
Cataplasms for the Belly, of Chamomil and Elder-flowers, Juniper Berries,
Henbane-leaves, Cresses, etc. boiled in Milk. If the Clysters prove successful,
let 'em be still continued, and sharpened with purgative Ingredients; after the
Paroxism, exhibit the Decoction of Pine-Apples and Juniper Berries, and other
Antiscorbutics.

VI. The wandering gouty Pains that follow the Scurvy, are owing to the
Convulsive influence of the scorbutical Salt upon the nervous Parts, especially
the Membranes that cover the Bones. They are distinguished from a proper Gout,
by these Symptoms. They are very inconstant, and apt to shift the place of
their Abode, and return again on a sudden. Thus rubbing with a warm Cloth will
occasion their removal and appearance in another Part. They never rise up in
hard stubborn Swellings. Their solution is frequently accomplished by Sweat and
Urine; and by cuticular Eruptions, with an unsufferable itching. The Cure
consists in allaying the impeutosity of the Spirits and Humors, evacuating the
Scorbutic Salt by Sweat and Urine, and removing the radical cause after the
Paroxysm is over.

First of all, it ought to commence by bleeding in the opposite side to the
part affected; then Clysters and Vomits, followed by absorbent Powders and
fixed Salts, especially Arcanum Duplicatum, diaphoretic Antimony, and Cinnabar
of Antimony; to which if the Spirits be very irregular, we add Narcotics.
Oft-times a gentle Laxative is very necessary. If the Spirits be low and
flaggy, we may exhibit the Essence of Woods, or Venice Treacle, with Osteocal
mixed with Opium. After these Preparations, we proceed to the use of volatile
Specifics; of which Worms are the Head. The Spirit of putrifi'd Earthworms,
rectified upon Cephalic Plants, or the Infusion of bruised Worms, in Wine,
Milk, or Whey, are most effectual Medicaments. Some apply living Worms to the
Part, which die if the Pain be violent, and as the Symptoms relent, prolong
their life. Therefore this Application is renewed till the Worms cease to die.
When the Paroxysm declines, we endeavor to root out the radical Cause, by
preparations from the Pine Tree, China Roots, and Juniper Berries mixed with
Antiscorbutics. The Decoction of Wormwood and lesser Centory; Bags of
Antiscorbutical Ingredients infused in Wine; and the carminative Spirit, or
Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, mixed with the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, are all of good
use. In a Word, if the Patient be of a moist Constitution, and apt to sweat,
volatile Ingredients are best; if not, Milk, especially Goats Milk, or Whey, in
which softning and Antiscorbutical Ingredients are boiled, is preferable.

Take of Cinnabar of Antimony, a scruple; Poterius's diaphoretic Gold, twelve
grains; Laudanum Opiatum, two grains. Make a Powder to be exhibited in the
beginning of the Disease.

Take of the Water of Mother of Thyme, Pine-Apples, and Scurvy Grass, of each
an ounce; the Essence against Catarrhs, three drams; the spirit of putrifi'd
Earthworms, a dram; the volatile salt of Hartshorn, a scruple; the volatile
salt of Amber, half a scruple; prepared Crabs Eyes, half a dram; Laudanum
Opiatum, three grains; Syrup of Elecampane Roots, an Ounce. Mix, and give a
Spoonful, in order to sweat.

Take of the Buds of the wild Pine Tree, three ounces; China Roots sliced, an
ounce and a half; Juniper Berries, an ounce. Boil them in Water; and exhibit
four ounces in order to sweat every Morning, and as much at Night without
sweating.

Externally we ought to avoid all oily Applications. Let the part be forcibly
rubbed with a Cloth outward, or toward the Circumference; and fumigated with
the steams of the Decoction of Earthworms and Ants. Then apply Cataplasms of
Horseradish Roots, or Briony Roots, boiled with Camomil Flowers, and Comfrey
Roots in Milk; or of Cats Dung and Earthworms; or of Venice Soap, dissolved in
Spirit of Wine, sprinkled with the Spirit of Earthworms, and mixed with
Camphyr; but it is worthy our notice, that these Cataplasms ought to be always
kept warm, for if they grow cold upon the Part, they wring and straiten its
Pores. Upon which account, some choose rather to foment it with the Spirit of
putrifi'd Earthworms, Spirit of Ants, the Spirit of Juniper Berries
camphoris'd, or the Spirit of Wine impregnated with Aromatic Plants; and then
apply a Plaster of Tacamahac, and Mynsichtius's Diaphoretic Plaster.

VII. Scorbutical Headaches are cured by volatile Sudorisics, such as the
volatile Salt of Amber, Spirit of Hartshorn, the Cephalic Spirit of Vitriol,
the Anti-scorbutical Elixir Proprietatis, and sometimes Opiats. To these we
subjoin a Milk Diet, which, though noxious in other Cases, is of admirable
efficacy in this.

VIII. A scorbutical Palsy is, for the most part, ushered in by a sense of a
creeping sort of Pain, like the motion of Emmets. It Is Cured thus; administer a
Vomit, unless the Person be liable to Pains in the Belly. Avoid Bleeding,
unless the Person be Plethorick; inject emollient Clysters, and exhibit the
mildest Laxatives. Then order the Decoction of Juniper and Pine-tree-wood, or
the Pine Apple, with Rosemary and cephalic Plants, in Milk or Whey. The
Decoctions of sudorific Woods, the Essence of the Pine Apple, the Essence of
Juniper Berries, the volatile Spirit of Tartar, or the Carminative Spirit de
tribus, mixed with the Spirit of Scurvy Grass; the volatile Salt of Amber, and
especially Poterius's diaphoretic Gold, or fulminatory Gold, are all
recommended upon this occasion. Externally the same Medicines are required, as
we order for the wandering Gout, especially the Spirit of Juniper Berries,
Essence of Castor, Spirit of Earthworms. Some order the Person to be set up to
the Waste in a Heap of Grapes, while they ferment either naturally, or by the
addition of Quicklime; Cataplasms of Briony and Comfrey Roots, are often used
with good success; some fumigate the Part with the steams of Goose-fat thrown
upon burning Coals; and anoint it with the Oil of Scurvy Grass, the Oil, or
Spirit of Earthworms, distilled Oil of Amber, and Balsam of Peru. Some apply
Plasters, such as Oxycroceum and Nervinum Vigonis; but all oily things are
improper, by reason that they shut the Pores. Of the natural hot Baths, those
of the meekest force and heat are best.

IX. Scorbutical Convulsions are cured by Vomits, Purges, and Antiscorbutics,
mixed with nervous Ingredients, Lac, Cinnabar of Antimony, the volatile Salt of
Amber, and Camphyr, exhibited in the Decoction of Elecampane and Juniper
Berries, are of excellent use. Some recommend Castle-Soap dissolved in Milk; as
also the Essence of the Pineapple, the Essence of Sassafras, carminative
Spirit, and Spirit of Sal-Armoniac mixed with the Spirit of Scurvy Grass and
Laudanum. In the last extremity, we must have recourse to the Decoctions of
sudorific Woods, China Roots, and Fennel. Externally, the Oil distilled from a
mixture of Quicklime and Oil of Lin-seed is of noted efficacy; and likewise all
cephalic Spirits and Oils. Some recommend Bathing every Day for eight Hours, in
the Decoctions of Gentian, Juniper Berries, Rue, and Agrimony.

X. Asthma's attending the Scurvy are cured by the Extract of Saffron; spirits
of Hart's-horn, Castor, Amber, and Sal-Armoniac; Benzoin, and Birth-wort-Roots,
with Antiscorbutical Decoctions. If the Asthma's are merely Convulsive,
Laudanum Hystericum is a sovereign Remedy.

XI. Vomitings require Artificial Vomits, gentle Purges, and stomachical
Medicines, mixed with absorbent Powders, and Antiscorbutics. Loosenesses are
cured after the same method, rather than by Astringents, which frequently
occasion Anxieties in the Breast, and Swoonings, Bleedings at Nose, or any
other part, are best stopped by exhibiting inwardly chalybeat Astringents, such
as Chalybeat, Diaphoretic Antimony, Vitriol of Steel, the Antiphthisical
Tincture, etc.

XII. A scorbutical Consumption is generally accounted for by a Milk Diet,
which is of excellent use, when it proceeds from the degeneracy of the Blood.
But if the disorders of the Stomac and first Passages gave Birth to it, Milk is
improper, and is fitly exchanged for Vomits and stomachical Aromatics. In
general, Elixir Proprietatis without an Acid, the spirit of Sal-Armoniae, the
Antiphthisical Tincture, and Raisins eaten after Meals, are very proper. If the
Animal Spirits are flat, nervous Remedies will be useful. If the milky Vessels,
or Glandules of the Mesentery and other Parts are charged with Obstructions,
volatile Aperients are necessary.

XIII. Scorbutical Fevers take their Original from the Corrosive sharpness of
the Blood, and generally pass for Hectics. Their Symptoms are an excessive
Appetit, followed by Vomiting, or love for salt Victuals; Costiveness, Sweats,
smelling like Acids, and leaving red Sand in the Bed, and livid Spots in the
Skin. They are cured by Antiscorbutics mixed with Steel, and volatile and fixed
Salts, especially the Flowers and spirit of Sal-Armoniac, the Spirit of
Sassafras, and Arcanum Duplicatum; Whey sharpened with the Juice of Citrons is
much approved, as also Milk, mixed with the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, when the
Stomac is able to digest it, and the Feverish Paroxysm is over. The Symptom of
Thirst is admirably accounted for by exhibiting the Decoction of China-roots
and Liquorice.

XIV. In scorbutical Dropsies, strong Purgatives are noxious; gentle Diuretics
mixed with Antiscorbutics, being the Basis of the Cure. Such are the Infusion
of Wood-lice in Wine, the Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, and Tincture of Tartar, mixed
with the Spirit of Scurvy Grass.

XV. St. Antony's Fire happening to scorbutical Persons, is cured by taking
inwardly absorbent diaphoretic Powders, mixed with the Spirit or Syrup of
Elder-Flowers, and Spirit of Scurvy Grass; and applying outwardly the Decoction
of Litharge, Elder-Flowers, Olibanum, Myrrh and Mastic, in Limewater and
Vinegar, with a little Camphyr.

XVI. Ulcers accompanying the Scurvy, and threatening a Gangrene, ought to be
washed with Limewater, or the Decoction of lesser House-leek, mixed with the
Spirit of Vitriol, and anointed with the Ointment of Tobacco and Sugar of Lead;
or covered with the Powders of Myrrh, and Frankincense, Crocus of Steel, and
Sugar of Lead. Inwardly let the Essence of Woods, Essence of Fumitory, and the
Antiscorbutical Tincture of Coral be frequently administered. As for the hard
Swellings that frequently molest the Legs; let Cataplasms of Bryony and
Comfrey-Roots, and Chamomil Flowers, be applied to 'em. Or let the thickened
Juices of Comfrey and Brook-lime, mixed with Mynsichtius his Diaphoretic
Plaster, and the Distilled Oil of Chamomil be used in like manner.

ART. 6. Of breakings-out in the Skin.
UNder the Head of Depraved Nutrition, we allot an Article for Cuticular
Eruptions; and first for the Scab, which proceeds from the depravation of the
nutritive Juice of the Parts under the Skin, occasioned by a preternatural
Acid. This Acid takes its rise from sudden Cold, succeeding to Heat; and
shutting up the steams of the Body within the straightened Pores; from the
contagion of an external Ferment, and sometimes, but very rarely, from internal
Causes, such as the Scurvy, French Pox, etc. But, for the most part, the Blood
and Internal Parts are not at all tainted, it being only the nutritive Serum
about the surface of the Body that is depraved; though it is true, that by
continuance it may at last infect the Blood. If the nutritious Juice be very
serous and apt to corrupt, the Breakings-out run much; if the Juice be Balmy,
and impregnated with a volatile oily Salt; they are crusty and dry.

As for the Cure of a Scab; we administer inwardly Purgatives and Sudorifics.
The Purgatives are the Extract of Black Hellebor, or Scammony sulphurated,
mixed with sweet Mercury, and the purging Mercurius vitae, or Turbith Mineral
in an inveterat case. If the Blood be tainted, we administer the Decoctions of
bitter and scorbutical Plants, and Spices mixed with purging Ingredients, in
Wine, Whey, or Water, and continue their use for some time. The Sudorifics are
the Decoctions of Woods, the volatile Salt of Vipers, Hartshorn, Ivory; the
fixed Salts, the Sulphur and Cinnabar of Antimony, diaphoretick Antimony, and
the Syrup of Elder Flowers. As,

Take of Elder-Flower Water, an ounce; the Spirit of Venice Treacle
camphoris'd, half a Dram; Diaphoretic Antimony, fifteen Grains; the volatile
Salt of Vipers, half a Scruple; Syrup of Orange-peel, half an ounce. Mix for a
Draught. Or,

Take of the Rob of Elder, a dram; the Powder of Snakes calcined, a scruple;
Sal-Armoniac, half a scruple. With the Syrup of Orange-peel make a Bolus. The
distilled Oil of Turpentin given to six Drops every Morning; the Essence of
Vipers to forty; the Tincture of Antimony, or Tincture of Coral, given to fifty
Drops, are also very proper. And when all proves ineffectual, a Mercurial
Salivation may not be amiss.

Outwardly we apply Ointments of Sulphur, Mercury, especially that precipitated
with the Spirit of Nitre, and Sugar of Lead; but we ought to take care that the
Pores be kept open, for fear the Scab should strike in. Upon which account, let
Salt of Tartar be always added. As,

Take of Vnguentum Enulatum, and Album Camphoratum, of each half an ounce;
Flowers of Brimstone, three drams; sweet Mercury, a dram; Salt of Tartar, or
Oil of Tartar per deliquium, a dram and a half; with the Oil of Tobacco, or of
St. John's wort Make an Ointment; to which add of the Balsam of Peru half a
sc^^ple; Oil of Rose-wood, six drops. Mix, and anoint the Limbs, especially the
Joints at Night going to Bed; and in the Morning, wash off the Ointment with
the Persons own Urine.

Take of the Decoction of Quicklime, a pound and a half; sweet Mercury, three
drams; Spirit of Venice Treacle camphoris'd, an ounce. Mix, and wash the
external Parts, for taking off the Scab, and the red Scars that remain after it.

The Distilled Water of Man's Ordure, is an admirable Wash, and reserved by
some as a Secret. Some use Girdles of Quicksilver; others fumigate with
Cinnabar; but the Body ought to be well cleans'd beforehand, and armed against
Cold. In a critical Scab, we ought not to use repellents. But Baths of the
Decoctions of the sharp pointed Dock, Tobacco-Leaves, Scabious, Elecampane and
Briony Roots, Brimstone, and Quicklime are allowable. After sweating by
internal Sudorifics, the scabby Person may bath in them, and rub down his Body,
and after bathing, anoint with the abovementioned Ointment.

The Itch is near allied to the Scab, and proceeds from the sharp Particles of
the Serum, repairing to the surface in small quantities; it is cured internally
by purging and sweating, as above; and externally by applying the following
Ointment.

Take of the Roots of the sharp pointed Dock, and Elecampane, of each an ounce.
Boil them in Vinegar 'till they become soft; then beat 'em through a Sive, and
add of the Oil of Orris, three Ounces; common Salt an Ounce; Myrrh, three
Drams; Litharge, an ounce and a half. With Wax make a Liniment.

A Leprosy proceeds from a saline corrosive Acid, reigning in the Serum; as
being a sort of exalted Scurvy. It is oft-times the hereditary Infirmity of a
Family, or follows a bad Diet, Chronical Diseases, and the suppression of
wonted Evacuations. The Signs which accompany it, are either internal or
external. The internal are Acid or musty Belchings, Costiveness, Thirst, a
stinking Sweat, thick Urine, insomuch that the Powder of Lead will swim upon
it, an extreme propensity to Venery; the thickness, viscosity, and unctuosity
of the Blood when drawn forth, and little Clotts of Sand sticking to the Cloth,
through which it is strained; the frequency and weakness of the Pulse, difficult
respiration, stinking Breath, a weariness of the Limbs, Chillness, stupidity,
and a hoarse Voice, as if it came through the Nose.

The External Symptoms are these. The Skin appears Livid, Black, or Yellow; it
Wrinkles, when exposed to the Cold; it is notably rough and oily, insomuch that
Water will not stick to it; it is covered with a Purple or White Dandriff;
little moveable painless Knots and Swellings beset the Forehead, Chin and
Joints; a dry Ringworm, and Pushes cover the whole Body; and affect not only
the Skin, but the Muscles; an eternal Itch, like the gnawing of Worms, or
pricking with Needles, molest^ 'em; when they scratch any part, it turns dry
and scaly, but voids no Matter; the Hair of their Heads and Eyebrows falls
off; their Forehead is furrowed with Wrinkles; their Ears stretched and
swelled, the Eyebrows callous and raised; their Eyes round, red, sparkling,
infested with little hard swellings in the corners, and apt to water; the upper
part of their Nose contracted, while the inferior is enlarged, troubled with
frequent Sneezing, and infested with a Polypus, and Cancious corrosive Ulcers;
the Face and Lips are pale, hard, livid and chopped; their Tongue and Mouth
liable to hard Swellings, Chops, and Corrosion; the Gums rough and swollen; the
Spittle viscous; the Breasts hard, and their Veins swollen; the Joints withered
and beset with callous indolent Ulcers that are apt to bleed upon the slightest
touch; the Muscles of their Hands, especially those of the Thumb and first
Finger, are much consumed; the Fingers and Toes benumbed, the Joints distorted
and knotty, and the Nails black, bowed and chopped.

The Cure of a Leprosy is the same as that of a Scab. If what was recommended
upon that Head prove successless, we must have recourse to the following
Medicine; viz. Take four quarts of Lie, and a pound of white Arsenic. Boil them
for an hour or two, till the Lie be almost consumed; then add fresh Lie and
boil again till the Arsenic be dissolved. Then pour off the Liquor by
inlination into a clean Vessel, and add two pound of Ceruss, dissolved in
Vinegar, and filtrated. This will yield a precipitat which ought to be
dulcified, and given for eight days together, from three to ten Grains.

The Disease called by the Arabians, Elephantiasis, does not spread so
universally over the Body as a Leprosy; as being only a red, livid, or black
swelling in the Feet, attended by Ulcers in the Veins, that void a sharp clear
Serum. It generally happens to old People that have drank much Wine; and is
frequently Critical. Upon which account we ought to be cautious of applying
repellent Medicines. Internally we administer Purges as in a Scab, and the
Decoctions of Woods and sudorific Ingredients for tempering the sharpness of
the Serum. Externally we apply the Plaster of the Calaminar Stone, or
Meibomius's Plaster of the Oil of Olives, Castle-soap, Ceruss, red Lead, and
Camphyr. In the mean while we roll up the Legs from the Ancles to the Knees in
a Swathe.

A Tetter and Ring-worm are near akin to a Scab, as being only a Crust, or hot
Pushes on the Skin, causing heat, redness, itching, and roughness. They are
cured by Purging, as in a Scab; and administering Sudorifics, with Sugar of
Lead, or the Antipththisical Tincture: In desperate cases, by Issues or a
Salivation. Externally we apply Castle-soap, mixed with Spirit of Wine, and
Sugar of Lead, and in a word, the same things that were recommended for the
Scab. In desperate Cases we use Limewater, or the Ointment of Roses, mixed with
sublimat Mercury; or with Mercury precipitated with Spirit of Nitre.

The little hot Pimples called Phlyctenes, that frequently appear about the
Wrists and Fingers, are cured internally as a Scab; externally by applying at
first the Mucilages of Quinces and Linseed extracted with the water of
Frogs-spawn, and afterward Limewater, and the Ointment of Litharge, or
Diapompholygos, mixed with Vinegar of Lead. The lesser Pimples, called
Sudamina, are cured internally by Purging and Sweating, and externally by
washing in Milk or Limewater mixed with Camphyr, and shifting their Linen
often. The Pushes that have little Worms in 'em, are cured internally by
joining the Essence of Myrrh, Elixyr Proprietatis, Spirit of Hartshorn, etc.
to the abovementioned Purgatives and Sudorifics; and externally by washing in
the Decoctions of bitter Plants, and applying Plasters of their Juices mixed
with Mercury; or picking out the Worms with a Needle.

The little hard callous swellings in the Face and Neck, called Vari, are for
the most part red and whitish at the top. They seem to proceed from the
depravation of the Genital Liquor, and mostly attack such as are ripe for
Venery. The internal Cure is the same as above. Externally, we apply Cataplasms
of the Oil of Bays, Ointment of Roses, sweet Mercury, and Oil of Tartar; or a
mixture of the Waters of Cows-dung, Elder-flowers, and Frogs-spawn, with the
Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, Flowers of Sulphur, Borace, Ceruss, Camphyr, etc.
Some commend the Precipitat from Lead, called Lac Virginis. Some recommend
fumigation of the Face with Spirit of Wine spit out of the Person's Mouth upon
a hot Plate of Iron, and followed by a fresh fumigation of Myrrh thrown upon
the same Plate. This, they say, will also take off Wrinkles, and make old Women
look young.

Freckles are little yellowish Spots in the Face, Neck, Breast, and Hands. The
Cause is the stagnation of the Serum between the Skin and Cuticle, occasioned
by the heat of the Sun, or otherwise. Internally, Elixyr Proprietatis and
Laxatives are proper. Externally, we wash the parts with the Water of
Cows-dung, or Bean-flowers, mixed with the whites of Eggs; or anoint it with a
Liniment of Frankincense, Ceruss, Myrrh, Brimstone, Camphyr, and Hen's Fat,
applying afterward Man's Fat to take off the roughness and scales that such
Liniments occasion. The Oils of Eggs, Tartar, Guajacum, Wax, and Soap: the
Powder of the Roots of Briony and Florentin Orris, sweet Mercury, the Magistery
of Lead, Lac Virginis, and the corrosive Liquor, called Liquor Mercurij
Saccharatus, are also used by turns.

The little brown Spots called Ephelides do generally appear upon big-belly'd
Women; or those whose terms are stopped, as proceeding from the sharpness of the
Serum. For Cure we rub the part with a Citron, or sower Apple cut up; and wash
it with the Emulsion of Hempseed, or anoint with a Liniment of Bay Berries and
Honey.

There are also Spots of a sad yellow Color, and about a Hands breadth, called
Maculae Epaticae, that suddenly appear and disappear, and render the Skin rough
and somewhat scaly. They proceed from the same Cause as Freckles. The internal
Cure is accomplished by the Decoctions of bitter and Antiscorbutical Plants
mixed with Purgatives: The external, by the Cosmetics above mentioned; or in a
difficult case by applying a Cataplasm of Mustard Seed beaten with Vinegar,
Salt, and the yolks of Eggs.

The red Pimples and Wheals in the Face and Nose, that mostly follow hard
drinking, proceed from the volatile Acid of Wine, incorporated with the Lymph
corroding the Skin. Their internal Cure is compassed by Bleeding, and
exhibiting the Decoctions of bitter Herbs mixed with Purgatives; and the
administration of Absorbent Powders. Externally we apply the Sugar of Lead
dissolved, in distilled Vinegar, and mixed with Camphry and Oil of Roses, or
with the Juices of House-leek and Plantane, or the Oil of Tartar per Deliquium,
mixed with Camphyr and the Waters of the Flowers of Beans, Solomon's Seal, and
Frog's-spawn; or an Ointment made of Pepper, Ginger, Brimstone, and Vngentum
Pomatum. In desperate Cases we must have recourse to Mercurial Compositions.

If the Skin be discolored by the Heat of the Sun, Pushes, Pimples, or
otherwise, its natural Color may be retrieved, by applying the Juice of
Citrons, or Vinegar impregnated with the Flowers of Beans, Solomon's Seal,
Jasmin and white Lilly Flowers. The Spirit of Wine Camphoris'd; the Essence of
Benzoin mixed with fair Water, are also recommended. As also Powders made of
dried Venice Soap, white Poppy-seeds, Starch, Lupins, Florentin Orris,
Magistery of Marcasite, Mosch, and Zivet; or of Briony and Cuckow-pint Roots,
with Sugar of Lead and sweet Mercury, which are mixed with the Waters of
Figwort-roots, white Lillies, Solomon's Seal, Flowers of Beans, and Roses, and
so applied in the form of a Calaptasm. Some mightily covet the Oil of Talk as
an admirable Cosmetic, but since it is not to be had genuin, the Oil of Tartar
per Deliquium will supply its room, The Decoction of Sublimat Mercury in common
Water, the water being boiled till the Acrimony be quite extinguished, and than
mixed with Cerues, and after a fresh gentle boiling, clarified with the white
of an Egg, is a Wash of infinite use in Counterfeiting Colors.

The Mange or Scurf that frequently besets the heads of those who are liable to
the Scurvy, French Pox, or Leprosy, seems to arise from an Acid, engaged in a
viscid Vehicle, that stagnats upon the out-Parts, and shuts the Pores. It is
cured internally as the Scab. Externally, let the Head be frequently washed
with the Decoction of the Herbs, Southernwood, Betony, Celandin, Soapwort,
Mallows, the Roots of Marshmallows, sharp pointed Dock, and Burdock, Pease,
Bay Berries and Coloquintida. Let these Ingredients be boiled in Lie, and
reserve the strained Liquor as a wash for the Head.

Before we conclude this Chapter, 'twill not be improper to take notice of the
sheding, or off-falling of the Hairs, which is remedied by washing with the
Decoction of Rosemary, Southernwood, Honey, Myrtle Berries, Linseed and Oil of
sweet Almonds, in Wine. The Ingredients being first infused for twenty four
hours; and then boiled till the Moisture be consumed; and the remaining Juice
expressed for use. If the Hairs are gray, we may endeavor to change their
Color by combing with a Leaden Comb, wet with Aqua Fortis in which Silver is
dissolved, it being qualified with common Water. Some commend the Ointment of
Tobacco, sharpened with Oil of Bricks, for an Universal Alopecia, and exhibit
inwardly the Essence and Decoction of Woods with Chalybeats.

SECT. XVIII. Of Diseases hindering the regular Reflux of the Blood to the Heart.
THERE are three Cases in which the regular return of Blood to the Heart is
hindered. 1. In Inflammations, when the Blood stagnats in its Vessels. 2. In
Empyema's, when the Blood is extravasated and lodged in some Cavity within the
Body. 3. In Haemorrhogia's, or external Bleedings.

CHAP. I. Of Inflammations.
INflammations are occasioned by the stagnation of the Blood in any part, viz.
When the Quantity imported is larger than what returns by the Veins. The
Symptoms attending 'em are, 1. A Redness. 2. A Heat. 3. A Swelling; and, 4.
Pain, which is either accompanied with a sense of the distention of the Fibers
and Nervous Parts; or a beating, as arising from the rebounding of the Blood,
when disappointed of its Passage; or a pricking, as caused by the sharp Salts,
when struggling and tending to suppuration. Now that stagnating Blood is apt to
produce those effects, is too plain to need a Proof. The remote Causes which
promote this Stagnation, are either External or Internal. The former are; the
occasional Compression, Contusion, or Distortion of the Vessels; Pains or the
shrinking and contraction of the Nervous Fibers, and consequently of the
Capillary Vessels, as in Arthritic Pains, and the Toothach, or when a Thorn or
Wasp stings the Part.

The internal Causes relate either to the general Disposition of the Blood; Or
the Infirmity of a particular Part. Those of the first sort are the thickness
and viscidity of the Blood, or its being Clotted by a prevailing Acid. Hence
the infusion of an Acid Liquor into a Dog's Vein, redundancy of Blood, and the
inconsiderat assumption of cold Liquors, or exposing ones self to the cold
after hot Exercises, are apt to produce Inflammations. Nay, the Blood of
Pleuritic Persons is visibly clotted when let forth, and all the Medicines both
internal and external, that are recomended for Inflammations are such as
dissolve or attenuat the thickened Blood, and drink in the Acid. The Causes
relating to a Particular part that is frequently more liable to Inflammations
than its other Companions, are the weakness of the Innate Spirit of the Part;
the Relaxation, Distention, or disorder of its Fibers, and the hidden remains
of an Acid; all owing to preceding Inflammations, especially if they degenerat
into Ulcers.

If the Acid be very prevalent, the humor hardens, and becomes a Schirrus, not
far distant from a Cancer: If the Volatile Alkali and the Acid be more equally
matched they ferment together, and combine into a salin purulent matter that
discharges it self by an Ulcer. If the stagnation be so great, that small
quantities of Blood cannot Pass, and the innate Spirit of the Part cannot
Correspond with the Animal Spirits, the Blood corrupts and Causes a Gangreen.
If the Alcali of the Blood be more vigorous and powerful than the Acid, it
unlocks the Blood and discusses the Inflammation. If an Inflammation happen in
a temperat Season to young healthy People, and settle only in a fleshy Part, it
is less dangerous than if it siez'd a Nervous Part, or attacked Cachectic old
Persons. For the most part all Inflammations are acute, and accompanied by a
Fever.

As for the Cure of Inflammations, Purging is pernicious. Perhaps upon the
account of the Fever, a gentle Laxative may be allowed. Or if the Belly be
Costive a Clyster of Whey and Honey may be injected. Bleeding is very proper
espicially in the Beginning, as well by way of Revulsion in the opposite side to
the part affected, as by way of Aversion in the same side at some distance, and
by way of Derivation just by it. But we ought to be cautious of not over-doing
and weakening the Patient, or of being misled by the Practices of some in
hotter Climats, that cannot be looked upon as precedents in ours.

What remains of the internal Cure is admirably accounted for by administering
Volatile Sudorifics that unlock and attenuat the Blood, and Absorbent Powders
that inbibe the Acid. Of the former sort are the Spirits of Sal-Armoniac,
volatile Salt of Hartshorn, Venice Treacle, the Spirit of Venice Treacle
Camphoris'd, and especially the Spirit, Essence, Syrup, or Water of Elder
Flowers; To all which we frequently add Laudanum Opiatum, especially if
unquietness thuart the design of Sweating. The Absorbents are Hartshorn,
Ivory, Unicorns-horn, Diaphoretic Antimony, Mineral Bezoar, and especially
Crabs Eyes mixed with Vinegar. Though Vinegar be an acid, yet when joined to
Crabs Eyes, and absorbent Powders, it ferments and assumes a lixivious Urinous
form, which is of admirable efficacy for dissolving clotted Blood. To these we
ought always to add Sperma Ceti, and the Decoctions, or Waters of Vulnerary
Plants as being enriched with a plentiful Alcali. The dulcified Spirit of
Nitre, and all the Preparations of Nitre, are also of excellent use, especially
if the Fever be high.

As for external applications, I refer the Reader to the sixth Book, and shall
only now take notice of two Particulars. 1. The mistake of those who apply
repelling Astringents, in order to straiten the Vessels and hinder the
Corruption of Blood. Whereas the Doctrine of Circulation teaches us that the
Blood conveyed thither by the Arteries, cannot be beat back, or return any
other way than by the Veins: Now to straiten the Vessels that are already
straightened by the swelling, is the ready way to hinder the Bloods access to the
Veins and augment the Inflammation. 2. If the tumor cannot be discussed, we
must bring it to a Head by ripening Applications; and when the Ulcer is open
see it thoroughly cleans'd before we attempt to consolidat.

The general Cure of Inflammations being thus accounted for, we proceed to
Particular Inflammations.

ART. 1. Of a Quinsey, Thrush, and falling of the Uvula or Palate of the Mouth.
THE Inflammation of the Muscles of the Neck, especially those of the Windpipe
and Gullet is styled a Quinsy; under which we comprehend all Inflammations
relating to the Chops. If the Internal Muscles of the Throat or Head of the
Gullet are inflamed it is called Synanche; if the External, Parasynanche; if the
Internal Muscles of the Head of the Windpipe, Cynanche; if the External
Paracynanche. If a Quinsey proceed from the simple Stagnation of pure Blood,
it is accounted Genuin; if the Viscidity of the Lymph be the first Author of the
Swelling, and so accompany or rather cause the Stagnation, it is a spurious or
white Quinsey.

The causes of a Quinsey are the unseasonable suppression of a Flux of Blood,
malignant Miasma's in the Air irritating the Throat and Windpipe, the
assumption of Corrosive Liquors, which provoke the Muscles to contractions;
cold Air, Bones, Pieces of Glass, or whatever happens to disturb the repose of
those Parts, or thicken the Blood, or Lymph. The viscidity or sharpness of the
Lymph, has a peculiar tendency to the Inflammation of the Tonsillae or
Glandules in the Throat; which causes 'em to throw out large Quantities of
glutinous Lymph upon the Tongue and Jaws.

An Imminent Quinsey is ushered in by a difficulty of Breathing, swallowing,
and moving the Neck; and a notable Heat in the Throat. The Symptoms that
accompany it are a difficulty of Breathing, especially in a Cynanche; the
tumor, pain, and redness of the Neck and Tongue, a viscous Film or Crust
proceeding from the Tonsillae and covering the Tongue, a difficulty of
swallowing, especially in a Synanche. A genuine Quinsey is also attended by an
acute Fever, and a distending Convulsive Pulse like that in a Peripneumonia.
But a spurious one by a slow Fever and meeker Symptoms.

If this Inflammation be not quickly discussed, it either choaks the Patient or
becomes an Ulcer, which sometimes distills a purulent matter into the Lungs, and
occasions tragical Symptoms. If the swelling and redness display themselves
visibly upon the external Muscles, it is a good Circumstance: If the internal
swelling, and difficulty of breathing increase without an apparent Tumor, and
be attended by Froth in the Mouth; If the Fever observe the period of a
continual Tertian; if the Vein under the Tongue, when opened, do not bleed;
these, I say, are bad Omens. If the Swelling disappear of a sudden, without the
Signs of Concoction in the Spittle, or diminution of the anxiety of the Breast;
or if the Head, Pleura, or other parts are seized with Pain and inflammation,
by virtue of the Translation of the morbifical Matter, we look for Death.

The Cure is either internal or external. The former is the same with that of
Inflammations in general, providing a due regard be had to the peculiar
constitution of the Parts; as appears by the following Rules.

1. The volatile Salts and absorbent Powders above mentioned, joined to the
dulcifi'd Spirit of Nitre and Laudannm, are given with good success in order to
sweat. Especially Horse-Dung, and the Dung of Birds, as being plentifully
impregnated with a Volatile nitrous Salt; Nitre dissolved in the ordinary Drink,
is also much approved.

2. Amber, Myrrh, Spirit of Hartshorn, and all Medicines recommended for
Catarrhs, are very proper in Quinseys, by reason that the Lymph is always
faulty, as well as the Blood.

3. In the beginning of the Disease, we first open a Vein in the Leg, then in
the Arm, and toward the height, under the Tongue. Before the Invasion of a
Quinsey, if the Patient be not Plethorick, nor the Blood very high, we may
order Blood-letting under the Tongue; but in no other case before the height.
If the Piles or Terms are suppressed, we must always let Blood in the Leg. In
desperate cases we apply Scarify'd Cupping-Glasses to the Neck, Shoulders, and
Chin. In fine, the Constitution of the Patient, and other incident
Circumstances, must be our Directory for regulating the Measures of Bleeding.

4. Epidemical Quinseys, or such as proceed from the malignity of the Air, must
be treated as malignant Diseases, without Bleeding or Purging. And the
Physician ought to avoid their Breath as being very catching.

5. Antimonial Vomits are of singular use in the beginning of the Disease,
especially if it be epidemical, or if the Patient be molested with a bitter
rusty taste in the Mouth, a tickling heat in the Gullet, and a loathing of
Meat. They are improper at any other time, besides the very height of the
Disease, when the suppuration is in some measure advanced, and the Swelling
cannot be laid open. Then indeed a Vomit is the last Refuge. If the Person
cannot swallow any Liquor, let the Throat be tick'ld with Mercurius Vitae with
Honey upon a Feather.

6. Purgatives are improper; as being apt to augment Inflammations. Perhaps in
the beginning, 'twill not be improper to cleanse the first Passages with a
Laxative. But Clysters ought to be injected every Day, during the whole
progress of the Disease.

7. Blistering Plasters applied to the Neck, after the first Blood-letting,
are not improper.

8. If the Inflammation of the Tonsillae, arising from viscid Lymph, be apt to
relapse frequently, let an Issue be cut in the Arm.

9. We must be very nice in distinguishing a Quinsey from a Prunella, which
generally follows Fevers, and requires the application of Medicines improper
for a Quinsey. See the Chap. of Acute Fevers.

The external part of the Cure of a Quinsey is performed,

1. By Gargarisms, Ointments, Cataplasms, and Plasters of discussing
Ingredients, such as Chamomil and Elder-Flowers, Mint, Pennyroyal, Wild
Marjoram, Sage, Hyssop; the Seeds of Dill, Rapes, Mustard and Cummin; Saffron,
Camphyr, Swallow-wort, the Dung of Animals, the Juice of River-Crabs, the
Persons own Urine, the Spirit of Wine, Sal-Armoniac, and Juice of House-leek.
The common Practitioners generally add astringent Ingredients, whereas they are
very pernicious, and augment the Inflammation, by hindering the Bloods access to
the Veins: upon which account we only use attenuating volatile Ingredients; as
for a Gargarism, the Decoction of Rapes mixed with Sal-Armoniac. Or,

Take of Lovage-Roots, six drams; Smallage-Roots, three drams; Elder-flowers, a
handful and a half; Mallows leaves, a handful. Boil them in Barley-water, and
add to the strained Decoction, Honey of Mercury, an ounce; Spirit of Venice
Treacle, six drams; spirit of Sal-Armoniac, a dram. Make a Gargarism.

After the beginning of the Disease, Gargarisms are improper as requiring a
motion prejudicial and painful to the inflamed Parts. Upon which Account, we
order the Patient only to let the Liquor lie in the Mouth for some time. As for
Discussing Cataplasms, those of bruised Wormwood-leaves mixed with Hoggs-Fat;
or of a Swallow's Nest boiled in Wine; applied to the Swelling, are of
excellent use. For a Plaster, we apply that of Melilot softened with distilled
Oil of Amber. For an Ointment, the Oil of sweet Almonds, mixed with
Sal-Armoniac; as also the following Oil.

Take of Brimstone pulveris'd, and Salt of Tartar, of each a Dram. Melt 'em,
and let 'em stand 'till they grow cold. Then pulverise the Mass, and add of the
Oil of sweet Almonds, three ounces; Oil of Camphyr half a Dram. Mix, and set
'em to digest for three Days.

2. If the Tumor be not quickly discussed, we must set aside all sharp
provoking Ingredients, and endeavor to bring it to maturity by soft, temperat,
ripening Medicines. Such are the Decoctions of the Herbs Mallows and Melilot,
Marsh-mallows-Roots, and Figs, in Whey or Milk, and sweetened with Honey for a
Gargarism; or the Oil of sweet Almonds, and Ointment of Marshmallows, with
which we anoint the outward Parts, and then apply the following Cataplasm.

Take a Swallows-nest, with the Dung, three roasted Onyons, and two or three
handfuls of Elder-flowers. Boil 'em in Milk. Beat the Pulp through a Sive, and
add half an Ounce of Album Graecum; half a dram of the distilled Oil of
Chamomil; and a sufficient quantity of the Oil of White Lillies, in order to
make a Cataplasm.

3. The Tumor being thus ripened, we must endeavor to open it, by anointing
the Jaws with Honey mixed with Dog's Dung: Or if that be successless by a
Gargarism of Mustard Seed, boiled in Mead; or of the Oil of Vitriol mixed with
White Wind, and ordering the Patient to Cough, and Hauk; and in the last
extremity, administering a Vomit, or opening the Larynx.

4. When the Ulcer is opened, it ought to be cleans'd by the Decoction of Barley
or Speedwell, mixed with Honey of Roses, or Black-smith's Water, for a
Gargarism. If it prove very sordid, we may add the rectified Spirit of Salt, or
Spirit of Vitriol; and in desperate cases, touch the Ulcer with Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum, or Platerus's green Water mixed with Honey. After it is sufficiently
cleans'd, touch it with an Ointment of Myrrh, Florentin, Orris-Roots,
Burnt-Allum and Honey of Roses, and gargle the Mouth with vulnerary astringent
mixtures.

As for the Thrush, or excoriation of the Mouth, it frequently attends Fevers,
when the Stomac is stuffed with green rusty Humors, and the Physician neglects
to cleanse it, and then it reaches from the Stomac to the Tongue. In other
cases it proceeds from the sharpness of Spittle. If the Crust is black, livid,
green, flat, and continues long dry, it portends a tedious Disease. The Cure
consists in moistening and softening the affected Part. For which end, let the
Juice of Rapes, or mucilage of Quinces, with Nitre or fresh Butter and Sugar,
be applied to the Tongue. If it degenerat into Ulcers, gargle the Mouth with
the Decoction of Speedwell mixed with Honey; or wash the Ulcers with the Phlegm
of Vitriol and Plantan-Water. In Scorbutical Cases, add the spirit of Salt, and
that of Vitriol; and for Venereal cases; Platerus's green Water.

The falling of the Uvula, is cured by applying to it Sal-Armoniac and Pepper;
gargling the Mouth with the Decoction of Self-heal, mixed with Sal-Armoniac and
crude Alum; or the Decoction of Hemp Seed in Vinegar and Water; and applying
to the Crown of the Head, a mixture of Yest, Spirit of Wine, Mastic and Amber.

ART. 2. Of Inflammations of the Stomac, Guts, and Fundament.
THE Causes of an Inflmamation of the Stomac, are the same as those of other
Inflammations. The Symptoms are an Acute Fever, a Tumor, a Pain and sense of
Heat under the short Ribs; an unquenchable Thirst; unquietness and Watchings.
The profundity of the Pain, the comparative invisibility of the Tumor, and the
acuteness of its Symptoms distinguish it from the Inflammation of the Liver, or
of the Muscles of the Belly. Sometimes the Inflammation suppurates; and then if
the purrulent Matter fall inward upon the Guts, there is not so much danger, as
if it were discharged into the external Cavity.

As for the Cure: Purgatives, during the increase are improper: Bleeding ought
to be cautiously managed, by reason of the Swoonings and Convulsive Symptoms
that attend this Diste^per. Clysters are very convenient. But the Sudorifics
recommended above for Inflammations in general are the Basis of the Cure.
Especially Antimonial Nitre, or the dulcifi'd spirit of Nitre, mixed with the
Decoction of Liquorice for ordinary Drinking. The Sugar of Lead mixed with
Poterius's Antihectic, Pulp of Tamarinds, Mineral Bezoar, and Tartar
vitriolated. Externally foment with the Decoction of Chamomil and red Roses in
Wine; and apply discussing Cataplasms of Aromatic Plants boiled in Wine. If
the Tumor incline to suppurat, apply the following Cataplasm.

Take of Fenugree Seeds, three Ounces; Pigeon's Dung, two Ounces; Yest, and
Honey, of each an Ounce; Oil of Chamomil, an ounce and a half. Mix, etc.

As for internal Administrations: In case of Suppuration, exhibit Turpentin
dissolved with the Yelk of an Egg in Scabious Water, or the rectified Spirit of
Tartar, and the Juice of Syrup of Scabious. If the Tumor is open, administer
the Decoction of Hyssop mixed with Honey, or Chalybeat Milk, or the Decoction of
China-Roots and Scabious Leaves with absorbent Powders, Balsam of Peru, Balsam
of Sulphur, and the Oil or Extract of the Flowers of St. John's Wort: If the
Stomac be ulcerated by the corrosion of sharp Liquors, administer first a
Vomit, and then the Mucilages of Fleawort and Quince-seeds, mixed with
Tragacanth, and Syrup of Roses.

The Inflammation of the Guts is caused by Dysenteries, Ruptures, Iliac Pains,
etc. The Symptoms are a Tumor, Heat, and beating Pain; a Lipyria Fever, in
which the external Parts are cold, while the internal are unsufferably hot;
Costiveness, Retraction of the Anus, and suppression of Urine. If the small
Guts are the seat of the Inflammation, it appears about the Navel, and is
attended by a difficulty of Breathing, and Vomiting. If the great Guts are only
affected, the Swelling appears in the sides of the Belly, the Loins are
infested with a weighty Pain; the Symptoms are more remiss and bear downward.
If the Pain attending the Iflammation be suddenly extinguished, it notifies a
Gangrene. For Cure; let Clysters of Milk, Honey, and purified Nitre be speedily
injected; let a Vein be opened in the Arm oftener than once, if there be
occasion; let a Caul of a Sheep killed in the very Room with the Patient, be
laid upon the Belly, and, if the Pain do not cease, let it be shifted for fresh
ones, twice, or thrice; let the dis^ill'd Oil of Lead, with Oil of Roses, be
applied at other times; and let the dulcifi'd Spirit of Nitre, with Laudanum
Opiatum, Sugar and Oil of Lead, and proper Sudorifics, be internally
administted.

The Inflammations of the Anus, are caused by the suppression of the Piles,
excessive riding, and such like external Causes. The Symptoms are the same as
those of Inflammations in general. For Cure, open a Vein in the Arm; inject
Clysters of emollient Ingredients boiled in Milk; or if these be insufficient,
of Lin-seed and Rape-seed Oil; and if the Excrements be hardened, add a dram of
Sal Gem. If the Inflammation be so great that Clysters cannot be injected,
administer Raisins, or such like gentle Laxatives for opening the Belly; and
gentle Sudorifics for promoting Sweat. Externally apply the Decoction of Mint
and Agrimony in Wine, or Limewater; or that of Mullein Flowers, and Henbane
Leaves in Whey; or the mucilage of Quinces extracted with Houseleek-Water, and
mixed with Sugar of Lead. If the Inflammation was caused by the Contact of any
sharp thing, such as Paper covered with Pepper or Vitriol; foment with the
Decoctions of emollient Ingredients in Milk, mixed with the Whites of Eggs. If
it cannot be discussed, apply Rulandus's Balsam of Sulphur (made of Sugar and
the Oil of Poppies) and inject Clysters of Chalybeat Milk mixed with Turpentine
and Honey of Roses. After ulceration, apply Fulminatory Gold mixed with the Oil
of Sweet-Almonds, and exhibit internally vulnerary Decoctions.

ART. 3. Of Inflammations of the Mesentery, Sweetbread, and Caul.
THE Inflammations of the Mesentery, proceed from the same Causes as all other
Inflammations, particularly from the critical translation of morbifical Matter
into their Glandules, from the unseasonable suppression of a Dysentery, or from
a rupture haling it out of its natural Seat. The Signs are very obscure and
uncertain, by reason of the Mesentery's distance from the external surface, and
its open correspondence with the Nerves of other Parts, which frequently
obtrude the effect upon us, under the notion of the principal Cause. However
the following Symptoms will give us some light into the matter, viz. A sense of
weight in the Belly, especially when the Person turns himself in his Bed; a
gentle Heat toward the Navel, a small Pain, and a sort of distention and Heat
under the Stomac; and the serosity of the Excrements, or their mixture with
Chyle, when the Stomac is not disordered. It Is distinguished from the
Inflammations that the Navel is liable to, by the remissness and dulfless of
its Pain, and invisibility of the Tumor, or absence of apparent hardness. If
the remote Parts of the Mesentery are only inflamed, the Fever that
accompanies is but slow; but if the Parts adjacent to the Guts be seized, the
Fever is acute, the Symptoms much higher, and the Guts share in the
Inflammation. When the Tumor suppurats, the Fever and other Symptoms are
exalted, and when it is ready to break, a shivering, and sometimes a shaking
seizes the Person, which are sometimes followed by the evacuation of purulent
Matter by Stool or Urine.

These Inflammations are but slow-paced, and require a long time before they
come to maturity. Their Symptoms are so obscure, that they do not much trouble
the Patient at first, though by degenerating into Schirrus's or Ulcers throwing
purulent Matter upon the Entrails, they frequently cause Hectics, Cachexies,
Gangrenes, etc. If the purulent Matter be cast into the Guts, and voided by
Stool; It is distinguished from that of Imposthumes in the Guts by this
difference, viz. That from the Mesentery comes in a body, mixed with some
Blood, and without Pain; whereas the other is squeezed out by drops, with
violent Gripings and an Acute Fever.

As for the Cure: Since the Fever and Symptoms are not Acute, Bleeding is
improper; or if any be allowed, that of the Hemorhoid Veins is only convenient.
Purgatives are hurtful; but emollient Clysters are of excellent use. The better
part of the Cure depends upon Discussing Sudorifics, especially the Tincture
and Spirit of Tartar, the carminative Spirit, the Essence of Steel, the
Essences of bitter Herbs, such as Wormwood, Centory, Fumitory, etc. The Essence
of Gum Ammoniac, and Chalybeat Diaphoretics. Externally, we apply the Plaster
of Gum Ammoniac with that of Hemlock (providing it do not exasperate the Pain.
If it do, we conclude that the Inflammation is become an Imposthume, and the
Plaster ought to be removed.) When the Imposthume breaks, and the purulent
Matter is voided by Urine, it runs first plentifully, and afterward intermits;
nay, oft-times the Urine it self is very plentiful, and seems to precipitat a
laudable Sediment to the bottom, which is nothing else but the melting of the
Humors of the Body, and is justly looked upon as a very bad Sign. Now when we
are appehensive of an Imposthume, 'twill be requisite to give Diuretics and
Abstergents, especially Turpentin dissolved with the Yelk of an Egg, and mixed
with Chalybeats; the Balsam of Peru, Rhubarb, the Decoctions of Sassafras,
China, Liquorice, and Jujubes; and the Decoction of Agrimony, St. John's Wort,
Cichory, etc. in Whey.

The Inflammations and subsequent Schirrus's and Imposthumes of the
Sweetbread, are of the same nature as those of the Mesentery, and equally apt
to disguise themselves under the cover of Chronical Diseases, that in effect
owe their Birth to them. The like may be said of those of the Caul. Both the
one and the other are Cured as those of the Mesentery, or other Inflammations.

ART. 4. Of Inflammations of the Internal Parts of the Breast, and particularly
of a Pleurisy and Peripneumonia.
THE Blood being exposed to the influence of Air in the Lungs, is apt to cause
Inflammations in the adjacent Parts. When the Lungs or both their sides are
inflamed, we call it a Peripneumonia; if the Pleura and only one side of the
Lungs are affected, it is a Pleurisy. Sometimes the Mediastinum, Midriff, and
the backpart of the Breast, or the Membranes of the Shoulders and Neck, share
of the Inflammation by turns.

The cause of such Inflammations is a vicious Acid, which both provokes the
Parts to Contractions, and disposes the Blood for Curdling. The remote Causes
are cold Air, or cold Drink, after great Heats, violent Motion, excessive
drinking of spirituous Liquors, the suppression of the Terms, or of a Dysentery
(which does not radically differ from a Pleurisy,) a Malignant Constitution of
the Air, the unseasonable retreat of a Scab or Cuticular Eruptions, external
B^^^ses, Falls, etc.

Some of these Inflammations are Benign; others Malignant or Epidemical, as
proceeding from the Air: some are principal Diseases, others only retainers to
other distempers, as Fevers, etc. some are simple Inflammations only of one
Part, others Complicated as when the Middriff is inflamed at the same time with
the Pleura: some are continual, others periodical and apt to return frequently
after intermissions, by reason of some small remains of the acid Ferment, that
were not extirpated in preceding Inflammations: some Pleurisies are called
Ascending, when the seat of the Pain is above the third Rib, reckoning from the
Neck, in which Region the Intercostal Vessels are derived from the Axillary;
others descending, when the Pain is seated betwixt the third and seventh Ribs,
where the Intercostal Vessels are derived from the inferior Trune of the great
Artery. Lastly, some Pleurisies are Genuin, accompanied by Fevers and other
Symptoms, relating only to the Pleura and one side of the Lungs; others are
spurious as being free from acute Fevers.

Of the spurious Pleurisies we shall mention four Instances. 1. When the
external Muscles of the Breast and the internal Intercostal Muscles are only
inflamed. In this case the Fever is slow, or there is none at all; the Pulse is
not very hard, the pain is gentle and does not shoot, nor is it much
exasperated by touching, and the Patient is easy when he lies on the opposite
side. 2. When the Lymph or Serum impregnated with a vicious acid stagnats in
the Pleura, without inflaming either it or the Lungs. This sort of Bastard
Pleurifies frequently invades Scorbutical Persons, or those whose nervous
Systeme is infirm. Its Symptoms are, a shooting pain in the side, without
Fever or Thirst, a laudable Pulle, and little or no Coughing. 3. When a sharp
serous Humor distends the Pleaura and intercostal Muscles. This kind of
Pleurisies is generally imputed to Wind and Vapors. Its Symptoms are a wandering
periodical pain, that does not shoot, a freedom from a Fever, Coughing, or
bloody Spittings; and a sensible ease accruing by lying on the opposite side to
the part affected. 4. When the Worms in the Guts occasion all the Symptoms that
attend a genuin Plurisie, and are only discovered by the disorders of the Belly
and uneasiness of the Stomac, complicated with Pleuritical Symptoms.

The Symptoms common to all Inflammations in the Breast, are, 1. A difficult
frequent Respiration. 2. A continual acute Fever, Headache, Thirst, and
Watching. 3. A frequent, hard, quick, and intermitting Pulse. 4. The Redness
and Inflammation of the Face and Eyes, and especially of that side of the Face
corresponding to the inflamed side of the Lungs. 5. A troublesome Cough, which
at first is dry; but afterward casts forth a thin parti-colour'd Matter, and
in progress of time, Blood it self. Toward the declension of the Disease, the
Spittings become white, thick, and concocted.

The peculiar Symptoms of a Peripneumonia, are a notable difficulty of
Breathing, and fear of suffocation, a heavy pain in time of Coughing toward
the lower and hinder part of the Thorax, a propensity to Vomit during the first
days of the Disease, and a peculiar exaltation of all feverish Symptoms.
Pleuritical Persons are molested with a pricking stitch in the side, especially
during the time of Inspiration; and are not so apt to Vomit. When the Midriff
is inflamed, Respiration is more unequal, a dull sense of pain girds the Belly
and Back a little above the Loins; Inspiration is attended by uneasiness about
the Sternum and lower parts of the short Ribs; the Hypochondria seem to be
distended; and the Cough is not so moist as in other Inflammations. The
Inflammation of the Mediastinum resembles a Pleurisy in all its Symptoms,
excepting that of a heavy sort of pain toward the middle of the fore part of
the Breast, without pricking or stitching. If the Inflammation tend to
suppuration, they are attended by a shivering and increase of pain, Fever, and
other Symptoms, which disappear upon its maturity, and return for a short time
while the Skin or Membran of the Tumor is a-breaking.

Inflammations in the Thorax are either discussed, or evacuated by Spitting,
Sweats, Bleeding, Looseness, or a plentiful flux of Urine. The Inflammation of
the Midriff is apt to cause fatal Phrensies. A Pleurisy is not so dangerous as
a Peripneumonia. If the Patient spit white smooth Matter about the Fourth Day,
the Pleurisy disappears on the Seventh; if these spittings be put off 'till
the Seventh, the Disease is prolonged to the Fourteenth. If the Person spit but
little, and that a thin crude Matter, or pure Blood, or a bilious rusty Humor,
with great Pain and difficulty of Breathing, it is a desperate case. The Urine
affords no certain Prognostic in these Diseases; since all the true signs of
Concoction belong more naturally to the spittings, which are oft-times
concocted when the Urine is crude, and e contra: In the beginning of a
Pleurisy, or Peripneumonia, bilious Vomitings are well looked upon; but during
the further progress of the Disease they are pernicious. A Peripneumonia
supervening to a Pleurisy or Quinsey is very dangerous; but a Pleurisy
following that is a good Omen. Phrensies and doatings with a ghastly
Countenance, and a Cessation of pain, attending Pleurisies are for the most
part fatal. In a word, the good or bad Prognostic of Pleurisies and
Peripneumonia's depends upon the meekness or fierceness of the feverish
Symptoms; only the smallness and intermission of the Pulse is not so formidable
as in other Cases. If these Inflammations are not quickly discussed they become
Imposthumes, which, if managed amiss, occasion a Phthisic.

As for the Cure, the Indications are threefold. 1. To discuss the stagnating
Blood. Or, 2. To promote its evacucuation by Spitting. Or, 3. To ripen and
bring it to a Head. In Pursuance of these designs, let the following Rules be
taken notice of.

1. In a Peripneumonia, Bleeding is of no use; in a malignant Pleurisy it is
pernicious; in a Benign one it may be serviceable, when the Blood abounds, and
the Disease is very Acute; but for the most part, it is not so proper as
sudorifics, nor so effectual a preventer of suppuration. When it is put in
Practice 'twill be of use to distinguish an ascending Pleurisy from the
descending; in the former we Bleed for Revulsion in the Leg, and for Aversion
in the Arm: In the latter, for Revulsion in the Arm, and for Aversion in the
Arm of the opposite side. However we ought to draw forth but a small Quantity at
one time; and repeat the operation after short intervals. 2. Purges and Vomits
are improper either in Pleurisies or Inflammations of the Lungs. The former are
apt to cause a Looseness and retard the Concoction of the Spittings. The latter
draws humors to the Breast, and so cannot choose but be pernicious, unless the
Original of the evil lie in the Stomac, or the Inflammation be degenerat into
an Ulcer. Clysters indeed are very Convenient, when the Belly is Costive. 3. Of
all Medicines Sudorifics are the best, especially for pleurisies. In the
beginning we exhibit volatile Salts and Opiats, notwithstanding the violent Heat
of the Disease; and toward the height, fixed Diaphoretics, especially
Diaphoretic Antimony. 4. Expectorating Remedies ought not to be administered
till toward the height of the Disease, when the matter begins to Concoct. If
they are given sooner, they promote Coughing, and consequently the frustraneous
and painful concussion of the inflamed Parts, not to speak of their attempting
to evacuat crude Matter. However when their season comes we ought to beware of
mixing 'em with Sugar, Honey, or sweet Acids. 5. Opiats are only useful during
the increase of the Disease; they allay the pain, and promote the Concoction of
the Matter; but in the height, when the Matter is already prepared, they hinder
its due evacuation. 6. There Is nothing more pernicious than cold Drink. It
hurts the Lungs, increases the Inflammation, provokes the Cough, hinders
Concoction, and thwarts evacuation. Therefore let their ordinary Drink be
always warm, and such as the Decoction of Barley and Liquorice, mixed with the
Tincture of Poppy Flowers.

Now, as for the Specifics that dissolve stagnating Blood, those for a
Pleurisy are of the same use in all Inflammations of the Breast. Such are red
Poppies, Carduus Benedictus, and Carduus Mariae, especially their seeds;
Chervil-water, the Decoction, or Powder of Burdoc-roots, the Juice of
Dandelyon, the Soot of Wood-fire given to a dram in Elder Vinegar; the Pizzle
of a Whale, or Heart, given in Powder to a dram, or by way of Decoction; the
Powders of Boars-teeth, Pike Bones, Perch and Carp-stones, given to two
scruples; the volatile Salt of the Jawbone of a Pike; the Blood of a Goat, or of
a Hare strangled after Hunting, dried and given in Powder, to a dram; the
Infusion or Juice of Horse or Sheeps Dung, the Powder of Pigeons Dung, Sperma
Ceti given to a dram with Castor; the Spirit of Nitre dulcified with the Spirit
of Wine impregnated by Cohobation with Antipleuritical Ingredients, given to
two drams; the Bezoardic Tincture, given to a dram; the Flowers of Sulphur, or
Gunpowder, given to a dram; and Antimony calcined by the heat of the Sun. The
forms of prescription are as follows.

Take of the Seeds of Carduus Benedictus, and Carduus Mariae, of each two
drams; white Poppy Seeds, a dram; with Chervil-water, make an Emulsion. To
which add of the Jawbone of a Pike, half a dram; Diaphoretic Antimony, a
scruple; sweeten it for a draught in order to Sweat.

Take of the Waters of Carduus Benedictus, and Chervil, of each an ounce and a
half; of Treacle Water, six drams; clarified Juice of Dandelyon, an ounce and a
half; prepared Crabs Eyes, a dram and a half; Syrup of red Poppies, an ounce
and a half. Mix and exhibit two Spoonfuls every quarter of an Hour.

Take of the Extracts of red Poppy Flowers, Holy-hocks, and Misletoe of the
Oak, of each a dram and a half; shavings of Boars-teeth, and an Unicorn's Horn,
of each two drams; Jawbone of a Pike, a dram and a half; the inner Rinds of
Filberts, a dram; Antimonial Nitre, half a dram; Magistery of Coral, a dram and
a half; with the thickened Juice of Scabious, make a Mass; of which a scruple
is a Dose, to be given in Poppy Flower Water.

Take of the Waters of Carduus Mariae, Chervil, and red Poppies, of each an
ounce; the spirit of Venice Treacle Camphoris'd, three drams; Diaphoretic
Antimony, and Jaw Bone of a Pike, of each half a dram; volatile Salt of the
Jawbones of a Pike, twelve grains; Laudanum Opiatum, three grains; Syrup of red
Poppies, an ounce. Mix, and give a Spoonful now and then.

Take of the Blood of a Goat, a scruple; Mineral Bezoar, half a scruple;
Laudanum Opiatum, a grain. Make a Powder for two Doses.

Take of the spirit of Venice Treacle Camphoris'd, three drams; Essence of
Saffron, a dram. Mix. Dose fifty or sixty Drops.

If these dissolving Medicines cannot discuss the Inflammation by Sweating, we
must endeavor to promote the Concoction and Evacuation of the Matter by
Spitting. For this end, we first use thickening Ingredients, and after
Concoction those of an attenuating force. Of the former sort are the Decoctions
of Barley, Liquorice, Elecampane, Scabious, Jujubes, Raisins, Speedwell, red
Poppies, etc. An Apple excavated, stuffed with a dram of Frankincense, or
Mastic, and half a dram of the Flowers of Sulphur; and so roasted, and
^^hibited with Carduus Benedictus Water; the spirit of Sal-Armoniac, the
Conserve of Violets, the Syrup of Poppies with the Flowers of Benzoin, and
above all the fresh Oil of Linseed given to three ounces in a convenient
Vehicle; or in want of that; the expressed Oil of sweet Almonds. As for the
latter Indication, viz. Attenuating, and Expectorating concocted Matter, it is
compassed by adding to the Decoction of these Ingredients in Mead, the Syrups
of Hissop, Hedgmustard or Tobacco, and especially the fresh Juice of Radishes,
and dulcified spirit of Nitre.

As for external Application, it is proper to allay the pain by fomenting the
Part with the Decoction of Emollient and Anodyn Ingredients or applying
Frogs-spawn with Burdock Roots, or an Ointment of the Juice of Coleworts, and
Powder of Cummin seed; or of the Fat of a Country Mouse, or Hen's Dung, with
Oil of Chamomil. Or Thus,

Take of the Ointment of Marshmallows, an ounce; Oil of sweet Almonds, half an
ounce; distilled Oil of Cummin, a scruple; Camphyr, nine grains. Mix and anoint
the part every three hours, applying afterward the Plaster of Melilot, mixed
with the Plaster called Filii Zachariae, and softened with the Oil of Mullein.
Every thing must be applied hot, and the part kept very Warm.

If the Inflammation can neither be discussed, nor dissolved by Expectoration,
'twill be needful to promote its suppuration, by giving inwardly Preparations
from Tobacco, Ground Ivy, Chervil, and Scabious, and applying outwardly
Cataplasms of Holy-hocks boiled in Milk, or the Plaster Filii Zachariae. After
it is sufficiently Ripe, we must provide for opening it by Vomiting, Sneezing,
or administering the Decoction and smoke of Tobacco, which is of Excellent use,
especially when the Imposthume is seated in the Lungs. Otherwise we may
discover the part where it lies, by the Heat, Pain, Swelling, etc. and open a
direct Passage into it betwixt two of the Ribs. When the Imposthume opens of it
self, its Matter does not always run into the Cavity of the Breast, as many
imagine, but is oft-times gathered within the dilated Membran that surrounds
the Pleura, in which Case a Paracentesis, or opening in the usual place for an
Empyema, is of no use. After opening the Imposthume the next thing is to
cleanse it by exhibiting the Decoctions of Chervil, or rather the Syrup or
Juice of ground Ivy, and Syrup of Tobacco, with the Balsam of Sulphur, Balsam
of Peru, and the Spirit and Oil of Turpentin.

Having dispatched the Cure of a G^^uin Pleurisy, it remains to touch briefly
at the four Spurious kinds above mentioned. The first of which is treated as
other external Inflammations in general. The second proceeding from a sharp
Acid Lymph, stagnating in the Pleura, requires volatile Salts, such as the
spirit of Sal-Armoniac, etc. mixed with Antipleuritical Specifics, and during
the increase of the Disease with Opiats. If the Urine be muddy and Precipitat a
Sediment, it is proper to add Diuretics, in order to discharge the Matter by
Urine, according to Nature's Direction. Externally Oily fat things wo' not be
so convenient, as dry hot Bags, or Frictions with a hot Cloth, and a Plaster
of the volatile Salt of Urine and Turpentin. The third sort is also cured by
volatile Salts and Diaphoretics, mixed with Opiats; to which in scorbutical
Cases we add Adtiscorbutics. And Lastly, the spurious Pleurisies that proceed
from Worms, are admirably accounted for, by exhibiting Carduus Benedictus
Waterin which Quicksilver is boiled, and the spirit of Sulphur, or dulcified
Spirit of Vitriol.

ART. 5. Of Inflammations and Ulcers of the Liver and Spleen.
INflammations of the Liver are frequenty caused by the external application of
hot Plasters, and Cupping-glasses, not to speak of the common Causes of other
Inflammations. As for Diagnostics, it is needful to observe that when the unequal
Part of the Liver is inflamed, they are attended mostly by the Symptoms of a
Genuin Pleurisy and when the Concave is chiefly troubled, the Symptoms of the
Stomac and Guts, such as Vomiting, Looseness, Inappetency, Loathing, Sighing,
Hickcup, etc. are most notorious. The Pain of an Inflamed Liver is always
obscure, heavy, and distending; for the shooting Pains that sometimes infest
the right Hypocondrium, are justly charged to the Colon: The Fever heat, and
such like Symptoms, are not so Acute as in other Cases, by reason that the
Liver enjoys only a small quantity of arterious Blood. Oft-times the Midriff
shares the Inflammation with the Liver, by means of the Ligament which annexes
the one to the other; and then the Person is sensible of Pain in the Throat, as
if it were pulled downward when he breaths, he is troubled with a dry
ineffectual Cough, difficulty of Breathing, and a quick unequal Pulse, and
chooses rather to lie on his Back than on either side.

Thus the Inflammation of the Liver is distinguished from a Pleurisy in the
Right-side, by the remissness of its Symptoms, the absence of a stitch or
shooting Pain, the dryness and meekness of the Cough, the largeness and
openness of the Pulse, the sense as it were of a weight hanging upon the
Right-side of the Thorax, and the easiness of Respiration in respect of
Inspiration. It Is distinguished from the Colic by the Fever, Cough, and
difficulty of Breathing, that the Colic is a stranger to; as also from the
Inflammation of the Muscles of the Belly, by the anxiety of the Breast,
Comparative invisibility of the Tumor, intenseness of its Symptoms, and the
absence of a beating Pain. Sometimes a reddish black line appears in the right
Hypocondrium, and by its pain discovers the Inflammation of the Liver.
Sometimes the Liver reaches to the very middle of the Belly, and discovers its
Tumor in the Center.

As touching the Prognostic, the Inflammation of the Concave part is more
dangerous, than that of the Unequal, especially if attended by a Hiccough; if
the Fever be very acute, the Belly swollen, and the external Parts cold, while
the Internal burn within, or if black greenish Matter be Vomited, it is a
desperate Case. If the Inflammation and Fever continue above twenty Days, it
degenerats into an Ulcer or Schirrus; and the purulent Matter is voided mostly
by Stool or Urine, or at least but very rarely by Vomiting or Spitting. If a
Copious evacuation of Urine follow the use of Nitre, it is a good Omen.

The internal Cure is compassed by Antipleuritical Medicines, such as the Sugar
of Lead, or rather the Crystals of Lead, with Spirit of Nitre, Antimonial
Nitre, Diaphoretic Antimony, volatile Salt of Vipers, and the common Sudorifics
mixed with Laudanum Opiatum, and bitter Apperients. Externally we apply the
spirit of Wine Camphoris'd with Plantan Water, or Nitre with Vinegar of Roses
and the Juice of Houseleek; or what follows.

Take of the Ointment of Marshmallows, half an ounce; Oil of Wormwood, two
drams; distilled Oil of Dill, a scruple; Camphyr, nine grains. Make a Liniment,
and anoint the Part. Or,

Take of the Waters of Henbane, Plantan, and Water Lillies, of each an ounce;
purified Nitre, half a dram; Camphyr dissolved in spirit of Wine, fifteen
grains. make an Epithema, to be applied Warm.

Sometimes the Inflammation of the Liver proceeds from excessive Venery, and
it is cured thus. Take a living black Cock and cut out his Liver, which bruise
in four ounces of Vinegar of Roses, till it be quite dissolved. Then strain the
Vinegar, and exhibit it warm for a Draught; in the mean while, let the Patient
take every Morning a Draught of the Decoction of Liquorice, Cichory, Rhubarb,
Lesser Centory, Liverwort, and the inner Rinds of Elder; adding to Every
Draught a scruple of Sperma Ceti.

If notwithstanding these Precautions the Inflammation come to a head, which
will appear by the Fever, Heat, and Shiverings that attend it, and their
abatement when it is over; in that Case we exhibit inwardly the Decoction of
China Roots, Liquorice and Raisins. And apply Emollient Cataplasms, with
Saffron, and Wormwood Tops. If the swelling be seated in the Unequal part, it
may be opened with a Knife, or a Potential Caustic. If it lie in the Concave
side, we must endeavor by all means to break it, and when it is broken follow
the conduct of Nature, in promoting the evacuation of the purulent Matter. As,
if it be emptied into the Guts, we exhibit Mead for tempering its sharpness,
and inject Clysters; if it be dischar'd by Urine, we administer Oxymel, with
the Decoctions of Smallage, Parssey, Juniper Berries, etc. in Mead. If it
recoyl into the Stomac, and cause Vomiting, we forward it with fat Broth, Oil
of sweet Almonds, etc. If it corrode the Membran, and cast it self into the
Cavity of the Abdomen, it is a very dangerous case, in which some choose to open
the Abdomen, and give vent to it; in the mean while we exhibit inwardly the
Decoctions of China, Sarsaparilla, and the Vulnerary Ingredients, to which we
add Turpentin dissolved in the yelk of an Egg, or the Balsam of Sulphur
prepared with Oil of Turpentin.

The Inflammations of the Spleen ought to be nicely distinguished from those of
the adjacent right Kidney, as being attended by a beating Pain, toward the
fore-side of the Abdomen, difficulty of Breathing, a moderat continual Fever;
whereas the Inflammations of the Kidney display themselves mostly in the Back,
and their Fever is very high, without any sensible Pulsation. In Inflammations
of the Spleen, Bleeding at the left Nostril, Fluxes of the Piles, a Looseness
and Pleutiful evacuations of Urine, attended by the signs of Concoction, are
good Omens. Their Cure is the same as that of other Inflammations; internally
all preparations of Lead, mixed with Diaphoretics; and externally, the Plaster
of Hemlock with the Oil of Camphyr, and the Syrup of Elder, with Sugar of Lead,
are of excellent use.

ART. 6. Of Inflammations and Ulcers of the Kidneys.
THE Inflammations of the Kidneys may proceed from Riding, Falls, Jumping,
Stones in the Kidneys, excessive Venery, etc. Their Symptoms are; a heat of
Urine and Strangury; a sense of heat and pain in the Loins, which by the
Correspondence of the Membrans, frequently reaches upwards to the short Ribs,
and along the back, so that the Person cannot bow his Body, and besides is
frequently molested with Vomiting; and likewise downwards toward the Ureter,
Bladder, Huckle-bone and Thigh, causing a numness in the Legs. Sometimes when
one Kidney is inflamed, the other is either by Sympathy seized with Spasmodical
Contractions, or so oppressed with the Quantity of Blood, that it is unfit for
secretion, and causes a Dysuria: To these Symptoms we add Costiveness and
Chilness of external Parts. Sometimes a simple Stone in the Kidneys, apes the
Symptoms of an Inflammation, but the continual Duration and Pulsation of the
Pain, the acute continual Fever, the heat and difficulty in making Water, that
attend the latter, and are strangers to the former, will point out the
Distinction. If an Inflammation of the Reins happen to weak puny Persons, or be
attended by doting, or if it become an Ulcer, it is very dangerous. The Flux of
the Emrods is a good sign; but white purulent Urine, with the abatement of the
Fever, and extenuation of the Legs and Thighs, is a certain forerunner of
Death.

As for the Cure, the external Remedies are the same as those prescribed for a
Quinsey, and the internal are the Specifics for a Pleurisy, especially Nitre,
Sugar of Lead, and the Juice of River Crabs, given with the Decoction of
Prunes, or the Emulsions of cold Seeds. Purgations are noxious, unless
crudities disturb the Stomac, in which Case the gentlest Laxatives are only
allowable. Emollient Clysters, or those of Milk, Turpentin, and the yelk of
Eggs, are proper. Diuretics in the Beginning increase the Inflammation, but
when the matter is concocted, the more temperat sort of 'em is useful,
especially Winter Cherries, Liquorice, Turpentin, etc. Or,

Take of the Waters of Winter Cherries, Broom and St. John's wort, of each an
ounce; distilled Vinegar, six drams; dulcified spirit of Nitre, half a dram;
Tartar Vitriolated, fifteen grains; Syrup of Ground Ivy, half an ounce. Mix.
Dose a spoonful or two.

Externally, we first Blood 'em in the Arm, then in the Ancle; and apply the
juice of House-leek, with the juice of River Crabs and Camphyr, to which we
sometimes add the Oil of Henbane, or expressed Oil of Poppies. Langius
recommends an Ointment of Crude Alum, mixed with the whites of Eggs. If by
these means the Inflammation cannot be discussed, we must promote its
suppuration inwardly by the Decoction of Liquorice, Barley, Pellitory of the
Wall, etc. And outwardly by Cataplasms of Emollient Ingredients boiled in Milk.

Ulcers of the Reins are sometimes the effect of Inflammations, and sometimes
of the Corrosion of a Stone. The former are less dangerous, and are attended by
a whitish Urine, which by standing precipitats a white Purulent Sediment,
whereas in the latter Case the Sediment is Ashy colored, and the pain in the
Loins more biting and gnawing. In either case fetid Stools are a good sign. For
Cure we first exhibit a Vomit, in order to cleanse the Ulcer, then Pills of
sweet Mercury with Turpentin or Balsam Capivi; the Decoction of Woods, Parsley,
Chervil, Chicles and Agrimony, and above all the Troches of Winter Cherries,
and the Powder of dried river Crabs. Or the following Decoction.

Take of Agrimony and Flowers of St. John's wort, of each a handful;
Mastic-wood, an ounce and a half; Comfrey Roots, half an ounce; Seeds of St.
John's wort, three drams. Boil them in Water, etc. The Spaw Waters and
absorbent Powders are also not improper. If the Ulcer be seated in the outside
of the Reins, and seize the Muscles of the Back, it ought to be laid open.

ART. 7. Of Inflammations and Ulcers of the Bladder.
THE Bladder having only a few small Blood Vessels, is seldom or never inflamed
by internal Causes; but mostly by external injuries, or the assumption of
Spanish Flies, or the cutting of the Stone. The Symptoms are a Distention,
Heat, Hardness, Tumor, and unsufferable Pain in the Pubes; a suppression of
Urine, Tenesmus, Costiveness, acute Fever, and sometimes Doting. It is a
dangerous Disease, as being very apt to degenerat into a Gangreen, unless it be
seated in the muscular Neck of the Bladder, in which Case it oft-times
suppurats and becomes a troublesome Ulcer. The suppuration is discovered by the
Remission of the Symptoms; and when the Ulcer breaks by the evacuation of
Purulent Matter with the Urine, without it break into the Cavity of the
Abdomen, and then it frequently gains a Passage by Imposthumes in the Groyn.

For Cure, we treat these Inflammations after the same manner, as those of the
Kidneys, in order to discuss 'em. As for Injections of Cooling Liquors they are
altogether useless, partly because they do not reach the Part, and partly
because, supposing their entrance into the Bladder, they cannot conveniently be
voided again. The Ulcers of the Bladders ought to be carefully distinguished
from those of the Urethra, which frequently void purulent matter, without the
Urine, and cause a violent pain in making Water, which is not found in Ulcers
of the Bladder, unless they be seated just in its Neck. Ulcers are cured by
dulcifying the humors of the Body, and consequently the Urine; cleansing and,
consolidating the Ulcer, and mitigating the Pain. The Ingredients that are
proper for these Purposes are frequently mentioned above. The forms of Recipe's
are as follows.

Take of the Herbs Agrimony, Plantan and Horse-tail, of each half an handful;
Liquorice Roots, two drams; Boil them in Plantan and Betony Water, till the
third Part be Consumed. To half a pound of the strained Liquor, add Honey of
Roses, an ounce and a half. Mix, and exhibit a Draught twice a day, for
mitigating the sharp humors; for which end the Decoction of Ground Pine in Milk
is also very useful.

Take of Turpentin, six drams; Honey, an ounce; with the yelk of one Egg,
dissolve 'em in four ounces of Spanish Wine. Mix. Dose, six drams; for the
abovementioned use, and for cleansing the Ulcer.

Take of the Shavings of Lignum Sanctum, three ounces; Roots of Sarsaparilla,
Liquorice, and Eryngo, of each an ounce; of the Herbs Agrimony, Speedwell, and
Ground Ivy, of each half a handful; Flowers of Roses and Violets, of each three
little handfuls; Raisins, an ounce and a half. Boil them in Water, and exhibit
a Draught of the strained Decoction frequently, for consolidating the Ulcer.

Take of Liquorice Roots, two ounces; red Vetches, a little handful; the Rinds
of Beans, an ounce; Plantan Leaves, a handful; Boil them in Water, with a
little lie, adding two ounces of Turpentin dissolved in Honey to a pound of the
strained Decoction; and in desperate Cases the Ointment Aegyptiacum. Mix, and
inject it with a Syringe for cleansing the Ulcer.

Take of Ladies Mantle, and Tops of St. John's wort, of each a handful;
Marshmallow-roots, half an ounce; boil them in Limewater, adding to ten ounces
of the strained Liquor, one ounce of the Syrup of Comfry, and three or four
drams of the vulnerary Essence. Mix, for injection, in order to consolidat.
Bathing in hot Baths, and drinking Spaw Waters, are much approved, both for
Inflammations and Ulcers of the Bladder.

ART. 8. Of a Phrenzy or Inflammation of the Membranes of the Brain.
THE Inflammation of the Membranes, and some part of the substance of the
Brain, was called by the Ancients Sphacelus; as that of the Midriff, was called
Phrenitis, from (...) Diaphragma; and indeed all derivative Words ending in
it is, signified the Inflammation of the Part, whose Name they are derived from,
as Pleuritis, Hepatitis, Nephritis, etc. However, that we may not depart from
the customary manner of speaking, we shall treat of the Inflammations of the
Brain, under the name of Phrenitides, or Phrensies. Their Symptoms are a
visible beating in the Carotid Arteries, and an unsufferable tearing Pain in
the Head, obliging the sick Person to throw, toss, and as it were, beat his
Head, and furiously pull at the Hair. They are attended by doting, and are apt
to degenerat into fatal Gangrenes, at which time Convulsions, prostration of
Strength, and a sort of a Lethargy ensue. Their Urine is pale, crude, and
white; and if their Stools be also white, if the Teeth gnash, the Nose drop,
and the Person tremble, shake, and pick at the Bed-Cloaths, it is a desperate
case. Sometimes Phrenetic Persons are only molested with frightening Dreams,
and a timorous inward doting, without any noise, which is a worse Symptom than
open fury, loud outcries, and violent tossings of the Limbs. A Frenzy is
distinguished from a simple Delirium, by the unrelenting vehemence of the
Fever and Headache, and a difficulty of breathing. Sometimes, but very
rarely, a Frenzy terminates in critical Sweats, Bleeding at Nose,
Loosenesses, etc. Sometimes it becomes an incurable Imposthume in the Brain. A
true Frenzy for the most part is incurable; however its Cure is attempted by
Bleeding, Vomits Clysters, and Diaphoretics. Of which more in the Second Book.

ART. 9. Of the Genuin and Spurious Inflammations of the Eyes.
A Genuin Inflammation of the Eyes is either Sanguine or Serous. The former is
called Ophthalmia; the latter Epiphora, or Lippitudo. An Ophthalmia is an
Inflammation of the Tunicles of the Eye, especially the Conjunctive, which by
reason of their Derivation from, and being of a piece with the Membranes of the
Brains, are apt to communicate their disorder to the Brain; as on the contrary,
the disorders of the Brain are frequently displayed in the Eyes. The External
Cause is whatever provokes the Fibers to Contraction, and consequently obliges
the Blood to stagnate in the small Arteries, which are very plentiful in the
Coats of the Eyes; as the sharp effluviums of the Air, Dust, steams of Metals,
etc. The internal cause is the suppression of any evacuation of Blood, or the
retention of a sharp Acid in the Body, as after the Small Pox, or when the
running of the Ears, customary to Children, ceases. Sometimes an Inflammation
proceeding from the Effluvium's of the Air, is epidemical; and sometimes
catching. The Symptoms of an Ophthalmia are, the Heat, Tumor, Redness, Pain and
watriness of the Eyes. In its highest pitch, the Eyelids are likewise
inflamed, and unable to shut, and the White of the Eye is swelled up above the
adjacent Surface, with a sort of Chink betwixt 'em. If the stagnating Blood
proceed from the outer Vessels, we observe a Pain, Tumor, and beating in the
Temples; if from the internal Membranes and Vessels, the Pain is more vehement,
and lies deep, the Palate and Nostrils itch, and the Person is apt to sneese
often.

As for the Epiphora and blear'dness of the Eyes, the former is a destillation
of a Cold or Hot Rheum from the Glandules in the corners of the Eyes; the
latter from the Glandules of the Eyelids, in conjunction with those of the
Eyes. Their Causes are,

1. The Laxity of the Glandules, as in Old Persons, and in malignant
Distempers, when the Animal Spirits are almost extinguished; or when the
Caruncle that shuts them is Corroded or Cut. In this case, the Eyes are apt to
be red, for that the Blood Vessels swell when the Glandules are so often
emptied.

2. The irritation of the Eye and its Glandules, by sharp effluviums from the
Air, Pepper, Onions, Garlic, etc. This Cause is at the same time apt to cause
an Ophthalmia.

3. The sharpness and acidity of the Lymph, which tickles, provokes, and
corrodes the Glandules. The Corrosion is frequently followed by a roughness,
and that by a thickness and intransparency; and consequently, a total
blindness. The Remote Causes are whatever is apt to occasion Catarrhs.

All these Inflammations, whether Sanguin or Serous* are attended by a
warriness or running of a Humor that is either sharp, saltish, corrosive, and
apt to gaul the Cheeks; or insipid, slimy, thick, and apt to make the Eyelids
stick together. The former is called a hot Catarrh, the latter a cold one. The
various Condition of this Catarrh, presents us with four observable Periods in
an Inflammation. The First, is called the Beginning, viz. When the Humor is
thin and plentiful. The Second, the Increase, when the Pain grows, and the
Humor thickens. The Third, the Height, when the Humor is concocted, and makes
the Eyelids stick together. The Fourth, The Declension, when all the Symptoms
relent. But withal, we ought to remember that this Humor is sometimes the
Effect, and not the Cause of the Disease, as in the case of external
irritation, for which Astringents are proper, though noxious in other Cases.

A spurious Inflammation is distinguished from the Genuin, by its comparative
dryness, and admits of three Degrees.

1. When the Eyes itch, and void a small quantity of a saltish Rheum.

2. When the Eyes are red, swollen, heavy, and molested with a gentle Pain and
Itching, without any flux of Matter.

3. When the Eyelids are hard and rough, without itching or running.

The Inflammations of the Eyes proceeding from the Disorders of the Membranes
of the Brain, are very dangerous. If the Pain continue long, it is an ill sign.
If the Inflammation be very tedious, or apt to relapse, it threatens a
thickness of the Membranes, or Webs, Scars, and loss of Eyesight: If it tend
to suppuration, it threatens a Gangrene, which, if the Eye be not quickly
extirpated, is apt to invade the Brain, the consequence of which is certain
Death. A dry or spurious Inflammation is tedious, but not so dangerous as a wet
one. Sometimes critical Loosenesses give the solution of the Distemper. As for
Epiphora's, if they prove inveterat in adult Persons, they degenerat to a
Fistula Lacrymalis, which is oft-times incurable.

As for the Cure: When the Inflammation proceeds from external Causes, a few
external Medicines may give relief. But when the Cause is internal, we proceed
thus. First of all we open a Vein in the Leg, then in the Arm, and aftewards,
but not sooner, in the Forehead, if it can be done without straitening the
Neck. In desperate cases, we open the Jugular Veins, and sometimes the Temporal
Artery. Blistering Plasters applied to the nape of the Neck, are of excellent
use, as occasioning a plentiful Flux of Blood into the outer branch of the
Artery of the Neck, which must needs drain the inner-branch that visits the
Eyes. They are best prepared of Emplastrum Citrinum, mixed with the Powder of
Spanish Flies whout Acids and the Blisters ought to be kept long open, with the
Plaster of Ceruss, mixed with a small quantity of the Powder of Spanish Flies.
In Hydropical Persons, or such whose Skin does not easily heal, Blistering
Plasters may be omitted. In difficult Cases, we order Issues in the Arm or Leg
of the same side with the inflamed Eye, and a Setum in the Neck: Instead of a
Setum, some choose to make a sort of Issue in the Ear, thus; Take the Root of
Hellebor, or Mezereon, dry it, and slice it into little round pieces, which
macerat in the solution of Nitre in Water, or the Lie of the Ashes of
Vine-twigs. Then bore a Hole in the Ear, and promote its suppuration for three
Days with a thread covered with Butter, and then put in one of these pieces
thus prepared, renewing 'em every day. Internally, we exhibit Jalap for a
Purge, and the Decoctions of China-Roots, Sassafras, Sarsaparilla and
Juniper-Wood, to which we add the Cephalic Dryers, such as Fennel, Eyebright,
Valerian, Betony, Rosemary, and their Essences. If the Inflammation proceed
from Mineral Fumes, we give Mineral Preparations inwardly. In external
Applications, we ought to avoid Opium, and Milk, though commonly us^d. The former
shuts the Pores, and promotes a Gangrene; the latter is also charged with the
same Crime, and besides, is apt to Curdle and become Acid, and by consequence
must needs be prejudicial to the Eyes. In the beginning of the Distemper, while
the heat, pain, redness, and sharpness of the Rheum prevail, absorbent Powders
are proper, such as Tutty, Ceruss, Chalk, Flowers of Tin, Crab's-eyes,
Calaminar-stone, etc. In general, the Water of Frogs-spawn, the Water distilled
from bruised River-Crabs, when they begin to putrify, and distilled again with
the Juice of Celandin; the Oil or Liquor per deliquium of Blew-bottle or
Succory flowers, they being gathered in the Morning when wet with the Dew, and
put into a thick Glass, encompassed with a thick Crust of Dough, and so baked
in an Oven 'till they melt into Liquor; the Phlegm of the Spirit of Vitriol,
the Oil of Sugar per Deliquium, or Sugar it self ground in a new Tin Platter
'till it become livid; the Sugar of Lead, Camphyr; the mucilages of Flea-wort
and Quince-seeds, extracted with Celandin Water; the Phlegm of Alum, Whites of
Eggs, the strained Decoction of the Litharge of Gold in Vinegar, the Infusion
of Crocus Metallorum or the Glass of Antimony; and in the height of the
Distemper Collyriums prepared with white Vitriol, are all approved Medicines.
If the Inflammation proceed from external Causes, the above mentioned
Mucilages, or a piece of raw Beef or Veal applied to the Eye, will finish the
Cure. If the Rheum be very sharp and corrosive, we insist much upon fixed
absorbent Powders; if it be thick and slimy, diluting Medicines and gentle
Astringents are convenient: These Ingredients are prescribed in various Forms.
As,

Take of the mucilages of the Seeds of Quinces, Clary, and Fenugrec, extracted
with Celandin Water, of each half an ounce; Sugar of Lead, twelve grains. With
Fennel or Eye-bright-water, make a Collyrium.

Take of Plantan and Eye-bright-water, of each an ounce; prepared Tutty, half a
Scruple; Camphyr, five grains; Saffron, two grains. Make a Collyrium, to be
used after the Smallpox.

Take of Tormentil or Plantan-Water, of each an ounce; mix 'em with the White
of an Egg, and ten grains of Alum. And apply it warm to the Eyes.

Take of the Glass of Antimony in Powder, from ten to fifteen grains; infuse
'em in three ounces of the Water of Frogs Spawn. Let 'em stand all Night in a
hot place. Strain the Liquor in the Morning, and add to it ten grains of the
Sugar of Lead in fine Powder, and six grains of Camphyr.

Take an Egg, boil it hard, and take out the Yelk, putting into its place six
grains of the Sugar of Lead, eight grains of white Vitriol, two grains of
Camphyr, and half an ounce of the Honey of Roses. When they are melted, squeeze
out the Liquor and drop it into the Eye, especially when the Rheum is slimy,
and apt to make the Eyelids stick togethet.

Take of Rose Water, and Plantan-water, of each two ounces; Night-shade-water,
an ounce; white Vitriol, a scruple; dissolve and strain, then add a scruple of
prepared Tutty. Make a Collyrium; in which dip a Clout, and apply it warm to
the Eyes, about the height of the Distemper.

Take of the Ointment Diapompholigos, and that of Tutty, of each two drams;
prepared Pearl, Coral, Crabbs-Eyes, Tutty, and Sugar of Lead, of each a
Scruple; Camphyr, twelve grains; Leaves of Gold and Silver, of each four. Make
an Ointment. With which, anoint the lower part of the Eyelids, and put about
the bigness of a Lentil into the corner of the Eye.

Take of sweet Apples roasted, three in number; boil them in Eye-bright-water
'till they be soft; beat their Pulp through a sieve, and add of prepared Tutty,
two Drams; Camphyr, ten grains; Saffron, four grains. Make a Cataplasm for
allaying the Pain and Heat.

Take of fresh Butter, half an ounce; Sugar of Lead, prepared Tutty, and
Calaminar stone, of each a scruple; Camphyr, a grain. Make a Liniment for
anointing the Eyelids in a dry Inflammation.

A serous Inflammation is cured by extracting the external Objects that disturb
the Eye, or correcting the Acrimony of the Lymph, or strengthening the
Glandules. For the first purpose, we apply to the Eye, a Crabs Eye making its
hollow part to touch the apple of the Eye, or a Seed of Clary; or we make use
of Instruments, such as Hildanus recommends. The Second Indication is accounted
for in the Chapter of Catarrhs. The Third is compassed by moderat Astringents,
outwardly applied; such as the Decoction of the Rinds of Pomgranats, with
Chamomil-Flowers, especially after the Small Pox; the infusion of Tormentil
Roots, and Alum, in Plantan and Rose Water; or of Tutty in Fennel-water; the
Powder of Citron Myrobalans infused three or four times in Rose Water, and
dried a-fresh every time; the Liquor that flows from a Willow cut in the
Spring; the Decoction of dried Rue in Vinegar and Honey; or that of Cows-bones
and the Chaff of Wheat, recommended by some as a valuable Arcanum; a mixture of
the White of an Egg, Rose Water, and Sugar beaten in a Tin Plate; the Decoction
of Quince-Leaves; the Infusion of the Powder of Calaminar-stone (upon which the
Spirit of Wine has been Kindled) in White Wine, or Rose Water; or that of the
Powders of Tutty, Sarrocol, Roman Vitriol and Sumac, in Eyebright and
Fennel-waters. The use of sneezing Powders is much dreaded by some, but the
Vessels leading from either Eye to the Nostrils, discovered by Steno, and the
Experiment of Collyrium's reaching the Mouth, seems to justify it. However,
since so many tragical Evils have been observed to follow 'em, we ought to be
very cautious, and never prescribe any but what are very gentle, and that in
the declension of the Distemper, or when the Inflammation ceases.

ART. 10. Of Inflammations and Ulcers in the Ears.
THE internal Membran of the Ears is sometimes inflamed, either by Internal or
External Causes. Its Symptoms are a beating, heat, and Pain; sometimes a
redness of the external Ear, Temples, and Cheeks, especially when the
Inflammation bends outward; and sometimes a Fever, Doting, and Convulsions
when it bends inwards.

In Children it is more dangerous than in Old Persons. When it suppurats, it is
least dangerous, and sometimes infers a critical solution of Headaches: But if
the purulent Matter be Corrosive, it may gnaw the Membrane, and cause Deafness.
It Is Cured by Sudorifics and Bleeding, or applying Leeches, or scarrifying
behind the Ears. External Remedies ought to be very cautiously used. At first,
we must endeavor to discuss it by dropping into the Ear the Balsam of Sulphur,
or Oil of Chamomil in which Earthworms or River-Crabs have been boild; or the
Oil of the Yelks of Eggs, with the Juice of House-leek; and fomenting the Ear
with the Decoctions of emollient and discussing Ingredients; or applying to it
the Spirit of Wine, or Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, with hot Bread. If it be not
quickly discussed, we must promote its suppuration by applying a Cataplasm of
the Crumbs of Bread boiled in Goats Milk, mixed with the Yelks of Eggs, Oil of
Roses, and Saffron; or of roasted Onyons, Butter, Oil of Chamomil, Oil of
Sweet-Almonds, and Saffron.

The Ulcers of the Ears are either the effect of a preceding Inflammation, or
of a corrosive sharp Humor; sometimes we meet with a Flux of corrupt bloody
Matter, that resembles that of Ulcers in the Ears, though in the mean while there
be none, in which case we only wash the Ear clean with Man's Urine, but are
cautious of stopping it, especially in moist Constitutions, or those who are
liable to disorders of the Brain, or Eruptions in the Head.

The real Ulcers of the Ears are Cured internally by Purgatives and Sudorifics,
especially the Decoctions of Woods. Externally they are cleans'd by dropping
into 'em Child's Urine with White Wind and Honey; or applying a Tent dipped into
it. If the Ulcer be inveterat, we add the Ointment Aegyptiacum; the Juice of
Wormwood, Hore-hound, or Onyons mixed with Honey, are also recommended for the
same use. When the Ulcer is cleans'd, and the flux of Matter abates, we add
Tutty and Pompholyx, for consolidating.

CHAP. II. Of the Effusion of Blood into the Cavities of the Body, and
particularly of an Empyema.
WHEN the Blood stagnates in its own Vessels, and is converted into Purulent
Matter, it causes a Vomica or Imposthume in several Parts of the Body, which we
dispatched in the last Chapter. But when this purulent Matter is collected in a
distinct Cavity it is called an Empyema, which is the subject of this Chapter:
It Is true, the Ancient Grecians meant by Empyema, any Collection of purulent
Matter in any part. But since the Modern Latin Writers have Christened it
otherwise, we choose to follow their Examples. The immediate Cause of an
Empyema, is either the direct effusion of Blood into the Cavity it self, which
stagnats, curdles, and by fermenting becomes Pus; as when the Breast is
wounded; or the eruption of purulent Matter from its own Imposthume into a
foreign Cavity, as when a Pleuritical Imposthume breaks, it ofttimes throws
its Matter into the Cavity of the Breast, and gives rise to what we call,
(...), an Empyema: Though sometimes the Pleuritical Matter is contained within a
Purse of the dilated Pleura, while it is erroneously referred to the Cavity of
the Breast. The remote Causes are Bruises, Falls, Wounds, or whatever breaks
the Vessels, and occasions the extravasation of Blood.

The Symptoms discovering the extravasation of clotted Blood relate either to
the Belly, Breast, or Head. Those for the Belly, are a Tumor, Paleness, Lead
color, and hardness of the Abdomen, occasioned by the Convulsions of the
Peritonaeum, as being provoked by the clotted Blood; and sometimes swoonings,
Prostration of strength, difficulty of Breathing, and Critical Imposthumes
about the Groin.

2. Those for the Breast are a notable difficulty of Breathing, a troublesome
Cough, a Pain and sense of weight about the short Ribs, an acute Fever, and
the coldness of the external Parts.

3. Those which discover a Collection of clotted Blood in the Head, are a
violent beating and pain in the Head; an involuntary Watryness of the Eyes,
redness of the Face, disorders of the Stomac, and critical Bleedings, at Mouth,
Nose or Ears. In all these Cases shivering and the increase of the Fever are
signs of Suppuration. After the matter is concocted it begins to float, and the
feverish Symptoms relent.

Of the Empyema's that proceed from the efflux of Purulent Matter, from some
Imposthume into the Cavity, those which follow the suppuration of a Pleurifie
or Peripneumonia are most remarkable; and upon that account we shall content
our selves with an account of their Symptoms, which may serve as a Pattern for
all others.

The Imposthume generally breaks about the twentieth, thirtieth, or fortieth
Day; being attended by a shivering, high Fever, a perpetual Cough with a
hollow sound, and a sense of rebounding Matter, as being tossed by the
convulsions of the provoked Midriff; and a difficulty of Breathing, with an
oppressing heaviness in the Breast when they Stand or Sit, of which they are
freed when they lie on their Backs. When they stoop they are in danger of
Suffocation, by reason of the weight incumbent upon the Midriff. The Fever
which at first was acute becomes slow, hectic, and liable to nocturnal
Exasperations. They are subject to frequent Palpitations of the Heart,
Anxieties of the Breast, nocturnal melting Sweats and Flushings in the Face,
especially the Cheek of the same side with the part affected. When the
distemper is far advanced, a rotten ashy taste invades the Mouth. The Pulse in
the Wrist of the same side intermits while that in the other observes its
regular Periods. A soft Tumor frequently besets the Ribs, which perhaps
proceeds from the transpiration of the thinner part of the Matter, and the
Patient finds most ease by lying on the same side.

As for the Prognostic of Empyema's; those of the Brain attended by Vomiting
are Mortal; nay oft-times the Patient dies before the clotted Blood come to a
Head. Those of the Abdomen are frequently discharged by Imposthumes in the
Groyn. Those of the Breast, if they be not cured betimes, are apt to cause
Phthisics and Consumptions. If white smooth Purulent Matter be voided by Stool
or Urine, or copiously expectorated in an Empyema of the Breast; and if the
Thirst, Inappetency, Fever, and difficulty of Breathing relent, it is a good
Omen: But the reverse of these Circumstances is fatal.

The Cure consists in dissolving and evacuating the clotted Blood, or promoting
its suppuration, evacuating the Pus and restoring the injured part to its due
strength. As for the evacuating Indication, the efforts of Nature must be our
Directory; as, if it incline to void the Matter by Urine, Sweat or Stool, it
must be accordingly assisted. If the clotted Blood be lodged in the Abdomen, we
give it Vent by a Paracentesis; if in the Breast, by opening the interval
between the fifth and sixth Ribs (reckoning downwards;) if in the Brain, by a
Trepanation. All these Operations are both proper and safe, if they be
performed betimes, and not put off till the Patient's strength be exhausted, or
the Matter be altered, and rendered unfit for evacuation. If it come by a
prick, we enlarge the Orifice of the Wound. If the Person be Plethoric, and the
Blood be apt to boil high, or if the Evil was occasioned by a Fall or Bruise,
Bleeding will be requisite, especially that for Revulsion, according to the
Circumstances of the part.

As for internal Medicines. The first in order are those which dissolve and
disengage clotty Blood. Such are the Decoction of Madder in Wine; the Tincture
of the lesser Dasies, the Decoction of the Roots, Leaves, and Flowers of Arnic
in Ale, the Juice of the Herb Robert, Sperma Ceti given to a dram; Castor, the
Blood of Goats given to a dram; Sparrow's Dung dissolved in Vinegar, Man's fat
melted given to half an ounce; the Herbs, Savin, Ground Ivy, Hyssop, Chervil,
Wormwood, St. John's-wort, etc. The Roots of Angelica, Swallow-wort,
Birth-wort, etc. The Seeds of Carduus Benedictus, Chervil, and St. John's-wort;
the vulnerary Tinctures, Bezoar Stone, Diaphoretic Antimony, and in a word all
absorbent Powders, especially Crabs dissolved in Vinegar. These Ingredients
ought always to be mixed with evacuating Medicines, that so the Blood when
dissolved may be readily voided. Thus if it be lodged in the Abdomen, or if
nature incline to void it by Stool, we add Rhubarb and Laxatives; if in the
Breast, we add Diuretics and Diaphoretics according to Nature's Motions. In
general Diuretics are the most proper. The forms of Receipts are as follow.

Take of the Decoction of Ground Ivy, a pound; while it is yet warm infuse in it
over Night Rhubarb, one ounce; picked Senna Leaves, half an ounce; Salt of
Tartar, half a dram. In the Morning strain the Liquor, and add of the Powder of
Crabs Eyes, a dram and a half; the Powder against Falls (prescribed in the
Ausberg Dispensatory) a dram. Sweeten it with the Syrup of Ground Ivy; and
exhibit a Draught now and then.

Take of the Powder of Crabs Eyes, Sperma Ceti, and Blood of Goats, of each
half a dram. Mix for two Doses to be taken in Vinegar. Note, Vinegar renders
the Crabs Eyes very Diuretic.

Take of Chervil Water, three ounces; Vinegar of Wine, an ounce; prepared Crabs
Eyes, a dram; Diaphoretic Antimony, a scruple; Syrup of Ground Ivy, six drams;
Mix for two Doses. If the Head be bruised, or Convulsions be feared, add half a
dram of the Cinnabar of Antimony* Myrrh, Laudanum Opiatum, Spirit of
Sal-Armoniac, spirit of Treacle Camphoris'd, Poppy-flower-water, volatile Salt
of Amber, Essence of St. John's-wort, and the vulnerary Essences may be added
by turns.

Having dispatched the Cure of clotty Blood, which for the most part degenerats
into Empyema's, we proceed to that of an Empyema it self, which consists in
evacuating the Purulent Matter, qualifying its sharpness, and strengthening the
Part. The means for evacuation are either Natural or Artificial; the latter are
mentioned above. The former are either Urine, Sweat, Stool or Spitting.
Empyema's of the Breast, (which may serve for a Pattern for all others, as to
the Cure) for the most part empty themselves, by Spitting and Urine, though the
Passages, through which the Matter reaches either the Mouth or the Reins, are yet
undiscovered. However it is a Physician's part, when he descry's Purulent Urine,
to exhibit Diuretics; and when the Matter moves upwards, and provokes Coughing,
to administer expectorating Medicines, or rather a Vomit, which is of wonderful
Efficacy; supposing still that there be no danger of a Spitting of Blood, for
in that case it ought to be omitted, and shifted for expectorating Medicines,
tempered according as the Matter is sharp or thick. As for the sharpness of the
Matter, it is admirably accounted for by exhibiting the Flowers and Balsam of
Sulphur, Balsam of Peru, Myrrh, and fixed Antimonial Sulphurs, such as
Diaphoretic Antimony, Poterius's Antihectic, etc. The injuries done to the
solid parts by the purulent Matter, are repaired by Goats Milk, and by the
Decoctions of Woods, Scabious, Chervil, and especially Ground Ivy. But
Vulnerary or Balmy Medicines are not to be exhibited without such as evacuate
one way or another, nor without a particular regard to the Fever that
accompanies this Distemper. As for Example,

Take of Hyssop and Scabious Water, of each an ounce and a half; the Flowers of
Sulphur, half a dram; Diaphoretic Antimony, a scruple; Jovial Bezoar, half a
scruple; Syrup of Tobacco, an ounce. Make a Potion for two Doses. To which, if
the Fever be high, add a few Drops of the dulcified spirit of Nitre.

Take of the Water of red Poppies, three ounces; Vinegar of Wine, six drams;
prepared Crabs Eyes, a dram; Diaphoretic Antimony, half a dram; Syrup of red
Poppy Flowers, six drams. Make a Potion to be given by Spoonfuls.

Take of the Juice of Ground Ivy, four ounces: the Juice of Hore-hound, two
ounces. With Sugar make a Syrup, to which add of Frankincense and choice Myrrh,
of each a dram. Mix. etc. The Decoction of China Roots, mixed with Diaphoretic
Antimony; or that of Guajacum, with the Juice of Ground Ivy; or that of
Ox-bones, with the Gelly of Hartshorn, are also very proper. The hot Balsams
may be mixed with Sugar of Lead when, heat prevails.

Take of the Shavings of Gujacum, an ounce; Sassafras, half an Ounce; boil them
in seven Pound of Common Water, 'till a Pound and a half be consumed. Then add
Ground Ivy, Flowers of St. John's-wort, and the Herb Speedwell, of each two
handfuls; Liquorice-Roots, half an ounce; Fennel-seed, six drams; Corants
bruised, three Ounces. Boil all 'till a Pound and a half more be consumed.
Strain the Decoction, and exhibit a Draught thrice a Day.

CHAP. III. Of Bleeding, or the Bursting of the Blood Vessels.
THE stagnation of the Blood in its own Vessels, and its extravasation in the
Cavities of the Body, being already dispatched; it remains now to account for
its effusion out of the Body. The causes of which are, either

1. An Anastomosis, or spontaneous dis-joining of the Capillary Vessels, and
especially of the Arteries, whose Blood in all natural bleedings runs by drops,
as depending upon the successive Pulsation of the Artery; whereas that of the
Veins (which, for the most part, never burst without a violent cause) runs with
a constant and united Stream.

2. A Diaeresis, or Breaches violently made in the Vessels, by external
cutting, pricking, or bruising Instruments, by Coughing, Neesing, Vomiting, or
Crying by excessive Joy, Grief, and vehement Passions of the Mind, especially
in the flux of the Terms; by the Assumption or Inspiration of sharp corrosive
things; Such as Hellebor, violent Purgatives, Suppositories, etc. and lastly,
by sharp corrosive Humors incorporated with the Blood, which both fret the
Blood, and gnaw its Vessels, especially in scorbutical Constitutions; the
Fibers of whose Vessels are lank and weak. Some Authors assign yet a third
Cause of Bleeding, viz. A (...), or the Transudation of the Blood through its
Vessels; but it is not accountable, that any Liquor so thick as Blood should
sweat through the strong touch Coats of the Vessels, especially those of the
Arteries, without a breach or Anastomosis. It Is true, the thin Serum may glide
through sometimes; but the Consistence of the Blood robs it of that Privilege.

The remote Causes of an Anastomosis, are

1. A true Plethora or redundancy of Blood, as in the suppression of the Terms,
etc.

2. An apparent Plethora, or the Ebullition of the Blood, obliging it to
distend its Vessels, as in Fevers, and the Small Pox, or when Persons drink
much Generous Wine, or eat Aromatic Food, or employ themselves in any
extraordinary exercise of the Body. This ebullition is most apt to cause a
bursting of the Vessels in fat Persons, by reason that their Vessels are
straightened by the incumbent Fat.

3. The thinness and serosity of the Blood; which at once unbends the Fibers,
and qualifies the Blood for making a Passage through 'em. In this case the Blood,
when it runs out, appears thin and pale, whereas in other cases it is brisk and
florid. This serosity of the Blood was by the Ancients charged to the Liver, as
being tardy in its Office of sanguification; but as our later Anatomists have
justly employed the Liver for other uses, so the imperfect Digestion in the
Stomac, and fermentation of the Chyle in the Duodenum, will naturally account
for the want of consistence in the Blood.

4. The Convulsive Contractions of the Coats of the Vessels, especially the
Arteries, which by straitening one Branch, occasion the extraordinary
distention of the next. Thus splenetic Persons are liable to vomiting of Blood,
because the Artery in the Spleen denies a free admission to the Blood; and the
obstruction of the Blood in the Head is frequently removed by bleeding at Nose.

5. The Convulsive Contraction of the Parts, incompassing the Blood Vessels,
which are apt to straiten the Vessels, especially the Veins, that are least
able to resist their force.

Critical and customary effusions of Blood, or such as follow the suppression
of a wonted Evacution, are not to be stopped, without they exceed measure. When
a Bleeding is attended by a sensible pulsation of some adjacent Artery, it is a
sign that it proceeds from the Compression or Contraction of that Artery.
Bleedings at Nose are ushered in by a giddiness, redness of the Eyes,
involuntary Tears, tingling of the Ears, itching of the Nose, a hard Pulse, a
violent Pain, and sensible pulsation of the Arteries in the Head and Neck. A
flux of Blood from the Windpipe is introduced by a Cough, and difficult
Respiration. That from the Womb, by the distention, weight, and heat of the
Abdomen and Loins, happening about the menstrual period; and that from the
Haemorrhoid Veins, by a Pulsation in the Hypocondria, Back, and Loins, and a
Tumor and Pain in the Veins, with a Tenesmus.

As for the Prognostic, a Diaeresis is worse than an Anastomosis; and Bleedings
from external Causes, are more favorable than those from internal. In
Melancholic and Phlegmatic Constitutions, especially when the Bleeding renders
the Face Limon-colour'd, or is followed by Convulsions and Swoonings, it
prognosticates Dropsies, Consumptions, etc.

As for Cure, The various causes must be removed by proper Medicines; a
Plethora by Bleeding, Scarifying, and a thin Diet: The Ebullition of the Blood
by such Medicines as temper a volatile Acid, as Vinegar, Spirit of Vitriol,
Nitre dissolved in Water; the Tincture of the Flowers of Dasies, the Sugar of
Lead, the Antiphthisical Tincture, Coral, sealed Earth, Purslain, Plaintain,
Opium, Camphyr, etc. The serosity of the Blood by thickening Ingredients, and
such as evacuate Serum, either by Stool, Urine, or Sweat. The Convulsive
Contractions of the Blood Vessels by Chalybeats. The sharpness of Blood, by
temperat Medicines, such as Milk, Raisins, Steel, etc. The Corrosion of the
Vessels, by vulnerary Astringents: The Laxity of the Parts, by corroborating
things, such as Ass-Dung, the Ankle of a Hogg; Crollius his Powder Sperniola;
Opium, Steel, etc. However, we ought to observe,

1. That Bloodletting is only proper, when the Blood abounds or boils too high,
and it is better to bleed often, for Revulsion, Derivation, and Aversion, than
to draw forth much at once. Sometimes Ligatures and Cupping-Glasses applied at
a convenient distance from the Part, are not amiss.

2. That Purgatives are only proper when the Blood is too serous; and in that
case, especially if it be accompanied by a Fever, Diaphoretics mixed with
Opiats are of good use; as being apt to thicken the Blood after the Swelling is
over, though in the time of swearing they rather attenuate and dissolve it.

3. Opiats are good in all Cases.

From these Premises we infer, that the internal Medicines that are proper
against Bleeding, are the vulnerary Astringents, absorbent Powders (especially
Steel, which is both Astringent and Anti-acid to a notable Degree.) Diuretics
and Purgatives in serous Cases, and temperat Ingredients, especially Raisins,
and Milk, for mitigating the sharp Humors. The Medicines which jointly answer
these ends, are either of the Vegetable, Mineral, or Animal Families. Those of
the Vegetable Province are Plantan, Purslain, the Syrups of Comfrey,
Ground Ivy, and Myrtle-berries; the Syrup made of the Juice of the Root of
Bastard Acorus with Sugar; The fresh Juice of the common stinging Nettle, given
to two or three Ounces; the Moss of Man's Skull given to a scruple, or half a
dram, in the Water of Shepherds Purse, with the Syrup of Coral; Mastic,
Sarcocol, Amber, Frankincense, Raisins, Camphyr, Opium, and Rhubarb, which not
only evacuats the Serum, but corrects the crasis of the Blood. Dragon's Blood,
if it be Genuin, is very proper; but since it is generally adulterated with some
noxious stuff, we ought to avoid it.

The Mineral Province presents us with Coral, Bole Armenic, Nitre, Spirit of
Vitriol, Sugar of Lead, the Powder of Boodstone mixed with Vinegar, or the
Juice of Pomgranats, the Vitriol of Steel mixed with Sugar of Lead, Hartman's
Astringent Extract of Steel, given to nine Grains; the Spaw-waters, or in want
of them, the solar Liquor of steel; and above all, the Tincture of the Sulphur
of Vitriol prepared thus;

Take of the Native Genuin Vitriol of Steel that is void of all Copper, and
dissolve it in Water, (if the Vitriol be not genuin, put the filings of Steel
into the Water, and 'twill precipitat the Copper; and then the strained Liquor
being thickened, will yield the genuin Vitriol of Steel) when the Vitriol is
dissolved in Water, pour into it the Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, or the Lie of
the Salt of Tartar, and 'twill precipitat an Astringent Crocus of Steel, which
ought to be frequently dulcifi'd with Water, and dried; then dissolved in the
Spirit of Nitre, and after the Spirit of Nitre is drawn off, the Caput Mortuum
digested with rectin'd Spirit of Wine gives the Tincture, which is of admirable
use against all Bleedings. Its Dose is thirty or forty Drops in a convenient
Vehicle.

The Animal Province affords us burnt Hartshorn, Unicorn's-Horn, the Powder of
green Frogs, the Water of Frogs spawn, Crollius's Sperniola, given to fifteen
Grains, the Juice of Asses and Hog's Dung, mixed with the Juice of Nettles, or
with Sugar in the form of a Syrrup, or their Powders, with the Powder of the
Dung of a Dog that is wont to gnaw Bones; and the Powder of the Blood that comes
forth in Bleeding, it being dried and given to a Dram in some proper Vehicle.
The Forms of Recipe's are as follows.

Take of the Extract of Flowers ( viz. of Red Roses, Red Poppies, and Dasies
infused in Water, in order to be strained or thickened for an Extract) three
drams; Ivory and Sea-Horse-Teeth, of each half a dram; prepared red Coral, a
dram; prepared Boodstone, two scruples; with the Syrup of Red Poppies, make
an Electuary for allaying the Hea^ and Turgescence of the Blood.

Take of the Pulp of Raisins, three ounces; choice Rhubarb, and prepared Red
Coral, of each a dram and a half; Ivory prepared without Fire, a dram;
Sea-Horse-Teeth, half a Dram; Extract of Steel prepared with the Juice of
Apples, three Drams. With the Syrup of Red Roses make an Electuary. Of which,
take the quantity of a Nutmeg Morning and Evening, for correcting the serosity
of the Blood.

Take of Plantan Water, three Ounces; Cinnamon Water, three Drams; Vinegar of
Wine, half an Ounce; Astringent Crocus of Steel, half a dram; sealed Earth, a
scruple; Laudanum Opiatum, three grains; Syrup of Myrtles, three drams. Mix,
and exhibit a spoonful or two frequently, for correcting the sharpness of the
Blood and Humors. For the Bleedings in Malignant Fevers, we add
Alexipharmacal Ingredients. If a Bleeding be caus^d by Cantharides, we exhibit
Milk and the Decoctions of Raisins, Isinglass, and Misletoe of the Oak, with
Gum Arabic, Tragacanth, etc.

Take of the Juice of Fresh-Asses Dung, Syrup of Purslain, and that of
Myrtle-Berries, of each half an Ounce; Plantan Water, an Ounce. Mix for a
Draught.

After the Bleeding is thus stopped, we exhibit such Medicines as dissolve and
evacuat clotted Blood, especially if it proceeded from an internal part. In the
mean while, we use likewise external Medicines, viz. Such as either cement the
Vessels by their gluy Virtue, as the Whites of Eggs, Mastic, Aloe, Beans, and a
living Pigeon or Hen cut up and applied to the Part, whose Blood curdles upon
the orifice of the Vessels, and shuts 'em; or such as wring the Vessels by
their austerity, or imbibe the Blood, and stick close to the Orifices, of the
former sort are Vitriol, Vinegar, etc. Of the latter are Bole Armenic, sealed
Earth, Alum, Potters-Clay mixed with Vinegar, etc. In general, the French
Styptic Liquor, (which is nothing else but the solution of Alum, and half its
quantity of the Vitriol of Steel in a proper Vehicle) and Tulpius's compound
Powder of Bole Armenic, Quicklime, burnt Vitriol, burnt Alum, Boodstone,
Aloes, Dragons Blood, Lemnian Earth, Crocus of Steel, Mummy, Mastic and
^rankincense; these I say are generally approved for external use in all
Bleedings.

ART. 1. Of Bleeding at the Nose and Gums.
THE small Arteries inserted into the Membrane of the Nostrils are liable to
frequent Bleedings, as being relaxated by prevailing moisture. The Symptoms and
Causes of this Bleeding are related above. If it be very copious, and unwonted,
or unseasonable, it prognosticates the Disorders of the Spirits; in Acute
Diseases, especially about the height, it is an ill Omen; but in the beginning
of the small Pox, or when it follows a Deafness after the height of a Fever,
it is not ill. In the Disorders of the Liver or Spleen, if the Nostril of the
same side with the Part aff^cted void Blood, it is well; if that of the opposite
side, it is a bad Symptom, according to Hippocrates.

In regulating the Method of Cure, we must have a particular regard to the
various Causes, viz. the redundancy, turgescence, serosity, or sharpness of the
Blood; and single out proper Medicines, according to the Directions given for
Bleedings in general. To which we shall only add this one Observation, that in
habitual Bleedings at Nose, fresh Mint, or its Juice taken frequently, is of
singular use.

Externally we endeavor to divert and appease the Spirits, to curb the
turgescence of the Blood, and to shut the Orifices of the Vessels. For
compassing the first Design, we use painful Ligatures, Frights, Caustics
applied to the remote parts, cold things suddenly applied to the Scrotum or
Breast; a dried Toad hung under the Armpits, or tied to the Forehead, or its
Powder applied to the Nostrils; a Boodstone, or genuin Jasper, held in the
Hand 'till it become warm; Ash-wood applied to the Nostrils, etc. For the
second end, we sometimes Bleed by way of Revulsion and Derivation; or apply
scarifying Cupping-Glasses to the Neck, or to the Calf of the Leg; those which
the Ancients ordered for the Liver and Spleen, being very dangerous and of no
use. Cataplasms of Fullers Earth, and Vinegar, and Epithema's of the Juice of
House-leek, Vinegar, Nitre, and Camphyr; or of Soot, Vinegar and the Whites of
Eggs; or of Alum, Frogs Spawn, and Vinegar, being applied to the Forehead,
Temples, Crown of the Head, Nape of the Neck, Scrotum in Men, and the Breasts
in Women, are of admirable efficacy for appeasing the tumultuous Motions of the
Blood. As for the third Indication of shutting the Orifices of the Vessels, we
blow into the Nostrils the Powder of Alum or Vitriol, mixed with Painters Lac,
or apply it with a Tent dipped into the White of an Egg; or into the Juice of
Hoggs-Dung, mixed with Juice of Plantan. The Powder of Hoggs-Dung, and that of
Toads, are very proper for the same use; as likewise the Phlegm of Vitriol,
writing Ink, the Tincture of the Sulphur of Vitriol; Soot taken from the bottom
of a Kettle, and mixed with the Powder of the Blood that runs from the
Nostrils; the French Styptic Liquor, or a solution of Alum and Vitriol of
Steel in Plantan-Water, and above all, the rectified Spirit of Wine.

The Gums are also very liable to Bleedings, occasioned by the laxity of their
Substance, or the Corrosion of sharp scorbutical spittle, or the drawing of a
Tooth, or by the general Causes of other bleedings. If their bleeding be
periodical, customary, or critical, it ought not to be stopped. If it be caused
by the drawing of a Tooth, apply the Tincture of the Sulphur of Vitriol with
Cotton; and gargle the Mouth with the Decoction of Tormentil, and
Snakeweed-roots, with Galls, and White Poppy-seeds in Water, mixing it with
Bole-Armenic, Alum, and a little Vinegar. Sometimes the Spirit of Salt mixed
with Water is useful for washing the Mouth. But when every other thing proves
ineffectual, an actual Cautery is the surest Remedy. Scorbutical Bleedings are
accounted for elsewhere.

ART. 2. Of a spitting of Blood.
THE Blood that is evacuated by spitting, may either proceed from the Stomac,
(of which elsewhere) or from the Palate, Nostrils, and Gums, as was related in
the last Article; or from the Organs of Respiration, viz. the Windpipe,
Bronchia or Lungs; in which case, the Disease is called ((...)) Hemoptysis, or
a spitting of Blood, and is the subject of this Paragraph. The general Causes
are already accounted for: The particular Causes are,

1. The Rupture of some Vessel in the Breast, occasioned by a redundancy of
Blood, suppression of the Terms or Piles, violent Crying, bearing heavy
Burdens, Falls, Blows, vehement Coughing, or immoderat Laughter.

2. The Corrosion of the Vessels in the Breast, especially in the Lungs,
occasioned by the Inspiration of Mineral Sulphurous steams; or by a sharp
Lymph reigning in the Body, as in the small Pox, or when a sordid Ulcer is
unseasonably dried. To these we may add the accidental swallowing of Leeches,
and immoderat Bathing.

A Spitting of Blood is of it self manifest: But to trace out the part from
whence it proceeds is a piece of Difficulty. For this end the Physician ought
to weigh the antecedent Causes, such as excessive Crying, Falls, Bruises of the
Breast, and violent Coughs, which generally arraign the Lungs, while other
Causes are apt to affect other parts. Besides the Circumstances attending the
Evacuation, will give some further light into the Matter; as if the Blood be
clotty, if it be voided without Coughing or much Hauking, and that in small
quantities, then it proceeds from the Palate, Gums, Throat, etc. and not from
the Breast, If it be copiously voided with a Cough that not only accompanies
but precedes the evacuation, and makes a hollow Noise, then it comes from the
Windpipe or Lungs; and if the respiration be difficult, if the Blood be
florid, thin, and frothy (as being rarified by the Air,) and if a pain beset
the lower part of the Breast, it certainly takes its rise from the Lungs. If
the Blood be black, clotty, and thick, and voided with a Cough and hollow
Noise, it springs from the Veins in the Cavity of the Breast. As for the
Prognostic; A Spitting of Blood from the Lungs is most dangerous, and apt to
degenerat into a Phthisic or Ulcer of the Lungs, especially if it took its rise
from the Corrosion of a sharp Humor. If it be only a Symptom of another
Disease, as of a Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, etc. it is not so dangerous, as when
it stands upon its own Legs. If a Spitting of Blood, occasioned by a
suppression of wonted evacuations, or by the Turgescence of Blood, be
unseasonably stopped, it degenerats into a Peripneumonia, or Consumption.

The Cure is performed in the Paroxysm, by removing the cause, appeasing and
thickening the Blood, and repairing the losses of the Vessels: out of the
Paroxysm, the clotty Blood remaining in the Breast, ought to be discussed, and
the Lungs strengthened. Now in order to answer these Indications, let us mind
the following Rules.

1. When a Spitting of Blood is caused by the Corrosion of sharp humors,
Blood-letting is improper; in some other cases it may be serviceable, but
regard must still be had to the Rules of Revulsion and Aversion; as if it
proceed from the suppression of the Piles or Terms, a Vein must be opened in
the Leg: When it arises from the suppression of a customary Bleeding at Nose,
the vein of the Forehead, or that under the Tongue is the proper place.

2. Purgatives are highly pernicious. But Diuretics and Diaphoretics are very
useful.

3. Internal Astringents ought not to be used, before the Blood be turned off,
for fear of imprisoning the Blood in the Breast, and so causing a Suffocation,
or Peripneumonia.

4. All external Astringents and cold things applied to the Breast, are more
apt to inflame than mitigat the Disease.

5. Opiats are always safe and useful; but such of 'em as are very hot, as
Venice Treacle, Mithridat, etc. are not so proper as Laudanum Opiatum, and
especially Henbane Seeds, which are unanimously approved both by the ancient
and modern Writers. Hence an Electuary of Henbane and white Poppy Seeds, with
Coral, Boodstone, and the stale Conserve of Roses, is of excellent use.
However the safest way is to give but a small quantity of Henbane Seeds at a
time, and repeat the Doses oftener, because they are very Narcotic, and apt to
cause Madness.

6. In all Compositions we ought still to have an Eye upon the corrosive
sharpness of the Humors, for tempering which we use the same Medicines as were
recommended against Bleedings in general; especially Plantan, Purslain and
Comfrey, their Decoctions, Juices and Syrups, for their Waters have no
astringent force: The Decoction, Syrup, and Conserve of Ground Ivy (a noble
Pectoral,) the Juice of Nettles, the stale Conserve of red Roses, Diascordium,
the Troches of Amber, (which at once temper sharp humors, dissolve clotty
Blood, and stop its Flux:) The Oil of Linseed given by Spoonfuls, the Oil of
Vitriol when there is no apprehension of a Phthisic; the Juice expressed from
Quinces boiled in Water till they be soft, given to two or three Spoonfuls,
three or four times a Day; the Decoction it self being mixed with that of
Barley, or Corants for ordinary Drinking; Mice Dung, given to a dram, twice a
Day, with the Juice of Plantan and Sugar; the Tincture of the Sulphur of
Vitriol, Bloodstone, the Antiphthisical Tincture, Mynsichtius's Species
Diaplantaginis, etc.

7. When the Paroxysm is over, we ought to add dissolving and expectorating
Medicines, such as Sperma Ceti, Diaphoretic Antimony, Crabs Eyes with Vinegar,
Oil of Amber, Oxymel of Squills, etc.

8. In the last place the Lungs ought to be fortified by Vulnerary Balmy
Medicines.

As for external Applications some apply a dried Toad under the Armpits; some
trust to the Sympathetic Powder of Vitriol; and others choose to wet or wash
the Testicles with Rose Vinegar, and that with good success.

Take of the Conserve of Ground Ivy, and that of Comfrey, of each an ounce;
Conserve of Roses, an ounce; sealed Earth impregnated with spirit of Vitriol,
(providing the Lungs are not corroded) two scruples; prepared Bloodstone, a
scruple; Troches of Amber, a dram; Laudanum Opiatum, six grains. With the Syrup
of Comfrey make an Electuary. Of which take the Quantity of a Nutmeg, twice a
day.

Take of Plantan, Purslain, and Chervil Waters, of each an ounce; Tincture of
the Sulphur of Vitriol, a dram; Troches of Amber, two scruples; Crollius's
Sperniola, fifteen grains; Laudanum Opiatum, five grains; Fernelius's Syrup of
Comfrey, and the Syrup of Purslain, of each half an ounce. Make a Potion.

The Spaw Waters, Milk, and the vulnerary Decoctions are used as preservatives.

SECT. XIX. Of Diseases relating to the Alterations of the Blood, in the
Spleen, Liver, and Kidneys.
AS the Blood visits the Bowels for their nourishment, so it is variously
altered according to the Nature of every Bowel. In the Spleen it is impregnated
with a Volatile sour Ferment, that prepares and qualifies its parts for
separation; in the Liver it is separated from the Bile, which is conveyed thence
into the Gut, either directly through the Ductus Hepaticus, or, after some stay
in the Gall-bag, through the Ductus Cysticus. Now there are several Cases in
which this separation is lamely performed, viz. When the Animal Spirits are
exhausted or disordered, or the innate Spirits of the respective Bowel
vitiated; or when Inflammations or Tumors invade the Part, as in Chronical
Diseases; not, as if the Obstructions or Tumors of the Spleen or Liver were the
Causes of Chronical Distempers, but only as being their effects, or at least
troublesome Companions, that ought to be accounted for in the Cure of those
Distempers, it being generally compassed by Chalybeats, or such Medicines as
conquer an Acid, and clear the first Passages, which are the Original Source of
all Obstructions.

In the Kidneys, the Blood being carried thither by the Emulgent Arteries, is
dissolved by a lixivious Ferment, and its Serum laden with acid and urinous
Salts, invelop'd with Oily Particles, is strained through the small Fibers that
convey it to the Corpus Papillare, from whence it sweats through into the
Pelvis, and passing through the Ureters and Bladder, is voided under the name of
Urine. If the Salts of the Urine be exactly united together, they entitle it to
transparency; if their mixture be unequal, it is muddy or crude, and betokens
the unequal temperature of the Salts in the Blood. But so soon as the Blood has
conquered the prevailing heterogeneous Salt that over-match'd and disturbed the
Harmony of the rest, then the Urine precipitats 'em as a Sediment, and becomes
clear. In perfect Health, it contains nothing but these Salts incorporated with
Oil and a serous Vehicle, but when the Chyle is not elaborat or perfectly
digested, then its Crudities, and the Sulphurous vicious Salts occasioned by
them, are voided with the Serum, and impart to it a high or flat Tincture,
according to the various Exaltation of the Salts, and their mixture with
Sulphur.

CHAP. I. Of Distempers relating to the separation of Serum in the Kidneys.
ART. 1. Of an Ischuria in the Kidneys, or a suppression of Urine arising from
the want of a due Separation in the Reins.
THE Causes of an Ischuria in the Kidneys relate either to the Blood or the
Kidneys. The former are the Redundancy of the Blood, or its vicious thickness
and the close Cohesion of its Parts, occasioned by Acid or viscous Lymph, and
an imperfect Fermentation, as in Fevers before the Height, in Chronical
Diseases, obstructions of the Bowels, etc. The latter relating to the Kidneys
are,

1. The Obstruction of their Passages, occasioned by clotted Blood, as in the
case of a Fall; Purulent Matter either residing there, or conveyed thither from
other Ulcers; viscid tough Humors, a Stone in the Kidneys, external cold
contracting the Fibers, nephritic Tumors, etc.

2. The Paralytic Laxity of the Fibers, occasioned by a weakness or deficiency
of Spirits, by preceding Wounds or Ulcers, by the disorders of their Nerves,
the dislocation of the Vertebrae of the Back, etc.

3. The Convulsive Contractions of the Fibers, which are frequently occasioned
in one Kidney by a Stone in the other, through the correspondence of the Nerves.

4. The flatness of the Ferment in the Kidneys, or its degeneracy from a
volatile salin Acrimony, as in Dropsies, Cachexies, etc.

A Suppression of Urine arising from the default of the Kidneys is
distinguished from that in the Bladder, by a sense of weight about the Loins,
the insufficiency of a Catheter for procuring Urine, and the absence of a Tumor
or pain about the Pubes or Perinaeum; sometimes it is attended by stinking
Sweats, or such as smell like Urine; a stinking Breath, Anxieties in the
Breast, Vomiting, an universal Benummedness, Epileptic Symptoms, and Tumors of
the Abdomen and Legs. If the Urine before the suppression was thick and muddy,
with a copious slimy Sediment, the Body being universally infested with tough
coarse Humors, then the suppression is caused by Slime stopping the Passages.
If the Urine before the suppression was Bloody, or if a Blow, Fall, or violent
Riding occasioned it, then clotted Blood is the immediate Cause. If the Urine
was mixed with Purulent Matter, or if any considerable Bowel be ulcerated, the
Obstruction is caused by the corrupt Matter. If the Urine was voided without
any other remarkable Symptom, than that of losing its wonted Smell and Taste,
the Ferment is faulty.

An Ischuria in the Kidneys is worse than that in the Bladder. If it be
attended by Symptoms disturbing the Breast, it is very dangerous. If the Urine
force its Passage before the Seventh day, it affords a comfortable Prediction,
though not infallible, especially if the Blood and solid Parts be much corrupted:
Some Instances there are of a total suppression of Urine, for ten, fourteen, or
twenty Days, that was cured; but these are unfrequent; besides, they are
generally attended by a perpetual Sweating, Vomiting, or some notable
evacuation of Serum, otherwise they would prove Mortal. If a suppression of
Urine be free from pain, it proceeds from the Paralytic Laxity of the Fibers,
and is always Mortal.

The Cure varys according to the Difference of the Causes. In general, gentle
Laxatives mixed with Diuretics and Turpentin Clysters are proper, as being apt
not only to irritat the Guts, but to promote Urine. If the Obstruction be
caused by clotty Blood; Madder, Sperma Ceti, Crabs Eyes mixed with Vinegar,
Chervil, Ground Ivy, St. John's-wort, especially its Seed, and above all the
volatile Salt of Amber, are proper Ingredients. If the Obstruction be occasioned
by Purulent Matter, we exhibit the Balsam of Sulphur prepared with Oil of
Turpentin, the Essence of Agrimony, Juice of Ground Ivy, and such like
vulnerary Medicines. If a slimy humor beset the Kidneys, we must first evacuat
the slimy Crudities by Laxatives, before we attempt to use Diuretics, for fear
they should augment the Evil, as causing a greater afflux of pituitous Matter.
After evacuation we administer the Juice of Radishes, the Infusion of Horse
Radishes in Wine, the Juice of Limons to two or three ounces, with Oxymel; the
dulcified spirit of Salt, the Philosophical spirit of Vitriol, or rather the
Acid spirit of Sal-Armoniac, with the Decoction of Parsley Roots and red
Vetches; the Juice of the Pellitory that grows upon the Rubbish of old Walls,
as being impregnated with the Nitrous Salt of the Lime; the Winter Cherry,
Madder, volatile Salt of Amber, etc. If the Fibers of the Kidneys be flaggy,
Aromatic and Nervous Medicines are proper, especially Turpentin, the spirit and
Oil of Juniper Berries, Cinnabar of Antimony, and above all the volatile Salt of
Amber given to twelve grains in a Convenient Vehicle is an admirable Diuretic.
If the Fibers be contracted we exhibit Narcotics, with Cinnabar of Antimony,
and the volatile Salt of Amber; or Mithridat with some diuretic Decoction; or,
in imitation of Gesnerus, the Powder of Glass.

If the ferment of the Kidneys be defective, we exhibit the sharp salin
Diuretics, mixed with the temperat Oily Ingredients; especially the Decoction
of Garlic Heads, the Seed of Hedge Mustard given to a dram in Wine, the Juice
of Parsneps, the Spirit and Salt of Urine; Amelungius's nephritic Tincture,
prepared from Tartar, Nitre, Antimony, and the solar Flint-stones; the
Carminative Spirit, the volatile spirit of Tartar; the spirit of Sal-Armoniac,
the volatile Salt or distilled Oil of Amber; the Spirit or Juice of Earthworms;
the Powder, Juice and Infusion of Woodlice; the Infusion of Spanish Flies in
Wine, or their Diuretic Essence prepared with the Tincture of Tartar; the
Infusion of Horses Dung in Rhenish Wine; the Urine of a Goat; Crabs Eyes mixed
with Wine or Vinegar; the Decoctions of red Vetches, Chervil, Madder, or St.
John's-wort; the Shells of Hens Eggs or rather those of Estrich Eggs, given to
a dram, or dissolved in spirit of Salt; the Powder of Snails Shells dissolved
in like manner; the fixed Salts of Diuretic Plants, prepared according to
Tachenius's Method; or so that they be not too much calcined, and consequently
robbed of their Salin Virtue; the Tincture of Tartar, prepared thus.

Take of the Salt of Tartar, two ounces; dissolve 'em in Water, then strain,
and set it upon the Fire; while it is a boiling, throw into it by degrees three
ounces of the Cream of Tartar in Powder; then thicken 'em with a gentle Fire,
and afterward reduce 'em to Powder, from which extract an admirable Diuretic
Tincture with the spirit of Wine.

To these we may add the Juice of the Birch-tree, the distilled Oil of
Turpentin, and Emulsions made of violet Seeds, and Speedwell Water, or of
Turpentin and the yelk of an Egg, with some Diuretic Water, and the Juice of
Limons. Or,

Take of the Waters of Parsley, and Restharrow, of each an ounce; Elixyr of
Juniper Berries, (called Malvaticum) six drams; spirit of Putrified
Earthworms, two drams; volatile spirit of Tartar, a dram; distilled Oil of
Turpentin, three drops; Syrup of Ground Ivy, two or three drams. Mix and
exhibit a Spoonful now and then.

Take of Tartar vitriolated, a dram; of the Salt of Beanstalks, and Salt of
Pigeons Dung, of each fifteen grains; volatile Salt of Amber, twelve grains.
Make a Powder for three Doses.

Externally we anoint with Stone Oil, Oil of Scorpions, and distilled Oil of
Turpentin, mixed with the Ointment of Marshmallows.

ART. 2. Of the Stone in the Kidneys.
STones in Man's Body, are nothing else but a vicious Acid congealed with a
volatile Alcali. This vicious Acid, for the most part, is bred in the Stomac,
and being mixed with the Blood, attacks a naked volatile Alcali wherever it
meets it, with which it conspires to make up a third Concrete or Stone. Now the
Kidneys being plentifully stocked with a volatile Alkali, are most liable to the
shocks of this Acid. It Is true, that in a healthy state, the Alcali of the
Urine in the Kidneys, is naturally qualified with an Acid, and then it is secure
from the efforts of the vicious Intruder; but for as much as the Urine is
oft-times liable to Alteration, or Corruption, which sets the volatile Salt at
liberty, much after the same method as when it has been exposed to the Air in
an Urinal and begins to smell; therefore the Kidneys are in such cases in
danger of being molested with Stones. Thus the generation of a Stone supposes
two concurring Causes; one is a prevailing Acid in the Body, occasioned mostly
by imperfect Digestions in the first Passages, or by such things as are apt to
become Acid; viz. Milk, Cheese, and especially Wine: The other is the
Putrefaction and liberty of the volatile Alkali of the Urine; occasioned
generally by the weakness of the Ferment, as by Asparagus and such Diuretics as
enfeeble the Ferment, and cause a putrid smell in the Urine.

Now, that a volatile Acid engaged with the volatile Alcali in the Kidneys is apt
to become a Stone, is made out by the following Remarks.

1. Arthritick and Melancholic Persons, who are much molested with vicious
Acids, are very liable to the Stone; whereas those of a bilious Constitution
are not.

2. Those who live near the Danube, and ^e wont to drink much Wine, are
frequently troubled with the Stone, by reason of the prevailing Acid in Wine,
which is apt to congeal with a volatile Alcali; as, if ye take Nitre very well
six'd, and mix it with Flint-stones, then melt it upon a strong Fire, and
'twill become like Glass; pulverize this Glass, and pour Spirit of Wine upon
it; after some time, pour that off, and add fresh Spirit of Wine, which in a
Month's time will become a red Oil, containing the Acid of the Nitre exalted
with the Spirit of Wine. Now if ye put a few Drops of this volatile Acid Oil
into a Glass of Wine, 'twill gather it into a hard substance.

3. The Chemical Analysis of the Stones presents us with a fetil Oil, an
Urinous Spirit, a volatile Salt, and a Caput mortuum, like Quicklime: Not to
speak of its effervescence with any Alcalin Salt.

When the Stones thus ingendered of the volatile Acid and Alcali are growing
together, they sometimes take in a viscid Mucilage, being the depraved
nourishment of the Kidneys, which renders the stones white: Sometimes they
corrode the small Vessels, and take in some drops of Blood, which makes the
stones red. Sometimes the pure Salts join together, without any other mixture
but some earthy Particles, caused by the Putrefaction of the Urine, and then
the Stones are yellow. But at other times the Membranes, and the whole
substance of the Kidney, make a part of the Concrete.

A Stone in the Kidneys, while it lies quiet and does not stir, is attended by
few or no Symptoms. But when it begins to move, or, as the Practitioners speak,
in the Paroxysm, it grates upon the Membranes, which by means of the immediate
Correspondence of their Nerves with all those from the Mesenteric Plexus,
communicate their disorder to all the adjacent Parts. When its motion in the
Kidney first commences, the Person is molested with a heavy dull Pain in the
Loins, inclining to the right or left side, and sometimes reaching to the
respective side of the Head, according as the right or left Kidney is
disturbed. When the Stone is advanced from the Pelvis to the Vreter, then the
Pain shoots, pricks, and raises a sense of distention, or tearing, and does not
cease 'till it either reaches the Bladder, or retire to the Kidney. Immediately
before the invasion of the Paroxysm, the Urine is scanty, watery, and very
sharp. Sometimes when the Stone is in motion, the nutritious Juice of the
membranous Parts being depraved, is voided together with the Urine, rendering it
thick, pale, and glutinous, especially toward the bottom of the Urinal.
Sometimes it is high tinctured, and thick, as being copiously impregnated with
dissolved Salts; sometimes it is actually mixed with Blood, by reason of the
Stone's offensiveness to the Blood Vessels. Oft-times Sand is also voided, but
then it falls to the bottom, and is hard, not friable; otherwise if the Sand be
friable and reddish, it is only a Coagulation of scorbutical Salts: sometimes
the Urine is totally suppressed, the other Kidney being contracted by the
provoked Nerves.

During the Paroxysm, the Person is unable to stand upright, or bow his Body,
and the Pain glides along the Ureters to the Bladder; sometimes it draws up the
Testicle, and benums the Leg of the same side; sometimes it causes vomiting,
inappetency, contractions of the Fingers, a tickling pain in the Nut of the
Yard, and difficult respiration, the Midriff being by sympathy affected, and
girding the Region of the short Ribs with a sense of constriction. But above
all, the most common Symptoms are, gripings in the Guts, Colic Pains in Men,
Hysteric Symptoms in Women, and in such as are high-belly'd Pains resembling
those of Childbirth. The Pulse for the most part is hard, by reason of the
convulsive Contractions of the Fibers of the Arteries. All these Symptoms are
not always to be met with, neither are they peculiar to this Disease; but those
which are most certain, and distinguish this Distemper from the Colic, are the
benum'dness of the Leg, inability to stand upright, or to stretch their Back,
the continuance of the Pain without remission, the disorders of the Urine, and
the absence of the Symptoms peculiar to the Colic.

A Stone in the Kidneys is a dangerous Disease, especially to Women with Child.
If frequently causes mortal Convulsions, Suppressions of Urine, Inflammations
and Ulcers in the Kidneys, etc. especially if it be rough and large. If the
Urine, that was at first thin, becomes thick and muddy, as being laden with
Sand and small Stones, it is a good sign. But if the Urine be suppressed for a
considerable time, and if the external Parts be cold, or seized with cold
Sweats, Death is at hand. Sometimes the Pains observe a Tertian or Quartan
period. If they cause a Lethargy it is incurable.

The Cure consists in mitigating the Pain, and removing the Contractions of the
Ureters and Membranes, and expelling the Stone by Diuretics. For which end, we
ought to observe,

1. That all violent Diuretics are improper, while the Pain is vehement; for
that they provoke and irritate the Membranes, to contract 'emselves more.
Wherefore while the Pain lasts, we give only the most temperate meek Diuretics
mixed with Opiats.

2. That oily things, such as Emulsions etc. are absolutely necessary for
allaying the sharpness of the Urine. The Ancients indeed recommended 'em for
relaxating the Passages, but 'twas a groundless Fancy: To be sure if they had
any relaxating virtue, they would first display it upon the Stomac.

3. That the first Passages ought always to be kept clear, lest their
impurities should aggravate the Symptoms of the Abdomen. Upon this Account,
emollient and anodyn Clysters are very serviceable, especially in the beginning
of the Paroxysm. Such are those of the Decoction of Speed-well,
Camomil-flowers, Marsh-mallow-roots, etc. in Milk; or of Rape and Lin-seed-Oyl;
but we ought to take notice, that the simplest Decoctions are best; that large
quantities must not be injected, especially in high-belly'd Women, for fear of
distending the Parts, and aggravating the Pain; and that if the Belly be very
costive, we may add Purgative Electuaries; and when the Pain is abated,
Juniper Berries, volatile Salt of Amber, and such like Diuretics. After the
injection of Clysters, we order Baths and Fomentations of the Decoctions of
softening, carminative, cephalic, and diuretic Ingredients; followed by
emollient relaxating Liniments, sharpened with distilled cephalic and diuretic
Oils. As,

Take of Pellitory, a handful; Mallows and Violets, of each half a handful;
Chamomil and Elder-flowers, of each two little handfuls; Marsh-mallow-roots,
six drams; boil them in Child's Urine, or Whey. To eight Ounces of the strained
Decoction, add of Turpentin dissolved with the Yelk of an Egg, two drams; Oil
of White Lillies, half an ounce; Oil of Scorpions, a dram; Antimonial Nitre,
two scruples. Make a Clyster.

Take of the emollient Ingredients, three handfuls; of the four large hot
Seeds, and Salt of Tartar, of each a dram; boil them in Water. To nine Ounces
of the strained Liquor, add of the Electuary of Hiera with Agaric, an Ounce;
Distilled Oil of Turpentin, a dram; with the Yelk of an Egg make a Clyster.

Take of the Herbs, Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory, and Mercury, of each two
handfuls; Chamomil and Elder-Flowers, of each two handfuls; Juniper Berries,
two ounces; Lin-seed and Fenugrec-seed, of each three ounces; make two Bags to
be boiled in Water for a Bath, applying, in the time of bathing, one Bag to the
Loins, and the other to the Navel.

Take of Sage, Mother of Thyme, and Chamomil-flowers, of each two handfuls;
Juniper Berries, two ounces; Seeds of Anis and Dill, of each an ounce. Tie 'em
in a Bag, to be boiled in Water; foment the Loins and Abdomen with the
Decoction, and apply the Bags as above.

Take of the Ointment of Marshmallows, three drams; Oil of bitter Almonds, and
Oil of Scorpions, of each a dram and a half; Rock Oil, two drams. Make a
Liniment. With which anoint the Loins, Navel, and Region of the Ureters.

Take of the Oils of bitter Almonds, Chamomil, white Lillies, and Scorpions, of
each two drams; white Rock-Oyl, three drams; distilled Oils of Spike, and
Juniper Berries. of each a dram and a half. Make an Ointment as above.

Take of Rock-oyl, three drams; expressed Oil of Poppies, a dram and a half;
expressed Oil of Henbane, half a dram. Make an Anodyn Liniment. The Essence of
Opium is useful for the same purpose. The nervous Cephalic Oils, the distilled
Oils of Turpentin, Cummin, etc. are also very proper. But above all, the Oil of
Camphyr is an admirable Diuretic for external Compositions. The Oil of Amber is
too fierce, and apt to aggravat the pain.

Take of the Plaster called Nervinum, and Tacamahac, of each an ounce; Balsam
of Peru, two drams. Make a square Plaster to be applied to the Loins.

Take the expres'd Juice of ten River Crabs boiled in Milk, and add to it three
ounces of the Crum of white Bread, three yelks of Eggs, an ounce of Butter, an
ounce of the Oil of Chamomil, and half a scruple of Saffron. Mix all for a
Cataplasm, to be applied to the Loins, for allaying the excessive heat of the
Kidneys.

While these Prescriptions are in use, 'twill be requisite to look out for
internal Medicines. In the beginning gentle Laxatives are useful. They ought to
be mixed with the meekest Diuretics. As,

Take of Tartar Vitriolat, fifteen grains; Salt of Broom, three or four grains;
Scammony prepared with the Juice of Roses, three grains; distilled Oil of
Turpentin, a drop. Make a Powder to be exhibited in the beginning of the
Paroxysm. Or,

Take of Turpentin, a dram; Rhubarb in Powder, two scruples; prepared Amber,
half a dram; Cinnamon, half a scruple; with the Oil of Turpentin make Pills for
a few Doses. Note, Turpentin is both a Laxative and a Diuretic, and upon that
account highly useful in this case. The Emulsions of Violet-seeds with
Speedwell-water mixed with Crabs Eyes, are also very proper for the same
purposes.

The first Passages being cleared, we exhibit such Medicines as mitigat the
Pain, and allay the sharpness of the Humors, with gentle Diuretics. Thus the
Elixir of Juniper, mixed with the Essence of Opium, and exhibited by Spoonfuls:
The Oil of sweet Almonds mixed with Perch Stones, and the Syrup of
Mash-mallows: And the Emulsions temperat Seeds are very proper. In general,
Narcotics are very serviceable, not only by allaying the Pain, but by procuring
Sleep, and so strengthening the Spirits in order to the expulsion of the Stone.
To these we add the gentle and easy Diuretics. As,

Take of prepared Crabs Eyes, Sperma Ceti, of each a scruple; volatile Salt of
Amber, five grains; Laudanum Opiatum, two grains. Make a Powder. Sometimes we
add Cinnabar of Antimony, for preventing or removing the Convulsion of the
internal parts,

Take twelve living Wood-Lice; bruise 'em with two drams of the sharpest
Tincture of Tartar; then strain it, and add a scruple of the Essence of Opium.
Dose thirty or forty drops. The Tincture of the Balsam of Peru, or that of
Capivi, are likewise very proper.

Take of the extract of Acorus, sixteen grains; Castor four grains; Hysteric
Laudanum, six grains; with the Oil of Turpentin make Pills, to be exhibited
when a Vomiting and Hiccough attend the Stone in the Kidneys.

Take of the Water of Strawberries and Winter Cherries, of each an ounce and a
half; Cinnamon Water, three drams; Crabs Eyes, two scruples; Egg-shells
calcined, a scruple; purified Nitre, half a dram; Laudanum Opiatum, two or
three grains; Syrup of Marshmallows half an ounce. Make a Potion.

Take of prepared red Coral, and Perch Stones, of each fourteen grains
Diaphoretic Gold, twelve grains; Camphyr, three grains. Make a Powder for two
Doses.

Take of Marshmallows-roots, an ounce; Liquorice-roots, two drams; Mallows, one
handful; Violet-seeds, half an ounce. Boil them in Barley-water. To two pound
of the strained Decoction, add of the Syrup of Poppies, two ounces; prepared
Crab's Eyes, a dram. Mix, etc. Sometimes we add Juniper Berries, Carrot-seeds,
St. Johns-wort-seed, etc. Forestus's diuretic Decoction is much approved. As
also the decoction of Chamomil-flowers, or that of Water Lillies. In every
draught of such Decoctions, it is customary to add a few drops of the Spirit of
Nitre, or of a mixture of the Spirit of Salt with the volatile Salt of Amber.

When the Symptoms attending the Fit begin to relent, we must have recourse to
strong sharp Diuretics; such are, the Juice of Radishes, given to two ounces
with Spanish Wine; the Roots and Leaves of Horse-radishes infused in Wine; or a
Spirit distilled from Wine, in which Roots or Leaves of Horse-Radishes have
been infused in a Cellar for fourteen Days together; the Essence of Restharrow;
Burdock-seeds; the Infusion of Ground Ivy dried and Garlic Heads in the Spirit
of Wine, or that of Juniper Berries; an Electuary of the Rob of Juniper, and
St. Johns-wort-seeds, which when bruised smell like Turpentin, and consequently
must needs be serviceable both for cleansing the Veins, and preserving their
ferment by its balmy virtue; Carrot-seeds infused in fermenting Ale: The
distilled Oil and volatile Salt of Ash-tree-seeds; or the following Oil;

Take of the inner rindes of Ash-tree-roots, two pound; fresh Juniper Berries,
three pound; Turpentin, a pound and a half. Mix 'em with the Turpentin, and
digest all for the space of three Months in twelve pound of Water. Then distill
an admirable Diuretic Oil. Dose, eight or ten drops in white Wine.

The Juice of the tendrels of the Birch-tree gathered in March is of excellent
use, if drank like Spaw-waters. As also the Water distilled from Arsmart and
frequently cohobated; the Decoctions of the Indian Nephritic Wood; the Gum of
the Cherry-tree formed into Pills, or dissolved in Wine; and the Nephritic
Essences or Spirits of Winter Cherries, Juniper Berries, etc. Timaeus
recommends the Juice of the wild Tansey gathered in May before the Sunrising;
and that of green Rye, mixed with red Wine. To these we add the volatile Salt of
Amber, the Salt of Urine, Nitre, Spirit of Nitre, and all nitrous Salts,
especially that of Pigeons Dung; or the infusion of Pigeons Dung in Vinegar,
mixed with Honey; or the following Salt;

Take Nitre well fixed, and expose it to the Air. 'Twill melt to the
consistence of Pap. Then mix it with an equal quantity of the red Oil of
Vitriol. When their Ebullition ceases, draw off the Liquor with a strong Fire,
and 'twill leave a white Salt, of admirable efficacy against the Stone.

The Mineral and Animal Stones are likewise recommended in this case,
especially Nephritic Stones, Crabs Eyes, Perch or Carp Stones, the shells of
Eggs, especially Estrich Eggs. They are not directly Diuretic, but they drink
up the Acid that gathers the Stone, and if dissolved in the compound Spirit of
Salt are converted into a third Concrete that proves an admirable Diuretic. The
Lie of the calcined Eggshells, the lixivious Salt of Quicklime calcined with
Sal-Armoniac, are also much approved. The decoction of Quicklime in Water
being strained and congealed, yields a fixed Salt, which is either used in
Powder, or infused in rectified Spirits, to which it gives a notable red
Tincture that is much commended. Helvetius boiled Quicklime in Vinegar, and
evaporated the decanted Decoction. The remaining Salt he made red hot in a
Crucible, and extracted a notable nephritic Tincture with Spirit of Wine. The
Spirit of putrified Earthworms is also a proper Diuretic; or the Powder of
Scorpions, first washed, then infused alive in Spanish Wine for 24 Hours, and
then baked in an Oven in a Pot covered with Sage leaves; their Dose is four or
five grains in a potch'd Egg. If the Wings, Head, and Feet of Crickets be lop'd
off, and its Body be macerated in Parsley-water, 'twill become a milky Liquor
that is very Diuretic. The Essence of Wrens is much applauded, as likewise the
following Pills.

Take black Beetles gathered in May, without touching 'em with one's Hand.
Suffocat 'em in Spirit of Wine, then dry 'em, cut 'em into pieces; and in the
middle of their Body ye will find a viscous Liquor, which mix with their
Powder, to the consistence of a Balsam. Then take of this Balsam, adram;
distilled Oil of Anis and that of Cloves, of each three drops. Make Pills. Of
which exhibit two grains once or twice in Elder-flower water, in the Morning
with a fasting Stomac. They will cause a Strangury that shall last for thirty
Days.

If Diuretic Medicines prove ineffectual, we ought to discontinue their use for
some time, lest the Kidneys be overcharged with Crudities. The strongest of
these Diuretics are by some called Lithontriptica, or dissolvers of the Stone
in the Body; but I doubt much if any such Medicines be yet discovered. It Is
certain that Spirit of Nitre will dissolve a Stone out of the Body; but the
alteration it undergoes in mixing with the various Humors in the Body cramp
its virtue within us. And therefore whoever pretends to the knowledge of
Lithontriptica's must have found out such a Medicine as is not liable to be
changed by the Humors of the Body, and besides, that is neither an Acid nor an
Alcali, but consists of both as the Stone it self, and is peculiarly calculated
for its Pores, as Aqua fortis is for Silver. Some have exploded all
Lithontriptica's, as being too corrosive and apt to injure the Stomac, Guts,
etc. But they ought to consider that all sharp dissolving Menstruum's are not
corrosive to the taste, as Arsenic, Quicksilver, Mercurius Vitae, etc. whic
are altogether insipid. And besides, some Liquors are qualified for dissolving
hard Concretes, that wo'not pick upon softer Objects; as Vinegar dissolves the
shells of Eggs, while their inner Membran is left entire.

After the Paroxysm is over and the Stone voided, we ought to prevent the
generation of new ones by proper preservatives; as 1. By keeping the first
Passages clean with Laxatives, and once in three or four Months a Vomit, or a
stronger Purge. 2. By correcting the Acid in the first Passages with absorbent
Powders, and the fixed Salts of Diuretic Plants. 3. By cleansing the Reins and
evacuating the first Rudiments of the Stone, with volatile Diuretics, the Spirit
and volitil Salt of Tartar, the Spirit of Urine, that of Sal-Armoniac, the
Spirit of Worms, Elixir Proprietatis, Turpentin, fat Broth, Whey, etc. Some
commend Milk, but its Curd disswades us from using it. However we ought still
to remember that the Diuretics must be of the meeker sort, and exhibited only
once or twice in a Fortnight or three Weeks, and that at some distance from the
times of eating, but not till the first Passages are cleared. 4. By
strengthening the Reins, retrieving their ferment, and preserving the Urine
from corruption, with balmy Medicines, such as Turpentin, the Balsam of
Sulphur, Juniper, St. John's-wort-seeds, etc.

ART. 3. Of a Diabetes, or excessive Flux of Urine.
A Diabetes is either genuin or spurious. The former is a voiding of Liquors by
Urine without any stay or alteration in the Body. The latter is a voiding of a
much larger quantity of Urine than that of Liquids received into the Body. The
cause of the former is the laxity and openness of the Passages which lead
directly from the first Passages to the Reins. It Is true these Passages are not
yet discovered, but the quick Passage of some Liquors, and their being voided
without any alteration in color, taste, or consistence, according to the
Observations of Galen, Bartholin, Hildanus, etc. do sufficiently evince their
necessity. The cause of the latter is a sharp volatile Salt or Ferment bred in
the first Passages, that dissolves the fat acid in the Blood, Chyle, and
muscular Flesh, unlocking their Texture, and melting the ferment of the Reins.
Thus the balmy and nutritious parts of the Blood being melted down, and
tinctured with a sharp acrimony, they stimulat the Kidneys, and force their
passage. This volatile Alcali Salt is not unlike that which sometimes causes
melting loosenesses, or that of Spanish Flies and Beetles, and is frequently
the follower of violent Diuretics. Perhaps it also sucks in the humidity of
the Air in the Body, by virtue of which it melts, and so increases the quantity
of Urine, which sometimes exceeds that of all the Juices in the Body. The
Symptoms of the spurious Diabetes are the crudity, thinness, and sweet taste of
the Urine, with a fat Scum swimming upon it; a notable weakness, leanness,
dryness of the Mouth, thirst, a heat and pain in the Loins, a slow Fever, and
in short, all the Symptoms of a Hectic. If it follow immoderat Labor, Venery,
or Chronical Fevers, it is uncurable.

For Cure of a genuin Diabetes we exhibit Astringents and Aromatics, such as we
generally prescribe for defending and fortifying the Stomac and Bowels in the
use of Spaw Waters. Thus the astringent crocus of Steel, the Tincture of the
Sulphur of Vitriol, Bole Armenic, sealed Earth, Conserve of Roses vitriolated,
the decoction of Orange-peel, and Plantan bol'd in Chalybeat-water, are very
proper. Some recommend, as an Arcanum, a Cocks-comb calcined, and exhibited
with ones own Urine. As for the Cure of a spurious Diabetes; we must endeavor
to correct the Acrimony of the Volatile Alcali; to prevent the colliquation of
the Juices by Narcotics, and proper Astringents. First of all, their Diet must
be the same as that of Hectic Persons. In the next place vomiting is very
proper; to which we subjoin the Powder of the natural Boodstone, or of the
Artificial one, made of the Vitriol of Steel, and Sugar of Lead. The
Antiphthisical Tincture prepared from the same Ingredients. The Tincture of the
Sulphur of Vitriol; the astringent Crocus of Steel, the Powder or Spirit of
Alum, Amber, and its Troches, or those of sealed Earth, taken in an Acid
Vehicle; the Tincture or Magistery of Coral, prepared with the Juice of
Citrons, or their mixture with Vinegar.

Take of Plantan Water, three ounces; Distilled Vinegar, six drams; red Coral
pulverized, (not prepared) a dram; Laudanum Opiatum, two grains; Syrup of
Purslain, an ounce. Mix, and exhibit a spoonful frequently.

Quicklime-Water, given to four or five ounces thrice a day, is of singular use
in this Distemper; as also Milk, especially Chalybeat Milk, or that in which
hot Irons are frequently extinguished; Asses or Goats Milk are the Best, and
next to them Cows Milk. The Emulsions of sweet Almonds, and white Poppy-seeds
are also very proper. Externally some apply to the Kidneys, the Juice of
River-Crabbs, or Baggs of Plantan and Oak-Leaves boiled in Chalybeat Milk.

ART. 4. Of a Pissing of Blood.
THE Urine is sometimes tinctured with Blood, and that more or less according
to its quantity. The Blood springs either from the Kidney, Ureters, or Yard; or
from the Contusions of other parts. The Causes are the same as those of all
Bleedings, viz. Either an Anastomosis or Diaeresis: The former is caused by the
laxity of the Pores of the Reins, violent Motion, Jumping, Falls, excessive
Venery, violent Diuretics, and a redundancy of Blood in the Body. The latter by
sharp corrosive Humors, as in maligant Fevers, the Small Pox, and the Scurvy,
or by the application of Spanish Flies without mixing and tempering them with
Acids, by the Stone, Ulcers, etc.

The bloody Urine is distinguished from that which is only tinctured by Salts,
by its thick intransparent Consistence, and a red blackish Sediment, like
clotted Blood at the bottom of the Urinal. When the Blood proceeds from the
Kidneys, or Bladder, a heavy or gnawing pain besets those parts. When the Blood
is plentiful and well mixed with the Urine, and is not curdled, but liquid when
it falls to the bottom, it comes from the Kidneys. When the Blood is scarce,
unequally mixed, voided with Pain, and gives a clotty Sediment, it takes its
rise from the Bladder. If the Blood be voided without the Urine, or fall to the
Bottom immediately upon making of Water, it proceeds only from the Vrethra. If
a sharp Urine be voided with a sharp gnawing biting Pain, and if a strangury or
difficulty of making Water went before, the flux of blood is caused by the
Corrosion of the Vessels. If it proceed from Cantharides, the Person is
molested with an eternal erection of the Yard. If it proceed from the corrosion
or ulceration of the Bladder, it is very dangerous; but that from the corrosion
or weakness of the Reins, is yet more such.

For Cure, the Causes must be inquired after, and removed after the same
method, as in spitting of Blood. A redundancy of blood admits of bleeding. The
sharpness of the Serum prohibits both that and Purgation. Rhubarb indeed may be
allowed, as being an Alterative and Fortifyer of the Reins, as well as a
Laxative. Sylvius's Mixture of Coral, Dragons-blood, Laudanum, and Syrup of
Myrtles with Vinegar, and Plantan and Cinnamon Water, is a general prescription
for all Haemorrhagia's. However, the Acrimony of the Urine ought always to be
accounted for by the Juice of Plantan, or Purslain, or the Syrup of the Juice
of Comfrey and that of Plantan Leaves; the Decoction of Ground Ivy; or the
following Decoction.

Take of the Herbs Agrimony and Yarrow, the tops of St. John's Wort, and the
Moss of Bullace-Trees, of each a handful; Comfrey-Roots, two ounces; St
John's-wort-Seeds, two, three, or four drams; boil 'em in Chalybeat Milk, or
Whey, or Black-Smith's Water; sweeten the strained Decoction with the Syrup of
Comfrey, and add to every Draught, Crabs Eyes dissolved in Vinegar.

The Decoction of Ground Ivy, or Ground Pine; Sheep's Milk exhibited to four
ounces, with a dram of Bole-Armenic; Amber, and especially its Troches, given
to a dram, with half a dram of Bole-Armenic, and a little Vinegar in
Plantan-water, or with Crabbs Eyes, and Sugar of Lead; the Tincture of the
Sulphur of Vitriol, the Antiphthisical Tincture; prepared Boodstone exhibited
with Milk, (especially when the Disease is caused by Cantharides) and the
Emulsions of milky Seeds, are all very proper; and ought to be frequently
interlac'd with Laudanum Opiatum. To these we add vulnerary Ingredients,
especially the Juice or Powder of River-Crabbs, and Turpentin, either given in
Pills with Rhubarb, or dissolved with the Yelk of an Egg, in some convenient
Vehicle. The Spirit and Oil of Turpentin are too sharp. If the Bladder be
ulcerated we may inject the Troches of Amber mixed with Plantan Water, or the
Juice of Plantan with the Powder of Boodstone. When the Pissing of blood is
over, we ought to dissolve the clotty Blood that may remain in the Bladder,
with Amber and its Productions.

CHAP. II. Of Diseases relating to the Expulsion of Urine from the Bladder.
ART. 1. Of a total suppression of Urine, arising from its stay in the Bladder.
THE Urine being separated in the Kidneys, is conveyed through the Ureters to
the Bladder; and when its distending quantity, or its sharpness provokes the
Bladder to Contractions, is voided through the Vrethra.

This natural Evacuation is suppressed either through the default of the Bladder,
or of its Sphincter, or of the Vrethra. The Bladder is faulty when its Fibers
are heedless and stupid, as in Malignant Fevers; or relaxated, and unable to
contract it. This may be occasioned by staying long in cold Water, by Wounds,
Blows, Bruises in the lower part of the Back, or any Injury done to the Nerves
of the Part; by an excessive quantity of Urine forcibly retained in the
Bladder, by Worms, Ulcers, Inflammations, Tumors, etc. in the Bladder and
adjacent parts; and by the remissness of the Muscles of the Abdomen, which
ought naturally to press its Fibers. The Sphincter is faulty when it shuts the
Orifice, as being constantly contracted. It Is provoked to such Contractions by
Cholic and Nephritic Pains, Scorbutical Pains in the Abdomen, and the
Application of Spanish Flies. The Vrethra or Passage which leads from the
Bladder is faulty, when Inflammations, Tumors, or Venereal Excrescences beset
the Neck of the Bladder, Prostratae or Perinaeum; or when it is blocked up by a
Stone, clotty Blood, or viscous glutinous Humors occasioned by using Diuretics
immediately after eating before the Chyle be transformed, or by giving bad Milk
to Newborn Children, who are naturally liable to that Symptom.

The Symptoms of this Distemper are these. When the Bladder is over-distended
by a large quantity of Urine, the Person is molested with a grievous pain, and
vain desire of making Water, and the suppression is difficult to cure; when the
Bladder is Paralytic, it is insensible of Pain, or of any Provocation to
evacuat; when the urinary Passage is obstructed, a painful Tumor appears in the
Pubes, and is exasperated by touching. If clotty Blood cause the Obstruction,
it is discovered by preceding Falls, Bruises, pissing of Blood, etc. If
glutinous Humors block up the Way, antecedent Causes, and Slime voided with the
Urine, will give us to know it. If a suppression of Urine in the Bladder be
free of all Pain, and attended by a Tenesmus, and Hiccough, it prognosticates
Death. That from a Schirrus in the Neck of the Bladder, or adjacent parts, is
not easily cured.

The Cure is varied according to the Causes. If the Bladder be Paralytic, and
insensible, we give inwardly Cephalic Medicines, especially the Elixyr and
distilled Oils of Juniper; the distilled Oil of Amber, or that of Turpentin,
the Brains of Magpies, etc. and inject Clysters, first of emollient
Ingredients, and afterward of Centory, Coloquintida, etc. Or we administer
gentle Purgatives, and order the Person to keep in his Breath, and squeeze the
Abdomen. If these methods be ineffectual, we open the Passage with a Catheter,
or rather a Wax Candle, anointed with Honey and Oil of sweet Almonds. When the
Bladder is emptied, we inject the Decoction of Sage, Pennyroyal, wild
Marjoram, Calamint, Rue, Castor, etc. in Wine; and foment the External Parts
with a Sponge, or apply Cataplasms of Pellitory, and Oil of Scorpions; or
anoint the Pubes and Perinaeum with a Liniment of the Ointment of Marshmallows,
Oil of Scorpions, and distilled Oil of Juniper, applying afterward to the Os
sacrum and Pubes the Plaster called Nervinum, softened with the Oil of Amber.
If the suppression be very obstinate, we order bathing in the Decoctions of
emollient and nervous Plants, exhibiting at the same time some gentle Diuretic.
In Malignant Fevers, we apply the same Ointments and Decoctions, and order the
Patient to walk up and down the Room. When the Bladder is distended, we use the
same Method. When the Sphincter is contracted, we exhibit inwardly the
Specifics for Convulsions, mixed with Opiats; and anoint with a Liniment of the
Ointment of Marshmallows, mixed with the Oils of Poppies, Castor, and Amber.

If the Passage be stopped by clotted Blood, we exhibit Crabbs Eyes with
Vinegar, the Decoctions of Chervil, Sperma ceti, etc. and foment or bath with
the Decoctions of Antipleuritical Ingredients; applying likewise Cataplasms of
fresh Cows Dung. If viscid Humors block up the Passage, we give first a gentle
Purge; then the Juice of Limons with Spirit of Turpentin, or Spirit of Salt;
the Juice of Radishes, and Decoctions of aperient and diuretic Ingredients, to
which Black Garden-Currants are added. If the Prostatae be swollen, we apply
Cataplasms of Brook-lime, and Chamomil Flowers. If purulent Matter stick in the
way, we exhibit the Oil of Amber, and that of Juniper, and clear the Passage
with a Cacheter, providing the Bladder be not inflamed. If Excrescences beset
the Vrethra, we eat 'em away with Corrosives, applied with a Candle of Wax and
Turpentin, and then consolidate the Ulcer with Vnguentum Album Camphoratum.

For all Suppressions of Urine in general, we foment the Parts with the
Decoction of Pellitory, Anis and Parsleyseeds, Zedoary and Bay Berries in Wine;
and apply Cataplasms of Pellitory (growing upon the Rubbish of Old-Walls) with
roasted Onyons, Garlic, Oil of Scorpions, and Oil of Juniper; or anoint with
the same Oils mixed with Rock-Oyl.

ART. 2. Of the Stone in the Bladder.
THE Stone of the Bladder is for the most part, first bred in the Reins, and
introduced by Nephritic Pains, and, when it descends through the Vreters into
the Bladder, receives a considerable increase from the Mucilage, or depraved
nutritious Juice, that sticks to it, and becomes hard as it self. Thus we find
that stones in the Bladder are covered like an Onyon with several distinct
Coats, and have a Kernel in the middle, which represents the Stone as it came
from the Kidneys. The Symptoms are; a sudden stopping of Urine in the very time
of making it, followed by a violent and vain Desire of finishing that
Evacuation, and of going to stool; a dull sense of weight about the Perinaeum
and Pubes; a Pain, and itching in the Nut of the Yard, and its perpetual
Erection, occasioned by the irritation of the inner Membrane: When the Person
stoops to pull up any thing from the ground, he feels a pricking and pain about
the Pubes; when he jumps, he feels it move, unless it be grown to the Membrane,
as when the Bladder is tore; in which case it must be searched with a Cacheter.
When the Evil is inveterat, the nutritious Juice of the injured Parts is
depraved, and voided in the form of a Mucilage like white Clay, which some are
apt to take for the Matter of which the Stone is bred, whereas it is properly
its effect. The Stone in Women is more easily cured than in Men, whose Bladder
is more inaccessible. If it be enclosed in a peculiar Membrane, it is scarce
curable.

The Internal Cure is the same as that of a Stone in the Kidneys, to which we
refer the Reader. The Blood and Urine of a Goat, and the Juice of Wood-lice
bruised with the Spirit of Juniper Berries, or Tincture of Tartar, are
particularly recommended; as also Pills of the Salts of Ivy-Berries and
Watercresses mixed with the Crystals of Nitre and Tartar, and with Turpentin.
If the Stone be in motion, and be not very large, we may give a Vomit to drive
it out. Externally we inject proper Liquors for dissolving the Stone; for which
purpose some commend the warm Blood of a Goat or Fox; or the solution of
calcined Pigeons Dung in Pellitory Water. We likewise order Fomentations and
Bathing in proper Decoctions; and anoint the Pubes and Perinaeum, with a
Liniment of Rock-oyl, and the expressed Oils of Poppies and Henbane; or apply a
Cataplasm of white Onyons boiled in Wine, and mixed with the Oil of Scorpions.
As for Clysters, their Virtue is sufficiently known. When all proves
ineffectual, the Stone must be cut, and if the Inflammation and Gangrene of the
Bladder can be prevented, there is no great danger in the operation.

ART. 3. Of the incontinence of Urine.
AN Involuntary efflux of Urine is caused by the imperfect Constriction of the
Sphincter. The remote Causes are,

1. The Palsy and stupidity of the Sphincter, occasioned by the weakness and
deficiency of the Animal Spirits, as in Fevers and Apoplexies; or by the
Obstructions of the Nerves, from internal or external causes.

2. The Relaxation of the Fibers of the Sphincter, occasioned by a
preternatural distention of the Vagina and neck of the Bladder in Childbirth,
or the down-falling of the Womb.

3. The cutting or tearing of its Fibers, especially in cutting the Stone, or
in time of Delivery, when the Midwives scratch the Caruncula Myrtiformis with
their Nails.

Sometimes the efflux of Urine cannot be properly called involuntary; but it is
such, that the Person is frequently obliged to make Water, and cannot retain
the Urine so long as naturally one may. The immediate Cause is the perpetual
Irritation of the Bladder, occasioned by rough Stones, or sharp Humors; or the
Compression of the Bladder, caused by the distended Womb in Women with Child,
or by excessive Laughing and Coughing, especially in fat Persons; or by
Inflammations of the Muscles of the Abdomen and adjacent Parts. Some Persons
are liable to an involuntary voiding of Urine when they are asleep, especially
Children and Old Persons, whose Spirits are lazy and inactive.

An incontinence of Urine, proceeding from a Palsy, or from the default of the
Brain, or spinal Marrow, is very difficult to cure. In Old Persons, or when it
follows Childbirth, it is seldom cured. In Fevers, it is a fatal Sign. In
Children it is overcome by Nature before the Twenty Fifth Year of age; or else
accompanies 'em to the Grave.

The Cure in general is performed by Astringents, especially the Decoction of
Calamint, Agrimony, and Mint in Wine; the Powders of Galangal, Aloes-Wood,
Acorus, Castor, Myrrh, Frankincense, Gum Arabic, and Mastic. The most noted
Specifics are the Throat of a Cock roasted, pounded, and given to a dram in
Wine; the Powder of a burnt or calcined Hedgehog; the Powder called Medulla
Saxorum; The inner Tunicle of a Hen's Ventricle, which when dried, becomes hard
like Horn; the Fish found in the Belly of a Pike; the Powder of a Sow's Womb;
or for Men, of a Boar's Pudendum; the Powder of Hogg's Hoofs; the Powder of
dried Mice; and the Dung of a She-Goat. Externally we order Fomentations, and
Baths, of the Decoctions of Astringent nervous Plants, such as Mint, Wormwood,
Pomgranat Flowers, Tormentil Roots, and especially Comfrey-Roots, in
Blacksmith's Water. For Old Persons, there is nothing so proper as the Natural
Hot-Baths. After Fomentation or Bathing, it is convenient to anoint the Loins
and Pubes with the Oils of Mint, Amber, Wormwood, Mastic, Balsam of Peru,
distilled Oil of Juniper, Turpentin, etc. and to apply the Plaster Oxycroceum
softened with Oil of Amber. After hard Labor in Childbirth, some recommend an
Ointment of Calaminar stone, washed in Vinegar and Rose Water, and pulverized
with Litharge of Silver, Ceruss, Oil of Roses, Oil of Chamomil, and Goat's Fat.
Finally, the Powder of a Toad, taken alive and burnt in a New Pot, being hung
in a Bag about the Neck, is universally approved of for curing any incontinency
of Urine.

ART. 4. Of a Strangury.
A Strangury is a making of Water by drops, with an unsufferable Pain in the
Neck of the Bladder, and Vrethra, and a violent Itch for pissing and going to
stool. The Cause is the acidity and sharpness of the Urine, which provokes the
Bladder to Contraction, and when the Sphincter opens to give it vent, provokes
it likewise to shut the Passage. Thus the reciprocal Contractions of the
Bladder and Sphincter, occasion the voiding of Urine by drops; and the
sharpness of the Humor causes the excessive Pain, which is more violent in the
Vrethra than the Bladder, by reason that the one is defended by a slimy Matter,
and the other is not. The Remote Cause of the acidity of the Humors, is an
imperfect digestion in the first Passages, and the inactivity of the Bile. Thus
New Wine or Ale will cause a Strangury, as being apt to turn Acid in the
Stomach. The Strangury which attends the Venereal Disease, proceeds from a
sharp corrosive Lymph, voided by the Prostatae. If a Strangury continue long,
it is apt to create Ulcers in the Bladder; nay, sometimes it may proceed from
Excoriations or Ulcers of the Bladder. In Old Persons, whose digesting Faculty
is weak, it is almost incurable.

The Cure consists in tempering the sharpness of the Humors, and rectifying the
state of the Bladder. The latter Indication is accounted for above. The First
is answered by Vomits, as being wonderfully useful in all Diseases relating to
the Urine. Purges of Rhubarb, or Jalap and Turpentin, are also very proper.
When the first Passages are cleared, the Essence or rather the distilled Oil of
Orange-Peel, i^s of admirable efficacy for destroying the Acid, and whetting
the Bile. In general we recommend for a Strangury, the Decoction of Black
Currants and Carret-seed in red Wine; the Decoction of Winter Cherres, with
Raisins; the Decoction of Rapes; the Emulsions of Hemp Seed and the four cold
Seeds; the Oil of sweet Almonds mixed with the Syrup of Marshmallows and Crabbs
Eyes* the Juice of River-Crabbs; the Infusion of Onyons in some proper Vehicle;
the dulcified Spirit of Nitre; the carminative Spirit de tribus; the Spirit of
Tartar; the Spirit of Wine taken every Night going to Bed; the Balsam of
Sulphur; Oil of Amber; Troches of Amber; and above all, the Balsam Capivi given
in Parsley-Water, and Borace given to a scruple. A Strangury caused by new Ale,
is cured by the Powder of Nutmegs. If these Medicines prove ineffectual, we
must have recourse to Aromatic Ingredients, such as Galangal, Zedoary, Orange
Peel, Elixyr of Juniper Berries, and especially Wine in which burning
Flintstones are extinguished.

Externally, anoint the Navel (which communicats with the Bladder by the
Urachus) with a mixture of Goats Tallow, and the distilled Oils of Wax and
Orange Peel; or sumigat the Parts with the Decoction of Radishes in Wine.
Inject Chalybeat Milk, or Oil of sweets Almonds, into the Bladder; and in time
of Pissing let the Yard be put into warm Milk. Anodyn Emellient Clysters are
also proper; as likewise Emollient Fomentations and Baths. For old Persons
there is nothing so serviceable as the natural Hot Baths.

ART. 5. Of a Dysuria, or Heat of Urine.
A Dysuria is a voiding of Urine with a great deal of Pain and Heat. It differs
from a Strangury in this, that the Urine is not voided by Drops, but in a due
quantity; that the Pain vanishes after making Water; that it causes no vain
desire of Pissing, or going to Stool, and that its Pain is accompanied with a
burning Heat. The cause for the most part is the Inflammation, Corrosion, or
Ulceration of the Neck of the Bladder, Urethra or adjacent Parts. Thus the
Stone sometimes galls the parts as it passes, and causes a Heat of Urine. The
Inflammation of the Prostatae, or the sharp Corrosive Humor voided by 'em; the
Inflammation of the Womb, Intestinum Rectum, or the Emrods, will produce the
same effect. Sometimes, but very rarely, it proceeds from the sharpness of
Urine, as being laden with Scorbutical Salts, or mixed with some purulent
Matter, or impregnated with Cantharides, or corrosive Preparations of Mercury.
When the Bladder and adjacent Parts are thus disordered, their nutritive Juice
is depraved, and voided with the Urine, in the form of a thick milky Mucilage;
in which case the Disease is dangerous. If this Distemper continue long, it
degenerats into an Ulcer of the Badder, or Incontinence of Urine.

The Cure consists in tempering the sharpness of Urine, and rectifying the
state of the Bladder and adjacent Parts. For which Purposes the same Medicines
as were recommended for a Strangury are proper; to which we may add the
Conserve of Mallows Flowers the Decoction of Sebesten with House-leek Water,
Whey, or Milk in which Blew-bottle or Larks-heel Flowers are boiled (especially
when the Disease is occasioned by Cantharides;) Turpentin mixed with Amber,
Frankincense, Myrrh, and the Juice of Liquorice; the Bladder a Goat in Powder,
with the distill^d Oil of Caraways; the Powder of Dates with Sugar, and
Laudanum Opiatum. Note the Spirit and Oil of Turpentin are too sharp.

Take of the Conserve of Violets, an ounce and a half; Rob of Juniper, six
drams: Powder of the Seeds of St. John's-wort, three drams prepared Crabs Eyes,
a dram; prepared Pearch-stones, half a scruple; Laudanum Opiatum, a grain and a
half. With the Syrup of Scabious make an Electuary.

Externally we apply Cataplasms of Rue, Pellitory and Chervil boiled in Milk,
and mixed with the Oil of Scorpions; or anoint the Pubes with the Ointments
Martiatum and Agrippae, mixed with the Oil of Bays. The Injection of Milk and
living Lice; the Bathing, and Clysters are also very proper. If the Bladder be
ulcerated we inject, first, cleansing, and then consolidating Decoctions. Of
which more else where.

SECT. XX. Of Diseases relating to the separation of Lymph in the Glandules,
and its regular Motion.
THE Lymph is a Liquor separated by Glandules, some of which are gathered into
a round uniform Globe, and are called Conglobatae; some into a Cluster called,
Conglomeratae. The former convey their Juice through Lymphatic Vessels into the
left axillary Vein, where it dilutes, and prepares the Chyle for an easy union
with the Blood; and likewise promotes the fermentation of the Blood in the
Heart and Lungs, as being of a volatile Spirituous Nature. The latter throw
their Juice into some noted Cavity, as the Spittle into the Mouth, the Juice of
the Sweat-bread into the Guts, etc. These Juices as separated or sucked from
the Blood, partake of acidity, which is tempered by the Animal Spirits
repairing to the Glandules, they being condensated and incorporated with the
Liquor. The Separation of this Liquor is frequently disturbed by the
Obstructions of the Glandules, of which else where.

ART. I. Of Catarrhs.
A Catarrh is a preternatural Defluxion of Lymph from the Conglamerated
Glandules, into some noted Cavity of the Body, especially the Throat, Breast,
and Head, where these Glandules are very plentiful, and their Lymph is most
liable to alterations from the Air. A Catarrh therefore proceeds from the
Constriction of the Fibers of the Glandules, occasioned by some provoking
Causes. These Causes are either External or Internal. The former are the
malignity of the Air (in Epidemical Catarrhs) sharp Steams, and external Cold
contracting the Fibers, hindering a free Transpiration, and so occasioning the
redundancy, stagnation, and provoking sharpness of the Lymph. The internal
Causes are the sharpness or Acrimony of the Blood, and consequently the Lymph,
occasioned by an imperfect Digestion in the Stomac, Scorbutical Salts, etc. Or
the occasional Corruption of the Peculiar Nutritious Juice of the Glandules,
which being depraved, sticks to their sides, and provokes 'em to Contractions.
This degeneracy of their Juice arises from external injuries; or whatever
internal Cause is apt to weaken or exhaust their innate Spirit.

When the Fibers or innate Spirits of the Part are weakened, the Catarrh is
Habitual and apt to relapse; in other Cases it is only Accidental, and generally
take its rise from external Occasions. When a Catarrh begins, it is Thin and
Sharp, as being the pure Lymph without mixture; but afterward by its continued
Flux it depraves the nutritive Juice of the Glandules, which mixes with it and
renders it Thick and Temperat. When the Lymph is very Corosive and Sharp, it is
usually called a Hot Rheum; when it is Thick and Slimy, it is entitled Cold.

There is yet a Spurious sort of Catarrh, near allied to this abovementioned,
viz. The Stagnation of the serous part of the Blood in any parts, either before
or after its conversion into Lymph, as when Nocturnal Cold, or the Diminution
of the ordinary transpiration causes pain in the Limbs. This is not properly a
Catarrh, but a stagnation of Serum or Lymph, caused by the Constriction of the
Fibers of the part in which it is lodged. Thus the Toothache, Scorbutic pains in
the Limbs, Bastard Pleurisies, etc. are of the same kind. The Causes from which
they take their rise are much the same as those of the Genuin Catarrh.
Sometimes the true Catarrh causes Fevers, which are particularly accounted for
in the Section of Fevers.

An imminent Catarrh is ushered in by a weariness of the Joints, heaviness of
the Head, dullness of the Senses, and Froth making a circle in the Urine. If
the Lymph be thin and sharp, it is mostly voided in the Night time, and a slow
Fever increasing toward the Evening accompanies it; if it be thick and slimy
it is equally troublesome at all times, but the Symptoms are more remiss. If a
Catarrh recur frequently in the same part, or if the part be influenced by the
alterations of the Weather, it is a sign that the nutritive Juice of the
Glandule is depraved, and its innate Spirit weakened. If it be caused by the
Crudites, or imperfect Digestion of the Stomac, it distinguishes it self by
frequent relapses either in the same or different parts; by the Person's
propensity to spit and sweat much; and the thinness and paleness of the Urine.
Catarrhs in the Breast or Windpipe are apt to cause a Cough or Phthisic. In
old Persons they are scarce curable, by reason of the weakness of their
Digestive faculty, the natural Laxity of their Glandules, flatness of their
Spirits, and Acrimony of the Serum. A Catarrh in the Glandules of the Brain is
apt to cause Palsies, Lethargies, and such like disorders of the Spirits. That
from the Nose and Mouth is least dangerous, especially if the Matter come
quickly to Concoction.

As to the Cure, let the following Cautions be minded.

1. The best Evacuaters are Diuretics and volatile Sudorifics. When the Stomac
is faulty, Vomits and Purges are proper, but not in other Cases.

2. Chronical or Habitual Catarrhs, proceeding from the Acrimony of the Serum,
as in old and Scorbutical Persons, are influenced by the Moon, and therefore
Preservatives ought always to exhibited before the new Moon.

3. Opiats are of excellent use, especially in the beginning of a Catarrh
arising from external Causes. They ought always to be mixed with volatile Salts,
and proper Specifics. Toward the height of the Disease, or in epidemical and
critical Catarrhs they must be cautiously used.

4. Issues and Blistering Plasters, are of use for draining the Lymph, or
relieving a particular part; but they cannot remove its Cause. Therefore in
scorbutical Cases, or when the Evil is inveterat, and scarce curable a Priori,
we must insist on such a palliative Cure, being directed thereto by nature,
which frequently throws out the Lymph by Ulcers in the Legs.

5. Bleeding is not proper. But in some particular Cases, as when the Body is
very Plethoric, or Blood suppressed in the Body, or when the Catarrh falls upon
a noble part, it is allowable.

These Cautions being premised, let us now Consider the Indications. As,

1. The Activity of the Cause, and sense of the Part ought to be impaired by
Opiats.

2. The quantity of the Lymph must be lessened, its vicious quality corrected,
and the solid part cleans'd by volatile Sudorifics.

3 The Stomac must be strengthened, its due digestion retrieved, and the solid
part fortified by balmy Aromatics.

The specifics proper for these purposes are Mother of Thyme, Rose-mary,
Avens-roots, Juniper Berries, and all Aromatics; Sassafras, especially its
Tincture, prepared with the spirit of wild Thyme; Amber and all it preductions,
especially the succinated spirit of Hartshorn; Myrrh, Sulphur or its Flowers,
Mastic-wood, and Sperma Ceti. From such Ingredients we make several
Prescriptions, such as the Decoctions of Woods; the infusion of Aromatic and
Stomachical Herbs in Wine, an Electuary of the Rob of Juniper Berries mixed
with Spices, etc. The Cure of sharp and thick Humors vary's, as that of dry and
wet Coughs. In scorbutical Cases we always add some preparation from the
Pine Tree. When we exhibit Purgatives we mix 'em with the Specifics, as in
Crato's Pills of Amber, Jalap, sweet Mercury, and, in inveterat Cases,
Hellebor, are recommended. If the Humor be thick, Coliquintida corrected with
salt of Tartar, or Ferra foliata Tartari, will be very proper. Externally in
Catarrhs of the Head, we apply to the Crown of the Head and Temples the Oil of
Amber, distilled Oil of Mace, or of Hartshorn, if the Person be not offended
by the smell; and the Plaster of Betony mixed with Tacamahac, and softened
with the Oil of Amber. In Catarrhs of the Breast, we fumigat the Mouth and Face
with Amber, Mastic, Benzoin, etc. But above all, the smoke of Tobacco is of
admirable use, if it be mixed with the Powder of Amber, Anis, or Coriander
Seeds, etc. The spurious Catarrhs abovementioned are cured internally with
Sudorifics and urinous Spirits. Externally by applying the Gum Tacamahac, and
Caran; or if the Skin cannot bear Gums, the rectified spirit of Wine
impregnated with Aromatic Plants and Seeds. However all Oily things ought to be
carefully avoided.

ART. II. Of Coryza.
THE most common instance of Catarrhs is that called Coryza, or a defluxion of
Matter from the Nose, which at first is thin and sharp; but in process of time
the nutritious Juice of the Nostrils being depraved, renders it thick. The
membran in the Head of the Nostrils is frequently provoked to Sneezing, and the
Nervous Tubuli being likewise assaulted communicate their Convulsive disorders
to the Membrana dura of the Brain; whence insues a heavy pain, and a sense of
squeezing as it were in the Head. Sometimes the sense of Smelling is quite
lost, and the Nostrils are galled and ulcerated. The Cure is the same as that
of Catarrhs in general. While the Humor is thin, we ought to remove the
Irritation by exhibiting inwardly volatile Salts; and applying outwardly the
distilled Oil of Anis, or rather that of Amber, mixed with a few drops of the
Oil of Cloves, with Cotton. The smell of the shavings of Horn, the steams of
burnt Amber, Mastic, Benzoin, Gum Animae, etc. and the smoke of Tobacco
impregnated with a few drops of the distilled Oil of Anis, are likewise very
serviceable. When the Humor is thick, and the nostrils stopped, we must endeavor
to attenuat and evacuat it, by fumigating with Vinegar upon hot Iron, or
applying the spirit of Sal-Armoniac, or the Oil of Almonds with Camphyr
dissolved in it, both to the extremity, and internal Membran. Sneezing Powders
are also very useful, such as the Powder of Florentin Orris with Euphorbium;
the Powder of black Hellebor with Sugar. Tobacco-leaves sprinkled with a few
drops of the Oil of Majoram, and dried; or mixed with the Powders of Marjoram,
Flowers of the Lilly of the Valley, distilled Oil of Anis, Amber, and Mosch.
The solution of white Vitriol in the Decoction of Tobacco, Marjoram, and
Flowers of the lilly Convally is also very proper. If the Head be disturbed or
clouded, we anoint the Crown of the Head with Balsam of Peru, or Oil of Amber.
If the Mouth be much molested, we order Troches of Mithridat, Mastic, and
Olibanum, to be rolled in the Mouth.

As for the Cough, Hoarseness, Blearedness of the Eyes, and all the other
subdivisions of Catarrhs, they are accounted for in their proper places.

Thus we have dispatched the Diseases relating to the Distribution of the Lymph.
As touching those proceeding from its Stagnation, viz. Hydropical Tumors in the
Abdomen, Head, Breast, Womb, Testicles, etc. their Cure is the same as that of
an universal Dropsy. And besides, they are in great measure discussed in the
Particular Chapters relating to the Disorders of those Parts.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF ETMULLERUS HIS Practice of PHYSIC, etc.
BOOK II.
SECT. I. Of the Diseases which disturb the Generation and Distribution of the
Animal Spirits, and consequently the due Performance of Sense and Motion.
THE Diseases of the lower Region of the Body were our last Subject. It remains
now to move upwards, and consider the Disorders of the Head. Where the Spirits
are separated and strained from the Blood by the Glandules of the Cortical part
of the Brain; and from thence conveyed to the Body. Without the Influence of
these Spirits all Motion and Sense ceases, as is evident by the Dissection of a
Nerve.

They require no Fermentation to fit 'em for their Office, being sufficiently
prepared by a bare Separation from the Blood; and are equally capable to serve
any Sense. The same Spirit that assisted in moving the Muscles of the Leg,
would have served the Eye in the sense of Seeing. It Is true, the Spirits of one
Man differ very much from those of another. The different condition of the Mass
of Blood, and difformity of the Brain, occasions a remarkable difference of
Spirits, which is visible in the variety of animal Operations, Thought and
Genius among Men. Nay, in one and the same Man, any alteration of the Humors of
the Body, and Mass of Blood, produces the like change in the Spirits. When the
Blood observes its regular Course, the Spirits are likewise orderly; and when
it is inflamed or boils too high, they become enormous, and cause a Perturbation
in the Mind; which depends upon them, and can never pretend to Clearness and
Justness of Thought, without the steady and equal Influence of the Spirits.
When their Motions are clever and swift, they cause a nimble and ready Wit;
when they are lazy, and move heavily, they make a dull inactive Soul; and when
their Motion becomes more languid, Sleep takes place; which is always
introduced either by exhausting the Spirits, by thickning and fixing them with
sleeping Medicines, by rendering them flaggy and dull, or clogging them with
nutritious Juice or some serous Humor, that distills upon the Brain in time of
Watching.

To return to the Generation of the Spirits. It may be disturbed. 1. When the
Spirits are deficient, for want of a due Exaltation of the Blood, or by reason
of some fault in the Texture of the Brain, or an immoderat Consumption by
Exercise. This Symptom is cured by exhibiting generous and spirituous
Medicines, as Spirit of Amber, Spirit of the Lilly of the Valley, with volatile
Salt of Hartshorn, and all the oily volatile Salts. 2. When the Spirits are
numerous and crowded, which generally yields to Fasting, Sleeping, or Exercise.
3. When the Spirits are corrupted, they resemble rectified Spirit of Wine, and
may suffer Depravation by mixing with foreign Spirits, or becoming phlegmatic,
and degenerating from their volatile Subtilty, or by engaging in irregular
Motions.

Before I descend to Particulars, it will not be improper to premise three or
four Positions that ought to be heedfully observed.

1. That the Brain, Nerves, Membranes and Ligaments are all composed of little
small Fibers, which are stronger in the Nerves and extreme Parts of the Body,
than in the Brain and Medulla Spinalis. These Fibers are naturally bent and
endowed with a rebounding Virtue upon the approach of an external Object, or
the impulse of the Spirits from within. Their Texture is variable according to
the Constitution of every Individual, and the different Motions of several
sorts of Spirits. From whence ensues the variety. of the animal or sensitive
Phaenomena's.

2. That the Brain and Spirits have a peculiar dependence upon the Moon; and
upon that account the Diseases of the Head increase or diminish in proportion
to its Age. The Spirits when disordered are more sensible of this Influence
than in their natural State. It Is true, the Sun has some Ascendant over our
Bodies, but that properly relates to the vegetable and vital Functions; the
Animal Province being more peculiarly allotted to the Moon.

3. That there is an admirable Sympathy betwixt the Brain and the Bowels,
especially the Stomac. An ungrateful Imagination disturbs the Stomac, and
Vomiting and Giddiness do equally give rise to one another. The Disorders of
the Stomac and lower Belly have a visible Influence upon the Fancy, as in the
case of Hysteric or Hypocondriac Fits, and the ridiculous Appetites of Women.
Helmont was very happy in this Observation, and the practical Inferences he
deduced from it; but his Theoretic Conjectures are frivolous. The reason why
the Spirits and the Stomac do so sensibly affect one another, seems to be this:
That the Mouth of the Stomac is the first part of all the Body that receives
any sensible Impression in the Womb; for so much as all Alterations in the
Embryo must be produced by the Nourishment conveyed to the Stomac. This
establishes an early Correspondence betwixt it and the Spirits, and lays the
lasting Foundation of their future Intimacy.

4. That the Spirits are liable to the same material Alterations with the Blood.

CHAP. I. Of immoderate Watchings.
WE are said to wake when the Spirits are distributed through the Organs of
Sense, and extend their Fibers. On the contrary, Sleep unbends the Fibers, and
imprisons the Spirits. The Privation of which causes Disorders in the Body.

The immediate Cause of Watchfulness is a continued or violent Incursion of
Spirits into the Organs of Sense. The remote Cause, barring some external
Object, must either be the Disorder of the animal Spirits, or some defect in
the Brain. The Spirits are oft-times too nimble and moveable, as in young
People and such as feed high, and drink generous Liquors. The Heat of Summer,
or traveling in a hot Climat, eating of Venison, immoderat Care, Study, and
the Passions of the Mind, the accession of foreign heterogeneous Particles from
malignant Distempers, or drinking Tee and Cossee, are the natural Causes of the
Mobility and Disorder of the Spirits, and consequently of Watchfulness. As for
the Brain, Watchings will ensue upon the Openness of its Pores, occasioned by a
Dryness, or want of Moisture to fill up the Intervals. This may happen through
Fasting, or eating of sharp volatile Meats, immoderat Venery, Sweating, smoking
Tobacco (which, tho it be an Opiat, exhausts the Moisture of the Brain) an
unseasonable Use of purging Medicines, or a Deficiency in the first Digestion,
which not only affects the Spirits by Consent, but robs the Brain of its wonted
Recruits, in neglecting the regular distribution of the Chyle.

This Disease is manifest of it self. As for Prognostics; It infers a Weakness
and Feebleness. It Is more sufferable in Youth than in a State of Manhood, and
among Men than among the Female Sex. It portends ill in acute Distempers. But
in Chronical Diseases may be longer endured, tho it is oft-times followed by
Phrensies, Folly, or Stupidity.

The Cure is performed by taking off the remote Causes. If it be caused by the
Inflammation and Impetuosity of the Blood, a Vein must be opened. If the Blood
be sharp and oppressed with heterogeneous Particles, Purgation and Sweating
take place. If it spring from the Disorder of the animal Spirits, they must be
reduced to Order by the use of pacific Medicines, such as Opium or Laudanum
opiatum, or their Compounds. Bartholetus commends the Essence of Opium prepared
with Spirit of Vitriol or Spirit of Cockle; Ens Veneris, which consists of
Vitriol and Salt Ammoniac, and likewise the Anodvn Sulphur of Vitriol are
proper in this case. But in using Opium, we ought to observe these Causions:
Not to exhibit it when the Watchings are owing to the Efforts of Nature,
endeavoring a Solution of a Disease; or when attended with a straitness in the
Breast, or difficulty of Breathing; or when they proceed from the deficiency
and want of Spirits, as in old Men, etc. The mildest Opiats are the safest. Let
them be given in small Quantities, and repeated often, As,

Take of the Conserve of wild Poppy Flowers one Dram, Venice Treacle or
Diascordium half a Dram, Laudanum Opiatum one Grain. Make a Bolus. Or,

Take of native Cinnabar fifteen Grains, Saccharum Saturni eight Grains,
Laudanum Opiatum one or two Grains; with the Extract of Saffron make Pills to
be taken in the Evening, about an hour before Supper. The Seed of Thorn Apple
is of excellent use in this case.

As for the Watchings which arise from the Dryness and Openness of the Brain,
moist and cooling, Medicines are most proper: such as Emulsions, and other oily
temperat Compositions.

Take of the four greater cold Seeds, of each half an Ounce, Garden Poppy Seeds
two Drams, sweet Almonds from two Drams to half an Ounce; with a sufficient
quantity of the Water of Water Lillies make an Emulsion. Add of Cinnamom Water
half an Ounce, and sweeten it with Syrup of Poppies. Or the Emulsion may be
accommodated to whatever acute Distemper accompanies the Watchings; as in a
malignant Fever,

Take of sweet Almonds and Garden Poppy Seeds, of each two Drams; of the four
greater cold Seeds, of each a Dram: With Viper Grass Water make an Emulsion:
sweeten it with pearl'd Sugar, and add half an Ounce of Ci^namom Water, and a
Scruple of Bezoar Mineral. It pacifies the Spirits, and obviats the Malignity
of the Distemper.

The Decoction of Barley with Poppies and Liquorice is much applauded. And in
general all moist, nourishing, milky, chilous Medicines are very conducive in
this case^, especially the Seed of Thorn Apple; of the Fruit we make Pills thus:

Take of Thorn Apples six Pound, bruise and boil them in twelve Pints of
Lettice Water to eight Pints; express the Decoction, and digest it in the Sun:
sprinkle it with Spirit of Wine, and set it to dry. To an Ounce of the Juice
thus thickened and dried add half an Ounce of Saffron, and two Scruples of the
Oil of Citron Peel. Make a Mass for Pills. Dose a Grain or two. It procures
Sleep, and stops all Fluxes.

In the Watchings of old Men, or such as proceed from a scarcity of Spirits, or
a frigid Crudity in the Stomac, Opiats are inconvenient: Comforting and
aromatic Medicines are only proper.

Some give Opiat Clysters or Suppositories to procure Sleep; but it is a
dangerous Method, unless the Watchings be accompanied with a Looseness or Pains
in the Guts.

Besides the internal Use of moistening and quieting Medicines, some apply them
outwardly to the Forehead, Temples, Feet and Hands. They foment and bathe the
extreme Parts with the Decoctions of Anodyn and Emollient Vegetables, such as
Camomile, Nightshade, Water Lillies, etc. They apply Emulsions to the Forehead
and Temples, or Liniments made of the emollient Oils. Sanctorius affirmed that
all these external Applications were of no use. Primerosius was of the same
Opinion.

CHAP. II. Of Excessive Sleep.
SLeep is accounted preternatural when the Spirits do not repair to the
external Organs in their wonted Season, but continue locked up within the
Brain. If a scarcity of Spirits, and extreme Weakness, occasion a shutting of
the Eyes, it is not properly Sleep, but Swooning: As in the case of hysteric
Fits and Weakness after Childbirth, there first appears as it were a violent
Inclination to sleep, which presently terminates in Swoonings.

If the Sleep be so profound, that the Person does not wake when jogged or
called upon, but remains destitute of all Sense and Motion, except Respiration,
it is called a Carus; and if it proceed from any internal Cause, is a sort of
Apoplexy, and requires the same Cure. The external Causes are excessive
Drinking, smoking Tobacco, using Narcotic Medicines, the Steams of sulphurous
Minerals or fermenting Liquors, or new Plaistering upon the Walls of the House,
and such like.

When the Person doats in his Sleep, and readily answers upon a Call, but
continues senseless, and presently drops asleep again, it is called a Sleeping
Coma. If the Fancy be awake while the external Senses are shut up by Sleep, and
attended by frantic Outcries and irregular Motions of the Members of the Body,
it is called a waking Coma; which seldom comes alone, but is generally followed
by Phrensies and Convulsions, and disappears upon their Removal.

Sometimes the strength of Imagination is such, that while the Person is
asleep, he not only speaks and moves, but gets up and walks about, and attempts
many fearful things, that when awake he would shrink to think of. This is
rather a natural Infirmity, than a proper Disease. It is influenced by the
Moon, and seems to be near akin to Hypocondriac Melancholy.

If the sick Person be seized with a sleepy Coma, and withal a slow Fever, and
a forgetfulness of what he does, speaks, or demands, it is called a Lethargy;
which is the only sleeping Distemper that requires Consideration in this place.

The immediate Cause is the dullness of the Spirits. The remote Causes are, 1st,
A Paucity of Spirits, occasioned by Bleeding, Venery, Watching, Fatigue, etc.
2dly, A watery or pituitous Humor, separated from the Blood by the Glandules of
the Brain, that blocks up the Passages and drowns the Spirits. Thus Children,
Hydropic and Arthritic Persons, and those of a Phlegmatic moist Constitution,
are ofttimes obnoxious to this Distemper. The Stone in the Kidneys, or any
thing that suppresses the evacuation of the Serum, will give rise to a
Lethargy. 3dly, Narcotic Medicines, and sulphurous Liquors, or poisonous Fumes;
which stupify the Spirits, by making such alterations in the Humors of our
Body, as are apt to produce a Numness. Thus the very Humors of our Body turn
Narcotic, and have the like influence upon the Spirits; as new Wine by
fermentation acquires a stupifying Quality, which formerly it had not. 4thly,
The stagnation of the Blood, Contusions, or Tumors in the Brain; which compress
the Spirits, and straiten their Passages.

Sleep distinguishes these Distempers from all others. The particular Symptoms
that distinguish one sleepy Distemper from another, may be gathered from what
is already said.

As for Prognostics: Sleep in general is a bad Omen, and is more or less to be
suspected, according to the degree of sleeping. A Coma is very dangerous in the
height of an acute Fever. If the Fever intermit, or be accompanied by
evacuations, it is less hazardous, except it happen in the beginning. A Lethargy
generally brings Death in seven days: If the sick Person survive the seventh
day, he recovers. If it is followed by evacuations by Stool, by the Nostrils,
the Ears, or salivating Glandules, it is a tolerable sign, especially if the
Fever and other Symptoms relent. If the Symptoms are heightened, and the Body
in the interim oppressed by other Distempers, especially those of the Head,
together with cold Sweats, it is a desperate Case. A Phrensy preceding a
Lethargy, makes it mortal: whereas if it follow after, it is a sign of Recovery.
If a Trembling succeed, it portends ill. If it come of its own accord, without
the impulse of an external Cause, it is mortal.

In the Method of Cure, we must have regard to the remote Causes
abovementioned. If a Lethargy proceed from a prevalency of serous or pituitous
Humors in the Blood, and consequently in the Brain, Blood-letting is for the
most part necessary, both by way of Aversion, Derivation, and Revulsion. It may
be repeated according to the former strength of the Patient. It Is better to
bleed often, and draw forth but little at a time, than to take it all at once.
In the beginning of a Lethargy from this Cause, it is not improper to inject the
following Clyster.

Take of Wormwood, lesser Centory and Rue, of each a handful; Pellitory Roots
three Drams; Pulp of Coloquyntida tied in a Bag, from half a Dram to a Dram;
boil them in common Water: To nine Ounces of the strained Liquor, add Electuary
of Hiera with Agaric one Ounce, Ox Gall thickened a Dram; Volatile Salt of Amber
half a Dram, and the yelk of one Egg (or, if you design to make it very sharp,
half a Dram of Sal-gem) mix for a Clyster. Or,

Take of Asarabacca (or Tobacco) Leaves, the Herb Rue, the Flowers of lesser
Centory, Flowers of Arabian Stechas, of each half a handful; Bryony and Gentian
Roots, of each half an Ounce, Pulp of Coloquyntida tied in a Bag a Dram and a
half; boil them in common Water, or human Urin: in seventeen Ounces of the
strained Liquor, dissolve of Electuary of Hiera and Agaric one Ounce, Ox Gall
thickened a Dram, Essence of Castor two Scruples; make a Clyster. Or

Take of the Powder of Hiera with Agaric a Dram and a half; Mice Dung, Ox Gall
thickened, of each a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of Honey of Rosemary
Flowers, or Honey of Rue: make a Suppository to be anointed with Oil of Myrrh
or Coloquyntida.

If these prove ineffectual, it is proper to apply a blistering Plaster; as,
Take of the Powder of Spanish Flies, from a Scruple to two Scruples, Powder of
Euphorbium from half a Scruple to twelve Grains; Castor in Powder, from fifteen
Grains to a Scruple; with half an Ounce, or an Ounce of Capital Lees: make a
blistering Plaster to be applied to the pit of the Neck, or behind the Ears,
or to the back of the Head, or to the Arms or Legs. It Is a very effectual
Medicine in this Case.

If the Patient reap any Benefit by these prescriptions, then it is time to
prescribe Vomits and Purges. The Antimonial Vomits are best. As for purging
Medicines,

Take of Castor two Scruples, and prepared Scammony one Scruple, mix for two
Doses to be exhibited in Oxymel. Or,

Take of Quercetanus's Extractum Phlegmagogum, from half a Scruple to a
Scruple, Castor half a Scruple, Troches Alhandal two Grains, Rosin of Jalap
one, two or five Grains. With the Essence of Castor make Pills: To which you
may add some sweet Mercury.

Next to evacuating Medicines, we exhibit the sharp Volatile Cephalics, which
dispel the serous Humor, and disengage the Spirits; such are Spirit of Salt
Ammoniac, Spirit of Mustard Seeds, Spirit of the Lilly Convally, Salt of Amber,
and especially Castor. The Decoction of Tee is much commended in all sleepy
Distempers. The sharpest Cephalic Medicines are best. As

Take of Marjoram and Rue Water, of each an Ounce and a half, Apoplectic Water
six Drams, Essence of Castor a Dram and a half, Spirit of Soot two Scruples,
Syrup of Betony one Ounce. Mix, etc. Or,

Take of the Spirit of Mother of Thyme, Spirit of Citron Peel, of each a Dram
and a half; Spirit of Human Blood one Dram; Mix. Or,

Take of the Conserve of Sage, Conserve of Rosemary and Lavender Flowers, of
each one Ounce, the Powder Dianthos a Dram and a half, Powder of Cubebs a Dram,
Mustard-seeds and Castor of each two Scruples; with the Syrup of Piony Flowers
make an Electuary.

If the Lethargy proceed from a narcotic Virulency that has seized the Spirits,
then the Volatile Acids are most proper, especially the Volatile spirit of
Vitriol, and the Volatile Spirit of Verdigreese: They are given from twenty to
thirty Drops in any convenient Vehicle; to which Castor always ought to be
added, it being an admirable specific in these Cases. When a Lethargy proceeds
from this cause, prescribe thus,

Take of black Cherry Water, Mother of Thyme Water, of each an Ounce and a
half, Myasichtus his Hysteric Vinegar, or Vinegar of Squills half an Ounce,
Essence of Castor two Drams, Oxymel of Squills six Drams; mix, etc. Or,

Take of prepared Amber a Dram, Cinnabar of Antimony half a Dram, Castor two
Scruples; make a Powder for four Doses.

After the use of these Medicines, the Cure may be completed by the Sudorific
decoctions of Woods, etc.

Next succeed the sneezing and chewing Medicines, which evacuate by the Mouth
and Nose. To this purpose are the sharp, pointed, irritating Medicines, which
ought always to be mixed with Volatile Salts; that so while the one irritates
and provokes to an evacuation, the other may penetrate and prepare the Humor. As

Take of Powder of Tobacco, Powder of Lilly Convally, of each a Dram, white
Hellebor Roots a Scruple, Castor from twelve Grains to a Scruple, distilled Oil
of Marjoram six drops; make a Powder to be blown into the Nostrils through a
Quill. Or

Take of white Hellebor, Castor, white Pepper, of each a Scruple; the distilled
Oils of Rue, of Marjoram and Sage, of each two drops; mix and make a Powder for
the same Use. This prescription was peculiar to Timaeus. Or

Take of Treacle of Andromachus, two Drams, Extract of Castor half a Scruple,
Powder of Pellitory Roots, one Scruple, distilled Oil of Amber six Drops; mix
and make a Medicine for cleansing the Palate.

To these we add the external Remedies. As,

Take of the distilled Oil of Sage half a Dram, the distilled Oils of Castor
and of Amber, of each a Scruple; mix and make an Oil; with which anoint the
Face and Temples, Or

Take of the distilled Oils of Rue, of Savory, and of Mother of Thyme, of each
a Scruple, Castor half a Scruple. With a sufficient quantity of some convenient
Balsam, mix and reserve for Use. Or

Take of Swallow Water prepared with Castor, two Ounces; the Spirit of the
Crystals of Verdigrease, two Drams; mix and foment the Face and Temples with
i^* Or

Take of Vinegar of Rue two Drams, Spirit of Verdigreese prepared with Sulphur,
two Drams; Essence of Castor a Dram and a half; mix and use as before. Or thus,

Take of the Herbs Savory and Rue, of each half a handful, Zedoary half an
Ounce, Juniper Berries six Drams, Laurelberries half an Ounce, Mustard Seeds
and the Seeds of Water Cresses, of each two Drams; boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Vinegar, and foment the Face and Temples.

The Spirit of Vitriol and Vinegar applied to the Nostrils, are of admirable
use against feverish Coma's. As for the waking Coma's, a Cataplasm of a fresh
Horse Radish Root beat up with Rue, Vinegar, common Salt, and a sufficient
quantity of Lees, may be applied to the Feet.

If the Lethargy proceed from Mercurial or Sulphurous Fumes, etc. let a Vomit
be exhibited upon the first view; then apply Vinegar and Castor to the Nose,
and likewise give it inwardly. Or thus,

Take of Mint Water, of Rue Water, of Rue Vinegar, of each an Ounce, Essence of
Castor six-Drams, Syrup of Mint, or of the Juice of Citrons, one Ounce; mix,
and let the Patient take a Spoonful often.

Where the immoderate Use of Opium causes a Lethargy, Vinegar of Rue, or of
Squills, or of Vitriol, mixed with Castor is a sovereign Remedy; or if that
prove ineffectual, add Mustard Seed, or Rocket Seeds; or inject a Clyster of
Spanish Wine.

If any sleepy Distemper ensue upon hard Drinking, let a Vomit be first
exhibited; then foment the Forehead and Temples with Vinegar, mixed with the
Juice of Smallage; or apply the juice of Sengreen the greater, with Vinegar and
Nitre, to the Scrotum. Spirit of Salt Ammoniac, or of Soot are very serviceable
in this Case.

Upon the whole, the Remedies made use of in a Lethargy must be particularly
appropriated to the Cause that produced it. If it proceed from an external
Cause, Vomiting and the use of Vinegar with Castor, will finish the Cure: If it
owe its Original to an internal Cause, or be preceded by other Distempers, the
Cure must be varied according to the respective Indications.

There is a near resemblance betwixt these Distempers, and what we call a
Catalepsis; in which the Patient is deprived of all Sense and Motion, and
seized with a stiffness in his Members, tho moveable by any external impulse,
and apt to remain in the posture they are left in. It is an uncommon Distemper,
and very surprising, being accompanied with a staring of the Eyes, and
distortion of the Countenance.

The Cause is the coagulation and fixedness of the Spirits: it may remotely
proceed from Cold, suppression of the Terms, Hypocondriac Fits, Worms,
sulphurous Fumes, and discontent of the Mind.

It is a dangerous Disease. As for the Cure, exhibit Antimonial Vomits, and
apply sharp Cataplasms or Suppositories; Spirit of Wine is used in this Case
both Internally and Externally.

SECT. II. Of the Disorders of the external Senses.
EXternal Sense proceeds from the influence of outward objects upon the Organs,
where the Nerves are inserted. The Animal Spirits ought naturally to bend and
extend these Nerves; so that when the outward Extremities are moved, the same
motion may readily be communicated to the Spirits in the Brain. This secondary
motion of the Spirits within, occasioned by the impulse from without, is the
foundation of internal Sense; by virtue of which we form Idea's exactly
parallel to the motion of the external Object. Thus, when the Arm is cut off,
there ofttimes remains an imaginary pain, as if derived from the first Finger.

These outward Senses are five in number, among which that of seeing is justly
entitled to the noblest Character.

CHAP. I. Of the Diseases belonging to the Eyes.
THE Rays of Light are either conveyed to us in a direct line from a luminous
Body, or reflected from the surface of a dark solid Substance. If this
reflecting Body be smooth and polished, the Rays are returned in the same
condition and manner as they are received; if it be rough and unequal, they
suffer various determinations according to the respective Figures and Texture
of the Parts: from whence ensues the admirable variety of Colors.

These Rays terminat in the Retina, where they form the inverted image of the
Object, after having suffered a Decussation in the Crystallin Humor: And the
size of this imaginary Picture is augmented or diminished according to the
proportional largeness of the Angles of Intersection.

The sense of seeing may be extinguished or diminished, when the Rays of Light
have not a free access to the Eye, as when the Eyelids are seized with a Palsy;
which is cured by applying a Plaster of Tacamahac and Caran, or distilled Oil
of Tartar with Wax; or an Ointment of Balsam of Peru and Aqua Vitae.

Sometimes the Rays are not admitted, by reason of a Web, or preternatural
Tunicle covering the Eye: which proceeds from a corrosion of the Glandule in
the internal corner of the Eye, by the sharpness of the Serum, and some
disorder of the general Coat called Adnata. The nutritious juice of this Coat,
and the Serum separated by the Glandule being thus vitiated, congeal into a
thicker Substance, which increases by degrees, and at length covers the whole
Eye. If the small blood Vessels, adjacent to the Glandule, be likewise
vitiated, some strokes of Blood appear in it, which is a sign of Malignity; and
if it be thick, rough, and painful withal, it approaches to a Cancer, and ought
not to be meddled with. If it be thin, clear, and white, it is a good Sign. If
it be inveterat, or attended by a suffusion, it is safest not to touch it.

In curing the Diseases of the Eyes, the following Cautions are fit to be taken
notice of. 1st. That all sharp irritating Medicines are improper. 2. That they
ought to be neither very cold nor very hot, but temperat. 3. That when the
Humors are sharp, and apt to inflame the part, Wine is not convenient. Tho, 4.
when a cold moisture prevails, Wine, Fennel, Eyebright, and especially the
Decoction of Sassafras, are incomparable internal Remedies. 5. That drinking of
Spaw-Waters is very conducive in the end, tho it seem to offend the Eyes at
first. 6. That Alcali's are always proper. Quercetanus prepared an excellent
Water, thus,

Take of Child's Urine half a Pound, white Vitriol and Tutty, of each four
Ounces, juice of Celandin two Pounds; let them stand to digest for some days;
then distill and reserve the Spirit for use. Others thus,

Take of the Roots of Celandin the greater, and of Valerain, of each one Pound;
of the Herbs Rue and Eyebright, of each four handfuls, Aniseeds, Fennel-seeds,
Lovageseeds, of each two Ounces, Marygold-flowers, Roses, Borrage-flowers, and
flowers of Comfrey the greater, of each four handfuls, and fifteen Crabfishes;
chop 'em all small, and pour upon them equal quantities of the weak Spirit of
Vitriol, and juice of Celandin: let them stand to digest for a Month, then
distill, putting a dram of Camphyre into the Alembic; reserve one half for use,
add to the other half two Drams of Crocus Metallorum; let it stand for the
space of two Hours, and then strain it. It Is an admirable Water for the Eyes.
Hartman's Eye Water was thus prepared.

Take of Fennel Water, Anniseed Water, of each a Pound. Dissolve in them half
an Ounce of the purest white Vitriol. Then infuse in it the Roots of Elecampane
in Powder: Strain the Liquor, and reserve it in a Glass. Or,

Take of the Water of the Flowers of Comfrey Royal, of Blew-bottle Flowers, of
Nightshade Flowers, of each an Ounce: White Vitriol from half a Scruple to
twelve Grains. To the strained Liquor add half a Dram of prepared Tutty. Let it
be dropped into the Corner of the Eye, or applied with a warm Cloth.

The best Method of using these liquid Remedies, is that the Patient be laid
flat on his Back, and the Liquor dropped into the Eye; and then the Eye must be
carefully covered.

Blistering Plasters and Issues are very proper; as also a moderate use of
sneezing Medicines.

To return to the Web upon the Eye. It ought to be removed either by resolving
Medicines, or by the help of a Needle. And afterward Astringents ought to be
applied. In order to the former, Sugar Candy, Honey, burnt Hartshorn,
Egg-shells, etc. are very proper either by way of Powder, or formed into an
Ointment. Quercetanus's Ophthalmic Water is generally used. It Is this;

Take of Eyebright Water, Fennel Water, and Water of Celandin the greater, of
each one Ounce, Crocus Metallorum, or Glass of Antimony, or Buttyr of Antimony
a Scruple, let it stand warm for the space of two or three Weeks: then strain
the Liquor, and drop it while warm into the Eye; for all cold things are
hurtful to the Eyes. Or,

Take of the Glass of Antimony powdered from half a Scruple to fifteen Grains,
infuse it in Water of Blew-bottle Flowers, Eyebright and Fennel Waters of each
one Ounce. Let them stand in a warm place over Night. In the Morning strain the
Liquor, and add six Grains of Camphyr. Or,

Take of Sal-gem a Dram, dissolve it in Rose Water and Fennel-water, of each
one Ounce; mix for a Collyrium.

The Gall of a Pike and several other Fishes, also a Water drawn from human
Gall, or from young Goose Dung, are by some reserved for Nostrum's. The
following Water is incomparable, and much used.

Take a Vessel of Brass; pour into it half a Pound of quick Lime Water prepared
with Water of Comfrey Royal; and add half a Dram of Salt Ammoniac. Let them
stand till the Color alter.

The Juice of Celandin mixed with the Dew gathered from Fennel, or Eyebright
Water, is a great Specific in this case.

As for Pouders, white Vitriol leads the Van. Sometimes they are diluted with
Waters, as,

Take of White Vitriol a Dram, prepared Tutty, Sugar Candy, Collyrium Albi
Rhasis, of each four Scruples, Camphyr six Grains, Rose Water, Vervain Water,
and Water of the Flowers of Eyebright, of each four Ounces. Mix. It Is good for
removing Inflammations, as the following is for taking off the Web.

Take of the Bone of a Cuttle one Scruple, Sugar Candy one Dram, white Vitriol
half a Scruple, prepared Tutty half a Dram: Mix for a Powder. Riverius pilfer'd
this Prescription out of Poterius, and was not so just as to take any notice of
its Author. If you please you may dilute it with Celandin and Royal Comfrey
Water, of each one Ounce.

Take of Boodstone half a Scruple, white Vitriol fifteen Grains, Myrrh and
Saffron of each five Grains, white Sugar Candy one Scruple; make a Powder; or
mix it with some convenient Water, and apply it to the Web with a Feather.

If such Medicines prove ineffectual, we must have Recourse to sublimat
Mercury. Plempius's wonderful Arcanum was this.

Take of sublimat Mercury from five Grains to half a Scruple, dissolve in Rose
Water, Eyebright Water, and Fennel Water, of each one or two Ounces: Touch the
Web with a Drop or two of this Liquor every Morning and Evening.

The Juice of red Ants expressed and dropped into the Eye is of wonderful
Success.

Having thus considered the first Obstacle to the passing of the Rays of Light,
the next is when the Horn Coat or White of the Eye is disordered. This may
happen, 1. When it is unequally nourished; or some Parts of it elated, while
the others are depressed, by reason of the Viscidity of the nutritious Juice.
2. When white Scars remain in this Coat, after the small Pox or any other
Ulcer. 3. When by an external Accident the Blood is forced out of its Vessels,
and creates an Inflammation.

The Signs are these. In the first case this Coat appears white and thick. In
the second we discover as it were a white Spot upon the Eye. The third is known
by the blue livid Color that attends it.

Children are more easily cured of these Maladies than adult People. If they
are of a long standing, it is a difficult matter to remove 'em: only the last is
generally more tractable.

As for the Cure: The Viscidity of the Chylous Juice, and the Scars upon the
Coat, ought equally to be removed by attenuating sharp Medicines; which ought
to be somewhat sharper in the latter than in the former case. The Seeds of
Clary applied to the Eye, are converted into a Mucilage by the Lymph which
waters those Parts, and thus prove an incomparable Medicine in this case.

The Gall of a Pike, or of a Partridg, and Ox Gall, or a Water distilled from
it, are much commended: they are used with the Water of Frogs Spawn. If the
Scars or Clouds in the Eye succeed the Small Pox, exhibit what follows.

Take of Fennel Water two Ounces, of the Gall of an Eel from a Dram to a Dram
and a half, Sugar Candy in fine Powder a Dram: Mix, and let them stand warm for
the space of a Night.

The Spirit of Urine distilled with Vitriol, the Juice of Eyebright or. Fennel
new drawn, mixed with a little Balsam of Peru, or rather the Juice of Fennel,
mixed with Sugar of Lead, are very proper to this purpose.

The Liver of a Lamprey melted into an oily Liquor, is accounted a Specific:
It Is a sharp Medicine, and ought only to be applied to the Eyelids, unless the
Malady be inveterat. The Scar may be gently anointed with Oil of Paper or burnt
Rags, with a Feather, or with the white Water of Honey. If the Cloud or Scar be
inveterat, take the yellow Water of Honey, or the following compound Water.

Take of Honey from the Combs two Pound, tops of Elder Flowers, Eyebright and
Fennel tops, of each half a handful, Sugar Candy four Ounces. Distill in the
Balneunt Mariae with a strong Fire.

The Juice of Celandin the greater, or of Rue, or of Brooklime or its. Water,
either dropped into the Eye alone, or mixed with Honey of Roses, are of
excellent use: As also the Water of quick Lime with Sal Ammoniac, as above
prescribed; or Platerus's famous Experiment, especially if the Serum be sharp
or apt to inflame the part, viz.

Take of the Pulp of four Apples half a Pound; chop 'em small, and boil them in
Rose Water and Fennel-water, to the Consistency of a Mucilage. Then add two or
three Ounces of the Mucilage of Fenugree Seeds, and two or three Yelks of Eggs,
half a Dram or a Dram of prepared Bloodstone, and two Drams of the Rinds of
Pomgranats powdered. Mix and make a Cataplasm, to be applied and continually
kept upon the closed Eye, and renewed twice a day.

The Waters distilled from Cichory Flowers, or Blewbottle Flowers, according to
Schroder and Hoffman's Method: Fennel Water with the Gall of an Eel; the Powder
of the Bone of a Cuttle with white Sugar; the compound Powder of Crabs Eyes,
and the Scales of a Serpent, either blown into the Eye, or diluted with a
convenient Vehicle, are all noted Specifics.

But above all sublimat Mercury is the most effectual Medicine, exhibited as
above.

When Children are seized with these Distempers, the Nurse or Mother may chew a
little Fennel Seed, and then breathe upon the Child's Eye, or touch it with her
Tongue.

When the Eye is beat black and blew by an external Accident, apply Cloths dipped
in Chervil-water, Hyssop-water, or the Water of Blew-bottle Flowers. The
chewing of Cumin Seed, or Fennel-Seed, or Cloves, and then breathing upon the
Eye, is a celebrated Remedy. Fomentation with Wine, in which the tops of Hyssop
have been boiled, is very successful; but for a forlorn Hope take what follows.

Take of Comfrey Roots six Ounces, the Roots of Solomon's Seal two Ounces;
Elder Flowers an Ounce and a half, Meal of Beans one Ounce: mix; and use them
by way of Decoction or Cataplasm, or reduce them with fresh Butter into the
form of a Liniment. Or,

Take of the Roots of Comfrey the greater, and of the lesser, of each half a
Pound, Chamomile and Melilot Flowers, of each two Ounces, Meal of Beans four
Ounces, fresh Butter three Ounces, Fenugrec Seeds one Ounce, Saffron half an
Ounce: Boil them and foment with the Decoction; which is better than a
Cataplasm, by reason that all fat oily things offend the Eyes. Or,

Take of Blew-bottle Flowers, and Flowers of Comfrey Royal, of each a little
handful; tops of Hyssop half a handful, Comfrey Roots three Drams, Roots of
Solomon's Seal a Dram and a half; chop and beat them small, and then boil them
in a sufficient quantity of Wine. Add to two or three Ounces of the strained
Liquor two or three Drams of Spirit of Wine camphoriz'd.

If there happen a Collection of Matter under this Coat, it must be drawn forth
by the hand of a Surgeon.

Sometimes little Blisters appear upon this and the native Tunicle, which are
caused by the suppression of sharp Humors. They are cured by applying
Hartman's vitriolated Water, or a simple Solution of white Vitriol; or by
blowing the following Powder into the Eye.

Take of prepared Calaminar Stone half a Dram, prepared Tutty half a Scruple,
Sugar of Lead half a Scruple: mix, etc. If the Blisters are opened, the Water
of the Whites of Eggs is very proper.

Having thus dispatched the Disorders that may affect the Coats of the Eye, let
us next consider those of the watery Humor.

The watery Humor is indisposed when a viscid Matter is mixed with it, and
interrupts the Rays of Light. This is called a Suffusion. If the Matter harden
into a Membran, it is called a Cataract. It generally sticks close either to the
Horn, or Grape Tunicle, and seems to proceed from a preternatural Extension of
its membranous Fibers. It Is always seated in the watery Humor, tho it sometimes
appears before the Coat called Wea, and sometimes behind it.

If this Membran cover the whole Eye, the Sight is quite lost; if it cover but
the half, the Object appears half'd; if it exceed not the bigness of a small
Point in the middle of the Eye, and the Circumference is left open, the Objects
appear as if holes were made in them. This last case is a true Suffusion.

The Signs are these. In the beginning the Patient complains of Flies, Smoke,
Cobwebs, Filaments, and such like, before his Eyes; the Color of Objects is
altered; and they appear either multiplied, half'd, or cut asunder. Thus by
degrees the sight is darkened, and the Apple on the Eye grows dusky. Some are
seized with Cataracts all of a sudden, without any preceding Signs. If the
Color of the Eye turn perfectly white, it is a complete Suffusion.

As for Prognostics; a young Suffusion is curable by the use of Medicines, but
an inveterat one is only to be cured by a chirurgical Operation. If Light when
brought near be quite imperceptible, Surgery it self can afford no Relief. If
the Eye affected be watery, and its Apple dilated while the other Eye is
compressed, it is some Encouragement for a manual Operation. If not, it is a
desperate case. If the Cataract be not ripe, and come to a sufficient
Consistency, it ought not to be touched with a Needle, for fear the division of
it should disturb the watery Humor, or it reunite and become come more callous
than before. If it be of a long standing, it sticks so close to the Coats of
the Eye, that it cannot be separated without rending them. An ashy colored
Cataract is generally ripe in five or six Months. But if white, it requires as
many years. If blew or green, it is incurable. If yellow, it must be taken in
time, else it becomes hard like a Horn. If the Cataract appear perfectly white,
it is a sign of Ripeness, and withal of its remarkable Thickness. In old Age a
confirmed Cataract from an internal Cause in one Eye portends the Invasion of
another in the other Eye; and if couched, it generally returns. If the Headache
either precede or accompany a Cataract, it is an ill Omen.

In the Method of Cure, regard must be had to the degrees of the Suffusion; if
the Patient be only molested with the appearance of Flies, Hairs, etc. before
his Eyes, it is in its first degree. When these filaments that cause such
appearances are gathered into a Membran, it is arrived at the second degree: If
the Membran be so thick and confirmed that there remains no manner of Sight,
it is finished to the last degree.

In the first degree Medicines are only proper. In the second they may likewise
take place, but yield to manual Operation.

Internally we use Hoglice, Eyebright, Vipers boiled in Ophthalmic Waters, the
Decoction of Woods, Celandin, Vervain, Fennel, Betony, and such like.

The external Remedies must be very penetrating; Antimonials are preferable to
all others, by reason of an Acid subtle Sulphur couched within 'em. As,

Take of Glass of Antimony in Powder, from half a Scruple to fifteen Grains;
infuse in Water of Elewhottle Flowers, Evebright-Water, and Fennel-Water of
each one Ounce. Let them stand warm for the space of a Night; in the Morning
strain the Liquor, and add six Grains of Camphyr-Drop it into the Eye, while
the Patient is laid on his back. Or,

Take of the Eggs of Ants four Ounces, and thirty Galls of Lampreys; mix and
distill with a slow Fire. It yields a muddy Water, which ought to be strained
and applied to the Cataract in the Evening.

The distilled Water of human Dung; with the Gall of a Lamprey, and Sugar Candy
dissolved in it, is much commended. Celandin the Greater, and River Crabs half
putrified and distilled, yield an Alcalin Water, of excellent Use.

If these Medicines prove ineffectual, we must have recourse to Quercetanus his
Ophthalmic Water prepared from a Child's Urine, and Vitriol: to which the juice
of Celandin may be added.

The White of an Egg hardened, and filled with white Vitriol and Sugar Candy,
and hung up in a Cellar, melts into a Liquor, which if diluted with Eyebright
Water, is of admirable Use in this Case.

The Spirit of Salarmoniac sharpened with Quicklime is the most penetrating
Spirit, and preferable to Spirit of Wine, in which we are wont to dip Rags, and
apply them to the Eye.

Blistring Plasters, Issues and Setaces are serviceable in the beginning, but
are of no use in an inveterat Suffusion. In room of them we may use what
follows.

Take the Roots of Mezereon, and macerat them in Water in which Nitre has been
dissolved, or in the Lees of Wine-ashes, and afterward dry them. Make a little
hole in the teap of the Ear with a Needle, and put some of this Root thus
prepared into it, after the manner of an Issue. It drains a great deal of
Matter from the Head and Eyes.

In an inveterat case, it is probable a Salivation procured by Mercury may be
serviceable. Fonseca, Mr. Boil, and Schenkius, were of the same Opinion.

Besides the genuin Suffusion abovementioned, we meet sometimes with a
spurious sort, which ensues upon Hypochondriac Fits, long Fastings, and the
Paroxisms of intermitting Fevers. It generally depends upon the Disorders of
the Stomac, and oft-times disappears upon eating, or at least is cured by
stomachic Medicines, viz. Aloe, Mastic and Ginger.

A Cataract ought likewise to be carefully distinguished from what we call a
Glaucoma, that is, when the Chrystallin Humor loses its Perspicuity, and
assumes a gray dusky Color. Old People are naturally obnoxious to it, by
reason of their scarcity of Moisture. For if we take out the Crystallin Humor,
and put it betwixt us and Objects, it magnifies them; but if we dry it or boil
it in hot Water, it becomes thick and untransparent. It Is in vain to attempt
the Cure in old Persons. If the Patient be young, we foment the Eye with Spirit
of Wine, or a Cloth dipped in it, and applied to the Eye over Night. Or infuse
Borrage or Bugloss Flowers in Spirit of Wine, and then use it. Some commend a
Tincture of Bugloss extracted with weak Alum Water, and the distilled Water of
the Whites of Eggs.

Thus much for the Obstacles which may embarrass the Passage of the Rays of
Light. If the Patient be insensible of their Influence when they have a free
Admission, the fault must lie in the optic Nerve, and it is called a Gutta
Serena.

Obstructions or Compressions of the optic Nerve interrupt the Passage of the
Spirits to the Eye, and so cause the Blindness. And a Tumor, or Collection of
watery Humors in the Brain, or a violent Commotion occasioned by a Fall,
Sneezing, etc. An unseasonable Use of sudorific Medicines, or the Translation
of a morbific Matter to the Head, may occasion this Disorder of the optic Nerve
within the Brain.

If nothing disturb it within the Brain, the Error must be lodged in its
Expansion called the Retina, as when it becomes paralytic, languid, or
otherwise indisposed by a Blow upon the Eye, a Fall upon the hinder part of the
Head, violent Sneezing, strong Convulsions, or a continued gazing on the Sun or
full Moon; the Violence of whose Rays weakens and resolves the Fibers of the
Tunicle. Colic Pains, and especially excessive Venery (a mortal Enemy to the
Eyes) may produce the same effect. Childbearing Women are sometimes seized
with this Disease, which disappears upon their Delivery. In like manner it is
sometimes caused by a Suppression of the terms, and vanishes upon their Return.

A Gutta Serena is distinguished from the other sorts of Blindness by this;
that these advance by degrees, according to the gradual Disorder of the part
which causes 'em: Whereas it seizes on a sudden, and quickly arrives at its
height. The Signs drawn from the Dilatation and Constriction of the Apple of
the Eye are not to be credited.

This Disease is not easily cured. If the Nerves be tore, or the Sight quite
gone, there is no hope. Old People never recover, for the Relaxation of the
Optic Nerve is natural in them. If the Cause be moveable, and the Disease yet
imperfect, there remains some ground of Hope.

Among the internal Medicines, those which evacuat by Stool and Sweating are
first in order. Vomits are not safe, nor strong Purgations. The meekest
Purgatives, such as the Pills called. Aloephanginae, or the Decoction of Senna
with Agaric and Salt of Tartar, are only proper on this occasion. Or, they may
be joined with Alteratives, thus.

Take of the Herb Eyebright one handful, Betony Flowers, Flowers of Comfrey
Royal, Blew-bottle Flowers, of each two little handfuls: Leaves of Senna
without the Stalks one Ounce, Roots of black Hellebor, and of common Spurge the
greater, of each two Drams: Fennel Seeds, Cubebs, and Cardamoms, of each three
Drams: Salt of Tartar one Dram: Cut and beat them small to be tied in a Bag,
and infused in Wine. Of which exhibit a Draught to the Patient Morning and
Evening.

Sassafras and the sudorific Woods are best for Sweating. As for Alteratives,
the mild oily Aromatics which are tinctured with a gentle Bitterness, are only
proper. All sharp and fierce Medicines inwardly taken are very offensive to the
Eyes, as Onyons, Garlic, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, Horse Radishes, etc. Therefore
they ought to be carefully avoided. Eyebright and all its Productions are
admirably good. Next to it are Valerian, Celandin the greater, Lovage, Fennel,
Juniper Berries, Carduus Benedictus, Rue, the four hot Seeds, Elecampane and
Rosemary. We use to tie them in Bags to be infused in Wine. The following
Powder is much approved.

Take of the Herbs Betony, Celandin the greater, Eyebright, Lovage, Anifeeds,
Lovage Roots, Valerian Roots, and Chinamom, of each a Dram: Cardamoms, Ginger,
Galangal, Fennel Seeds, Parsley Seeds, Seeds of Mountain Siler, and of the Herb
wild Marjoram, of each half a Dram; Sugar one Ounce; make a Powder to be taken
some time before eating, as likewise along with Victuals. Or,

Take of the Powder of Falcons Dung dried two Drams, Fennel Seeds one Dram:
Mix, for a Powder to be taken every day.

Innocent the 3d was wont to do mighty feats with an Electuary made of Fennel
Seeds, the Seeds of Mountain Siler, Smallage, Dill, and Parsley Seeds, with
Honey.

Ants, Earthworms and Hoglice, and their various Preparations, are very useful.
Mr. Boil commends the Infusion of Hoglice in Wine.

If a Gutta Serena proceed only from a want of Spirits, occasioned by Venery or
excessive Evacuations, there is nothing so proper as a moderat Diet, and Food
of easy Digestion.

As for external Applications, May Dew gathered from Fennel, Antimonial
Infusions, distilled Waters from the Galls of Fishes or Goose Dung, are
celebrated Remedies. The Liquor or Oil of the Liver of a Lamprey, the Fat of
Vipers, and the Juice of Ants clarified by standing, are all good. The Oil that
melts from Earthworms, Glass, and fermented Bread, is very effectual; it must
be strained through a thick Cloth, and sharpened with a little Camphyr, and gently
laid upon the Eye. Brendelius admires the following Ointment.

Take of Honey of Rosemary Flowers, scum'd, Ginger in Powder, Cloves powdered,
and common Salt, of each half an Ounce: Mix them for a liquid Ointment; of
which put about the bigness of a Mustard Seed into the Eye: It will make it
smart at first, but is a very innocent Medicine.

Chewing and sneezing Remedies are likewise not improper. Blistering Plasters
may be applied behind the Ears, or to the Pit of the Neck, or to the Head it
self; and Issues or Setaces may be cut in the Neck.

CHAP. II. Of the Disorders of the Ear.
THE Sense of Hearing is occasioned by the Motion of the Air in the Ear; and is
rendered agreeable or disagreeable, violent or flat, according to the Proportion
of the Air's Impulse upon it, which is communicated to the Brain by a
particular Nerve, set apart for that purpose. This Nerve detaches a small
Branch to the Teeth, which causes the Sympathy that is observed upon the
approach of any ungrateful Sound.

This Sense is sometimes weakened or quite lost, and sometimes vitiated. The
former may be caused by malignant, acute or chronical Distempers, and is taken
for a good sign in Fevers. It insues upon the cutting off or wounding of the
external part of the Ear; which Defect is in some measure supplied by holding
one's Hand or some artificial Instrument in its place. It may be caused by an
Obstruction in the Passage for Hearing, or a Disorder in the Membran, which
preserves the Nerve and internal part of the Organ from external Injuries. This
Membran may be injured by violent Sounds, Ulcers in the Ear, or a redundancy of
Serum in the Brain, which unbends it, and so indisposes it for receiving the
Impression of the Air. It becomes sometimes paralytic, and liable to
Convulsions, and is oft-times affected by the Disorders of the Stomac.

If the Animal Spirits have not a free Passage in the Hearing Nerve, Deafness
will ensue. Their Passage may be disturbed by a wrong Insertion of the Nerve,
by a Compression or Obstruction, occasioned by external Accidents or Defluxions
within, or by the abovementioned Disorders of the Membran, which is nothing
else but the Expansion of the Hearing Nerve.

Deafness is manifest of it self. The greatest difficulty is to distinguish the
Causes, which must be endeavored by inquiring into the Patient's Constitution,
the Accidents that preceded, and the Passions or Disorders which accompany it.

In the business of Prognostics, we must have regard to its Companions. If it
succeed to a Chronical Distemper, or becomes a formal Disease by it self, it is
a difficult Matter to remove it. In acute Diseases, if the Urine remain crude,
and the Person is seized with a Deafness, it portends Doting. If it be
accompanied with the signs of Concoction, it signifies the Solution of the
Disease. If attended by a Perturbation of the Eyes, a Heaviness in the Head,
and a Distention of the lower Belly, it bespeaks a Bleeding at the Nose;
especially if the Patient be apt to rub it. A Deafness succeeding to Doting,
is a better Circumstance than if it went before.

As for the Cure. In acute Diseases it disappears upon the Solution of the
Disease; or if it continue longer, is cured by Cupping behind the Ears, or
smoking Tobacco, or putting into the Ears a little Cotton dipped in Aqua
Anhaltina. If it subsist by it self, without any dependence upon other
Distempers, the Cure must be accommodated to the Cause that produces it. If it
arise from an Obstruction in the Passage, occasioned by the hardening of the
Earwax or otherwise, it is cured by injecting the Juice or Essence of Wormwood,
or Child's Urine, or the Spirit of Urine unrectify'd. If it proceed from other
internal Causes, a tender regard must be had to the Drum and the hearing Nerve,
by preserving their due Order with Aromatic and Nervous Medicines. In a
Catarrhous case give internally what follows.

Take of the Essence of Rosemary Flowers, of Saint John's Wort, and of
Sassafras, of each two Drams: mix, etc.

Amber given inwardly, or applied to the Ear in a little Cotton, is an
admirable Medicine for old People. Mosch or Civet, or Balsam of Peru diluted
with Spirit of Wine, or Origanum Water distilled with Wine, or the Water of
Carduus Benedictus rectified by frequent Cohobation, are all used externally
the same way. If Deafness be attended by a remarkable Heat in the Ears, the
Water that drops from one end of a piece of Ash-wood, while the other is put into
the Fire, or the Water of Ants, or the Water distilled from Flies, or Magpy
Water with Castor; or the Juice of Radishes, or of Onions, mixed with Oil of
Amber and Oil of Bitter Almonds, are all applauded Remedies; and are to be used
with Cotton, or a Linen Cloth.

Above all, the penetrating Aromatics, as Spirit of Treacle, Essence of
Wormwood and of Cloves, etc. are preferable. Human Gall, or the Galls of other
Animals infused in Spirit of Wine, are much commended. Or,

Take of Ox's Gall and Spanish Wine, of each equal Quantities: distill from them
a Liquor to be dropped into the Ear, or applied in Cotton or a Linen Cloth.

Take of the Roots of black Hellebor half a Dram, Roots of Aromatic Calamus two
Scruples, Pulp of Coloquintida a Scruple, Bay Berries a Dram, Cumin Seeds from
two Scruples to two Drams and a half. Cut and beat them small, and infuse them
in four Ounces of Spirit of Wine: and use the strained Liquor as above, or
sharpen it with Essence of Amber.

All Preparations from Ants are of wonderful use in this case. As,

Take of the Eggs of Ants one Ounce, and six Galls of Hares; beat them up with
a double Quantity of Honey, and then drop it into the Ear. Or,

Take twenty of the little white Worms that are found betwixt the Bark and Wood
of an Oak-tree. Let them boil in two Ounces and a half of the Oil of unripe
Olives. Then take the Root of Sowbread, and cut it hollow. Fill the hollow
space with the Oil of these Worms, and add of prepared Pellitory Roots, and of
the Roots of Aromatic Costus, from half a Scruple to a Scruple; Oil of Costus
or of Rue as much as it can hold. Close up the Root and roast it under the
Ashes; then bruise it in a Mortar, and with force express the Juice; and pour
some Drops of it into the Ear every day for ten ays together. Timaeus and
Heertodius recommend it for an incomparable Remedy.

The Fat of Serpents or of Vipers, or the Fat that drops from roasted Eels, are
proper in this case, and may be mixed with the Oil of Amber or Aniseeds.

Some commend a Fumigation of the Ears from a mixture of Sal Ammoniac, Oil of
Tartar per Deliquium, and a double quantity of Quicklime with common Water.

After the application of these external Remedies the Ear ought always to be
stopped with Cotton, and Amber or Musk upon it; and the Patient must lie upon
the sound Ear, that so the Virtue of the Medicines may penetrat the more.
Besides, it is to be remarked, that oily viscid Medicines are not so mild as
those of a thin spirituous Substance; and that they ought never to be applied
till the Ear be purged and wiped clean. All Medicines thus applied must be just
lukewarm, and two or three Drops may always suffice for one time.

If Deafness come by Fits, or depend upon a Catarrhous Disposition of the
Brain; just before the Invasion of the Paroxism, it is proper to apply to the
Crown of the Head a Cloth dipped in Apoplectic Spirits or Oils.

If it be occasioned by a vehement Noise, it is not amiss to apply hot Bread
from the Oven with Juniper and Bay Berries baken into it. Or,

Take of the Herbs Marjoram, Sage, Rosemary, and the Flowers of red Roses, of
each half a handful, Juniper Berries one Ounce, Cumin Seeds half an Ounce; chop
and beat them small, and stitch them into a Bag, to be applied hot; or wet with
a convenient Vehicle.

A Fumigation received at the Ear from a Decoction of Filings of Steel, with
distilled Vinegar and Cephalic Herbs, or from the Flowers of Sulphur, is much
esteemed. After the Fumigation is over, apply to the Ear distilled Oil of
Fennel with Cotton.

In Chronical or Catarrhous Cases the hot Baths are very proper, both for
Bathing and Pumping upon the Head. An Issue cut in the Arm of the same side
with the affected Ear, is likewise very useful on this occasion.

If Deafness be caused by a Fall, Contusion, or external Violence, distilled
Soubread Water is a proper Remedy; and a Plaster made of equal Quantities of
Tacamahac and Cerecloth of Betony may be applied to the Head shaved. Hot Urine
taken from a hunted Hare is commended by some.

If any Obstruction or such like cause give rise to a Deafness, it is probable a
Salivation procured by Mercury may be useful. But it is a desperate Cure, and
must be cautiously undertaken.

Thus I Have dispatched the first Branch of the Disorders of the Ear; the next is
when the Sense of Hearing remains, and the Patient is molested with a tingling
or noise in his Ears. It proceeds from a preternatural Motion of the internal
Air contained in the Cavity of the Ear, which affects the Fibers of the Drum,
and so represents an imaginary Sound.

This Motion may be occasioned by subtle foreign Fumes exhaled from the Blood
in the adjacent Arteries, which disturb the Repose of the internal Air; or by
the Irritation or violent misplacing of the Drum from any internal or external
Cause. Convulsions of this Membran may be occasioned by the Inflammation of the
Blood in a Headache or Fever, and in that case vanish upon bleeding at the
Nose: Or by a Catarrh, or Translation of morbific Matter, as in the Declension
of Fevers, etc.

If a Tingling in the Ears accompany other Distempers, it affords the same
Prognostics as Deafness. If it subsist by it self, it is not very dangerous,
unless it be inveterat, in which case it proves a Forerunner of an Apoplexy. If
it proceed from frequent Blows, it terminates in a total Privation of Hearing.

The Cure is performed by the same Medicines as abovementioned; especially
Fumigations, and the Application of Aromatic Spirits and Oils.

Take of the Leaves and Flowers of Chamomil one handful: Dill or Sage,
Marjoram, Rosemary, of each half a handful; Millet Seeds tosted one Ounce,
drv'd Salt half an Ounce; chop them small, and make a quilted Bag, to be
applied warm to the Ear.

The Vapor of new Bread from the Oven, with Cumin Seeds, Fennel Seeds,
Aniseeds, Origanum, Mother of Thyme, and Bay Berries, fermented and baked with
it, is sometimes useful, but not always. The Oil of Oak-worms above prescribed,
or expressed Oil of Peach Seeds, with Peach Flowers infused in it, are very
proper. Or,

Take of white Hellebor and Castor, of each two Drams; sweet Costus a Dram and
a half, Rue two Scruples, Euphorbium half a Dram; Oil of Bitter Almonds, or
Peach Seeds, one Ounce. Boil them gently in a sufficient quantity of Oil of
Rue, and apply it to the Ear with Cotton. Or,

Take of the Roots of white Hellebor three Drams, Bayleaves and Rue of each
half a handful: Ash-leaves one handful: Boil them in Oil of Bitter Almonds, or
of Nut's with White or Spanish Wine, till the Wine be consumed. Express the
Oil, and apply it to the Ear. Or infuse the Simples in Spirit of Wine, and
extract and Essence for the same purpose.

Fumigation from a Decoction of Mustard-seeds in Wine is commended. In a
pituitous Constitution apply what follows.

Take of the Oil of Henbane, and of Rue, of each half a Dram; distilled Oil of
Marjoram half a Scruple, Castor six Grains, Saffron four Grains: Mix, etc.

If it proceed from a Fall, Contusion or external Violence, take a Spoonful of
the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, and half a Spoonful of fresh Juice of Onyons, and
four or five Drops of distilled Oil of Spike. Mix and drop it into the Ear.

In Plethoric and young Persons it is not amiss to breathe a Vein in the Arm,
and exhibit some mild sneezing Medicines. If it come by Fits, follow the Course
prescribed above. If it attack Hypochondriac Persons, it generally proceeds
from the Disorders of the Stomac and lower Belly, and is cured by Chalybeats,
Carminatives, and volatile urinous Salts, together with the usual Specifics.

CHAP. III. Of the Sense of Feeling, and the Disorders it is obnoxious to.
THE third Sense is that of Feeling, occasioned by the Influence of external
Objects upon the nervous Glandules seated in the Skin. It Is true, the nervous
Fibers within the Body that are not glandulous, are deeply sensible of the
lightest touch; but their Sense is painful and preternatural, whereas that of
the Glandules is equal and agreeable to Nature. Upon which account Feeling is
their peculiar Property; and the Liver which has no Nerves or nervous Glandules
is destitute of that Sense.

This Sense is quite extinguished in Apoplexies, Palsies, and stupifying
Diseases. Of which more in their proper places.

The most remarkable Depravation of the Sense of Feeling is what we call Pain;
that is, when the Object makes such a sensible Impression upon the Organ, as to
provoke the Animal Spirits to irregular Motions, and disturb the repose of the
nervous Fibers, which readily impart their Disorder to the Brain. It may be
called a convulsive Motion of the Fibers; and Experience teaches us, that
Convulsions and Pain are reciprocal Causes to one another.

ART. I. Of Pain in general.
THE remote Causes of Pain are innumerable, for every particular Object has a
peculiar way of affecting the Nerves. The external Causes are manifest: The
internal Causes are generally the Offspring of vicious Acids; which partake of
sharp and stiff Parts, that are apt to make painful Impressions upon the
nervous Fibers. This Acid for the most part owes its being to some defect in
the Stomac and first Passages; and varies the Nature of the Pain according to
its changeable Circumstances. If a volatile sharp Acid be joined to a viscid
Vehicle, it takes deep rooting in the Part, and creates immovable Aches, as in
Venereal and Colis Pains. If the Acid be more gentle, and joined to a thin
Vehicle, it produces a fluctuating Pain. If it proceed from a particular defect
in the Part affected, it is apt to recur and cause Relapses. According as this
Acid is disposed, the Pain is either continued or intermitting; it either
observes set Periods, or attacks indifferently in all Seasons. And sometimes it
causes Swellings, by contracting the Fibers, and straitning the Pores of the
Part, so as to put a stop to the Circulation of the Blood.

In order to form a distinct Idea of Pain, I shall divide it into ten sorts.
The first is a weighty burdensome Pain arising from a Collection of insipid or
viscid Matter lodged in a less sensible Part, as the Swelling of the Liver. 2.
A pungent Pain arifing from a sharp pricking Acid in a membranous part, as in a
Pleurisy. 3. A pointed penetrating Pain, resembling the Sense of a Hole made by
an Aul, proceeding from a viscid Matter that partakes of Acidity: As in St.
Anthony's Fire and Arthritic Pains. 4. A beating Pain which generally keeps
pace with the Pulse of the Artery. It proceeds from a violent Distention of the
Fibers, which are exasperated by the Incursion of the Blood; as in Headaches,
or when ones Finger is pricked by a Thorn, etc. 5. A breaking Pain, peculiar to
the Periostium, resembling the breaking of the Bone. It Is produced by a sharp
Acid lodged in a tenacious Matter: as in Venereal Cases. 6. A rending or
distending Pain. The former is peculiar to Hypochondriac Persons, and Parts
that have no exquisit Sense, but are invested with a sensitive Membrane. The
latter is caused by Wilid, or any thing that overcharges the Part, and
stretches the surrounding Membran. 7. A tearing Pain peculiar to the Membranes,
and frequent in scorbutic Cases. 8. A burning Pain, peculiar to Fibers and
Membranes, arising from a volatile Acid, and the boiling of the Humors within
the Part. 9. A stupid chilly Pain. And, 10. A biting gnawing Pain.

If Pains be accompanied by an intermitting Pulse, it is no just Cause of Fear;
for when the former disappears, the latter returns to its wonted Order.

There are three sorts of Medicines made use of for Pains, 1. All Alcali's apt
to destroy a prevailing Acid: As Wormwood, Dill, Elder, Mint, Chamomile,
Bay Leaves, Pellitory of the Wall, and the other softening Herbs; Fumigations
with Amber, or the Spirit of Amber both inwardly and outwardly. The volatile
Remedies prepared from human Urine, and the Parts of Animals, are all proper
Antidots against a volatile Acid. As for example:

Take of Aqua Articularis (for external use) from an Ounce and a half to two
Ounces, Spirit of Urine or Spirit of Sal Ammoniac prepared with Quicklime six
Drams, putrified Earthworms, or Earthworms mixed with a volatile Salt, two or
three Drams: Mix and bathe the Part affected. Or,

Take of the Leaves of Tobacco, of Sage, of Rosemary, of each one handful,
Angelica Roots half an Ounce, Roots of Cuckoo Pint and Pelsitory of Spain, of
each two Drams, Rosemary Flowers, Lavender Flowers, and Flowers of Arabian
Stechas, of each two little handfuls; Rocket Seeds six Drams, Castor three
Drams; pour upon them two Pints of Spirit of Wine, and one Pint of Spirit of
Worms. Let them stand warm for some days in a close Vessel. And then strain the
Liquor to be used as above.

Venice Soap dissolved in Spirit of Wine is good for Arthritic Pains. In case
of a burning Pain it ought to be mixed with Water of Frogs Spawn or Spirit of
Wine with Camphyr and Saffron. Camphyr, Oil of Frogs, and the Oil of the Juice
of Dwarf-Elder, and all emollient Oils, are convenient in Arthritic Pains.
Paracelsus's Oil prepared from Galbanum, with Turpentine, and Oil of Spike, and
the Oils distilled from Aromatic Seeds, from the Bones and Fat of Animals, or
from Wax, digested with Spirit of Wine, are celebrated Medicines in all Pains
arising from an Acid. Or,

Take of Balsam of Peru one Ounce, dissolve it with the Yelk of an Egg, and add
three Ounces of the Spirit of Juniper Berries, or of Elder Flowers: Mix for
external Unction.

The Gums and Plasters prepared from 'em are proper in the case of a viscid
Acid. And likewise Cataplasms of human Dung, or the Dung of Animals with Oil of
Roses. Among Purgatives in this case sweet Mercury is the best. And Sudorifics
are the best internal Medicines.

2. All Anodyn Pacific Medicines are used for Aches. As Milk, Emulsions,
Mucilages or Oils of softening Herbs. Cataplasms made of white Bread, Milk and
Saffron. Or,

Take of the Crum of white Bread a sufficient quantity, let it soak in Cows
Milk: Mix it with Yelks of Eggs and fresh Butter, and an Ounce and a half of
the Oils of Chamomile, Dill, white Lillies and Earthworms. Apply it to the Part
affected with a warm Cloth. Swallow-water, with Castor, Liniments of the Fat of
Animals, and emollient Oils, and all oily softening Liquors or Ointments, are
all proper for external use.

3. Narcotic Medicines stupify the Part, and so lessen the Sense of Pain. But
where a viscid Acid prevails, they are inconvenient. In case of a sharp Serum
they are not amiss. As,

Take of the Hypnotic Ointment two Drams, expressed Oil of Nutmegs two Ounces,
Oil of Henbane Seeds one Ounce: mix. Or,

Take of Oil of Dill and expressed Oil of Poppies, of each a Dram, Oil of
Henbane half a Dram: mix.

The Oil of the Seeds of Henbane mixed with Camphyr, Saffron, and Spirit of
Wine, covered with fermented Dough, and baked in an Oven, yield an incomparable
Liquor for Pains of the Legs.

ART. II. Of the sharp tearing Pains in the Joints.
THese Pains are frequently met with in Scorbutic Cases.

They proceed from a subtle Acid fixed in membranous and musculary Parts: And
generally rage more by Night than by Day.

Blood-letting sometimes gives Relief. Blistering Plasters conveniently
applied, and Issues, are oft-times not improper.

The volatile Sudorifics, Decoctions of Woods, and all volatile Alcali Salts,
such as we call Antiscorbutic, together with Anodyn Absorbents, as Chalybeat
and Antimonial Preparations, are proper to be given inwardly.

Take of the Roots of Swallow-wort an Ounce and a half, Myrtle Leaves one
handful, Seeds of St. John's Wort, and choice Rhubarb, of each a Dram and a
half. Boil them in common Water, and in six Ounces of the strained Liquor
dissolve an Ounce and a half of the Syrup of Maidenhair. Mix and give it
inwardly. Or,

Take of the Shavings of Juniper-wood three Ounces, Sprouts of a young Pinetree
two handfuls, of the Herb Rosemary one handful. Infuse them in six Pints of
simple Water, and let them stand over night in a Balneum Mariae. In the Morning
boil it to four Pints, and give it for a Draught. It has a peculiar Virtue in
the Obstructions of the Glandules about the Head and Chops.

External Medicines must be cautiously used; fat unctuous things are hurtful.

Take of the Spirit of Lilly of the Valley (not much rectified) four Ounces;
Spirit of Sal Ammoniac prepared with Quicklime two Ounces, Essence of Castor
half an Ounce: Mix for external Use. Or,

Take of Aqua Articularis (for external Use) an Ounce and a half, Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac six Drams, Spirit of putrified Earthworms three Drams: Mix and apply
with a warm Cloth. Or,

Take of the Leaves of Tobacco, Leaves of Origanum, Flowers of Elder, of each
one handful, Roots of Angelica an Ounce, Roots of Cuckow-Pint, and of Pellitory
of Spain, of each two Drams. Flowers of Arabian Stechas, of Lavender and of
Lilly Convally, of each two little handfuls; Rocket-Seeds six Drams, Castor
three Drams. Infuse them in two Parts of Spirit of Wine, and one part of Spirit
of Earthworms. Let 'em digest for some days. Strain the Liquor for use.

Venice Soap dissolved in Spirit of Wine, and volatile Spirit of Tartar;
Cataplasms of Comfrey Roots, and the use of hot Bathes; are much commended.

ART. III. Of the Toothach.
THE Toothach proceeds from an acid Humor that corrodes the Membrane
surrounding the Tooth. Sometimes the nutritious Juice of the Teeth is vitiated,
and causes the Pain. Sometimes an acid Humor is distilled from the neighboring
Glandules, or collected in the Cavities of the Bones of the upper Jaw under the
Eye, and gives rise to it.

This Corruption of the Humor sometimes runs to that height, that the Substance
of the Teeth is eaten away, and little Worms engendered in 'em.

The Membrane is the original Seat of the Pain, which oft-times seizes the
whole side of the Head, attended by an Inflammation of the Jaw, or a Swelling
of the Face. For the nervous Fibers being contracted in Sympathy with the
Membrane, the Passages of the Blood and other Juices are straitened.

The remote Causes are a Depravation of the Juices of the Body, and
consequently of the nutritious Juice of the Teeth, as in Scorbutic and Venereal
Cases; the use of acid Liquors, Sugar, or Honey; which ferment and acquire a
notable Acid, very prejudicial to the Substance of the Teeth.

The Toothach is not dangerous of it self; but may be followed by Convulsions,
Inflammations, Tumors and Ulcers.

If the Tooth be corrupted, it must be drawn. If it proceed from a Scorbutic
Cause, Antiscorbutics must be added to the Remedies exhibited. If from a
venereal Cause, the Decoction of Guajacum, or its Oil, must be used.

As for the common Remedies, some use Decoctions of Herbs. As,

Take of the Herb Arsmart, Mother of Thyme, of each one handful; Dock Roots,
Nettle Roots, of each one Ounce; Pellitory (of Spain) Roots, the Shavings of
Boxwood, the Shavings of Lignum Sanctum, of each half an Ounce; Seeds of white
Henbane, one Dram. Boil them in a sufficient Quantity of Water. Strain the
Liquor for a Gargal.

Heurnius commends the Decoction of Tobacco with Chamomile Flowers. Or,

Take of black Pepper, Roots of Pellitory of Spain, Seeds of Stavesacre, of
each an equal quantity: boil them in Wine, and use it for a Gargal. Or,

Take of Juniper Gum one Ounce; boil it in a Pint of Wine, for the same use. Or,

Take of the Flowers of Spikenard a convenient Quantity: boil them in Wine for
the same use. Or,

Take of the Extract of Guajacum Wood three Grains, Laudanum Opiatum two
Grains, distilled Oil of Origanum, or of Cloves two Drops. Make Pills to be put
into the hollow Tooth. Or,

Take of the Flowers of Benzoin six Grains, Opium dissolved in Spirit of Wine
and thickened three Grains: with a sufficient quantity of the Extract of
Triacle, make Pills as above. Or,

Take of Laudanum Opiatum one Scruple, Oil of Camphyr, Oil of Cloves, of each
five Drops. With some convenient Balsam, make a Balsam to be applied to the
Tooth.

If the Face be inflamed, apply a Plaster of Triacle to the Cheek. Spirit of
Sal Ammoniac prepared with Spirit of Wine and Quicklime, with Camphyr dissolved
in it, applied with Cotton to the Tooth, gives present Relief. The Essence of
Sassafras prepared with Spirit of Wine is very proper: But above all the
Essence of Benzoin. Elixir Proprietatis prepared without an Acid is oft-times
useful. The Aromatic distilled Oils (especially of Savin) mixed with Oil of
Henbane, are preferable to Essences. Sulphur Auratum Antimonii, Oils of Amber,
Hazel, Boxwood, etc. are sometimes successful.

The Surgeons are wont to apply Plasters to the Temples, or the following
Plaster to the whole Part inflamed.

Take of Triacle of Andromachus, Tacamahac, of each half an Ounce; Balsam of
Peru a Dram. Spread it upon a Linen Cloth for use. If the Toothach cause an
Inflammation like to St. Antony's Fire,

Take of Triacle of Andromachus, from half an Ounce to six Drams; Salt of
Wormwood, Balsam of Peru, of each a Dram: Mix and apply. If it be attended by a
Swelling of the Jaws, it is not fit to provoke 'em to Suppuration. But,

Take of Chamomile Flowers, Elder Flowers, of each a handful; Roots of
Florentin Orris in Powder, half an Ounce: mix 'em with expressed Oil of
Poppies; make a quilted Bag, and apply it hot to the Part affected.

Sometimes indeed there happens a little Tumor in the Gums, at the very Root of
the Tooth, which ought to be suppurated by warm Milk or roasted Figs, and
afterward kept clean with Honey or the like.

If the Toothach be inveterat, and do not yield to the ordinary Medicines, it is
necessary to purge with Jalap, and let Blood, and apply Cupping-glasses to the
Neck and Shoulders.

If the Tooth be corrupted, it must be drawn with a proper Instrument. Before
drawing it is not amiss to apply the following Ointment in order to loosen the
Tooth.

Take of Gum Ammoniac, Seeds of Henbane, Juice of Henbane, of each a Dram and a
half: with the Fat of a green Frog, and a little Wax, make an Ointment.

In the case of Worms in the Teeth, the Decoction of Savin in Wine is proper.
If the Tooth be rotten, an actual or potential Cautery will prevent its further
Corruption.

ART. IV. Of the Aches of the Eyes.
AN Inflammation, or the sharpness of the Serum, or external Accidents, may
cause Pains in the Eyes. If any external thing lurk in the Eye, it must be
taken out by putting a Seed of Clary, or a little Pearl, or Crabs-eye, into it.
If the Pain proceed from a spontaneous Inflammation, the Mucilage of Seeds of
Quinces extracted with Water of Frogs Spawn, adding five or six Grains of
Camphyr and as much Saffron to three Ounces of Mucilage, ought to be laid upon
the Eyes.

Fennel-water with Sugar of Lead and Camphyr is likewise proper. Or,

Take of the Water of Celandin the greater, Water of Blew-bottle Flowers and of
Larks Spur, of each one Ounce; white Vitriol twelve Grains; strain the Liquor,
and add half a Scruple of prepared Tutty; to be applied to the Eye with a
Linen Cloth.

Of all external Applications, the following Cataplasm is the best.

Take three sweet Apples boiled and squeezed, and roasted under the Ashes, and
the White of one Egg well mixed with two Drams of Loaf-sugar, and twelve Grains
of Camphyr, with five Grains of Saffron: Mix for a Cataplasm to be laid upon
the Eye. Some recommend the opening of an Artery in this case.

Sometimes we meet with a pressing, tearing Pain, which comes in an Evening
without any evident Cause, and seems to proceed from the Convulsions of the
Coats of the Eye. In which case Antimonial Infusions are proper. Or,

Take of the Mucilage of Plantain Seeds, Quince Seeds, and Clary, extracted
with Water of Frogs Spawn, of each one Ounce; Saffron six Grains, Camphyr four
Grains. Or,

Take of Plantain Water, Fennel Water, of each six Drams, Lindanus's Sugar of
Lead a Dram and a half, prepared Tutty seven Grains, Saffron three Grains: Mix
for a Collyrium.

Sometimes Arthritic Pains are ushered in by a Pain in the Eyelids, which may
be cured by applying a blistering Plaster behind the Ears.

ART. V. Of Pains in the Ears.
THE Pains of the Ears are for the most part occasioned by the Disorders of the
internal Membran; by Inflammations, and the Corrosion of sharp Humors, or of
Worms either engendered in the Ear, or received from without.

An Inflammation is very dangerous, and attended by a remarkable Heat that is
not observed in the case of sharp Humors. Worms are distinguished by an Itching
and Sense of Motion within the Ear.

As for Cure, the following Cataplasm is universally applauded.

Take an Onion roasted under the Ashes, with an Ounce and a half of Oil of
Chamomile, and half an Ounce of Oil of Dill, with as much fresh Butter, and a
Scruple of Saffron. It is a sovereign Remedy for the Inflammations that follow
the Toothach.

The softening Oils, Infusions of Tobacco, or the Smoke of it, conveyed into
the Ear, and especially the Oils of Insects, are all very proper. As,

Take of the Oil of Scorpions one Dram, Oil of sweet (or bitter) Almonds,
distilled Oils of Anniseeds and Caroways, of each half a Scruple. Pour it hot
into the Ear, or apply it with Cotton.

In the case of an Inflammation; Take of the Juice of Houseleek; Oils of
Scorpions, of Earthworms and of Chamomile, of each a Dram: Mix and use as above.

If there be no suspicion of an Inflammation, the distilled Vegetable Oils of
Origanum, etc. are proper. Or,

Take a hundred of the largest Eggs of Ants, Castor, Pulp of Coloquintida,
Marjoram, Savin, Wormwood and Rue, of each one handful. The Seeds of Cumin,
Aniseeds, Fennel-seeds, and Caraway-seeds, of each three Drams. Bayberries and
Juniper Berries, of each half an Ounce; the Rinds of Pomgranats six Drams;
Roots of black Hellebor, of round rooted Cyperus, of Radishes and Sow-bread, of
each one Ounce; bitter Almonds two Drams; with seven pretty large Onions:
Infuse them in a sufficient quantity of Wine, and draw it off from a Balneum
Mariae. Use as above. Sometimes ye may add a small quantity of Opium.

If the Pain be occasioned by Worms, they ought to be enticed to come forth by
pouring in sweet Milk, or applying a sweet Apple roasted to the Ear. If they
refuse to come forth, they must be killed by bitter Oils and Juices. As,

Take of the expressed Oil of Peach-seeds one Dram, Quercetanus's Oil of
Coloquintida half a Dram, sweet Mercury from six Grains to half a Scruple: Mix
and pour it in by Drops, or apply it with Cotton. Or,

Take of Aloe two Drams, Myrrh from a Dram to two Drams, Coloquintida half a
Dram, tops of Wormwood half a handful. Boil them in a sufficient quantity of
Wine or Water, and use the strained Liquor as above.

If an Ointment be more acceptable; take of Salt of Lead, Earwax, and expressed
Oil of Filberds, of each an equal quantity: Mix, etc.

Fumigations by the bitter Herbs and Antimonial Ingredients, are proper both
for the Ear and Mouth.

If a Fly creep into the Ear, put a little Turpentin into it: If a Flea, put a
little Ball of Dogs-hair: If a Leech, inject the Solution of common Salt, or
the warm Blood of any Animal.

ART. VI. Of Headachs.
SOmetimes the whole Head is seized with an universal Pain; at other times only
a particular part, as the hinder part of the Head in Women, which generally
slows from the Disorders of the Womb; the external Membranes surrounding the
Scull, in venereal Cases; and the internal Membran called dura Matter, from the
Indisposition of the Blood, which it receives by an infinite number of capillary
Veins.

If the Headache be not originally caused by some Disorder in the Head, it
oft-times proceeds from those of the Stomac, the Spleen, the Kidneys, the Womb,
etc. by reason of the mutual Commerce established betwixt them and the Head, by
virtue of their Membrans and Nerves.

If it proceed immediately from some defailance in the Head, it may be caused
accidentally by external Wounds, use of Mercury, immoderat Drinking, etc. and
disappears upon their removal. If it become habitual and inveterat, it proceeds
either from an Inflammation of the Blood in the Vessels of the Brain, or the
Depravation of the Lympha separated by its Glandules, or a collection of some
heterogeneous Humor which oft-times settles into a viscid Consistency, and
creates particular Pains confined to narrow Bounds, as the breadth of an Egg,
the head of a Nail, etc.

The only use of Signs in this case is to distinguish the Causes: If it is
inconstant, and apt to relent, or be accompanied by Disorders in the lower
Region of the Body, without any visible defect in the Head, it is owing to the
influence of these other affected Parts. If it be habitual, or observe set
Periods in returning, and be influenced by the Sun and Moon, it is an essential
Headache. And if it cause a Sense of beating, like to that of an Artery, and a
burning Heat, it proceeds from the Blood. If it increase after eating, or
vanish after Sleep, it arises from the Depravation of the Chyle. If attended by
a Drousiness, a sense of Weight, and a seeming Distention of the Brain, it
proceeds from some serous or viscid Matter lodged in the Head. If followed by
scorbutic or venereal Symptoms, they discover the Cause.

As for Prognostics. If in Fevers it suddenly vanish without any Evacuation,
it is an ill Omen. If attended by grievous Symptoms, as Giddiness, Convulsions,
Vomiting, etc. it is not easily cured. If a drouzy Headache seize a Childbearing
Woman, it is dangerous. If accompanied by a Coldness of the external Parts, it
betokens an inward Inflammation. It Is more suspected in acute than in chronical
Diseases.

In order to a regular Cure, it is needful to observe the following Cautions. 1.
If it arise by consent with other Parts, it yields to Vomiting, Purging, and
the Restoration of the disordered Part. But if it be essential and inveterat,
frequent Evacuations are not so proper as corroborating cephalic Medicines.

2. Opiats are not very proper in essential Headaches. At least they must be
given in sinall Doses; and if externally used, must not be applied to the
Sutures, but to the Temples and Forehead.

3. It Is always conducive, excepting the case of a malignant Fever, to keep
the Belly open.

4. The scorbutic Pains of the Head are the most obstinat. The Decoctions of
sudorific Woods, volatile Salts and Spirits, Milk, Opiats, blistering Plasters,
and external Anodyn Applications, are proper in such cases.

5. In all Headachs the Decoctions of the sudorific Woods ought to succeed to
the general Evacuations.

6. Chirurgical Operations are of great use. If it proceed from the Blood, open
a Vein in the Arm, or the Vein of the Forehead, or the Vein betwixt the Thumb
and first Finger; or apply Leeches to the Temples; or open the Artery that runs
along the temporal Muscle toward the Forehead, which gives present Relief, and
is a very innocent Operation, if cautiously performed. If it arise from a
Depravation of the Serum, apply blistering Plasters behind the Ears, or over
the whole Head; or cut Issues in the Arm, Neck, or Head it self. Trepanations
are sometimes, but very seldom, convenient. Cupping Glasses are not amiss. But
the universal Evacuations ought to precede all chirurgical Attempts.

7. If the Headache arises by Consent, Vomits are proper. But if it be
essential, Purges are more convenient. As,

Take of the Pills of Mastic a Scruple; extract of black Hellebor, extract of
Castor, of each five Grains; Troches Alhandal two Grains; with a sufficient
quantity of Elixir Proprietatis, make Pills. They are likewise proper against
the Disorders of the Stomac and lower Belly, which oft-times cause a Headache.

Take of Crollius his Extractum Panchymagogum, or extract of black Hellebor
fifteen Grains; Extract of Vervain seven Grains; sweet Mercury from half a
Scruple to fifteen Grains; Laudanum Opiatum two Drams, Scammony Sulphurated two
or three Grains; with a sufficient quantity of the Essence of Saffron, make
Pills. Or,

Take of Extract of Agaric half a Scruple, Extract of black Hellebor six
Grains; Aloe prepared with Juice of Roses, Rosin of Scammony, of each three
Grains; distilled Oil of Rosemary Flowers, or of Origanum, one drop. Mix and
make Pills. In a pituitous Headache,

Take of the Pills Aloephanginae with Diagrydium one Scruple, Rosin of Jalap
six Grains; with Essence of Amber, make Pills. Or,

Take of the Conserve of Rosemary Flowers one Dram, Cream of Tartar half a
Scruple, Golden Sulphur of Antimony five Grains, Rosin of Jalap four Grains.
Make a Bolus.

8. Rosemary always ought to be added to the sudorific Decoctions. The volatile
Salt of Amber, Camphyr, the diaphoretic Preparations of Antimony, and urinous
volatile Salts, are proper Alteratives in all Pains of the Head. The Decoction
of Tea in Wine or Water, the Essence of Silver, the volatile Spirit of Vitriol,
etc. are of the like nature.

Take of prepared Amber from half a Scruple to fifteen Grains, Cinnabar of
Antimony half a Scruple, Laudanum Opiatum one Grain, distilled Oil of Sassafras
one Drop. Mix for a Powder. Or,

Take of native Cinnabar or Cinnabar of Antimony a Scruple, Extract of the Wood
Aloe fourteen Grains, Extract of Castor eight or ten Grains, Laudanum Opiatum
four or five Grains. Make Pills for four Doses. Or,

Take of the Conserves of Sage Flowers, Rosemary Flowers, and Clove
Gillyflowers, of each six Drams; Amber a Dram; native Cinnabar, or Cinnabar of
Antimony half a Dram; of the Powder Diambra, and of the Powder Diamoschus
dulcis, of each two Scruples, with Syrup of Clove Gillyflowers make an
Electuary. Or,

Take of black Cherry Water, Vervain Water, of each one Ounce; Water of Lilly
Convally prepared with Wine six Drams; the Spirit of Hartshorn with Amber two
Scruples, Syrup of Betony three or four Drams. Or,

Take of the Spirit and volatile Salt of Hartshorn three Drams; Essence of
Opium tartariz'd one Dram: Mix. Dose forty or fifty Drops. Or,

Take of the compound Essence of Castor two Drams, Essence of Amber and Spirit
of Hartshorn with Amber, of each a Dram: Mix. It Is profitable in a Catarrhous
Headache.

9. Among the external Medicines Vervain leads the Van. Next are the Flowers of
red Poppies, and the Herb Betony. As,

Take of Betony two handfuls, Wormwood one handful, Cubebs two Drams: Boil them
in two Pints of Wine, and foment the Head with the Decoction.

The Root of Rhodium may be beat up with Vervain Water, and applied to the Head
in the form of a Cataplasm. Or,

Take of the Root of Rhodium an Ounce and a half, Flowers of red Poppies and of
Roses, of each half a handful, with three Poppy-heads: boil them in Water, and
apply the strained Liquor warm to the Forehead and Temples. Or,

Take of Vervain Water, Water of Elder Flowers, Betony Water, of each one
Ounce; Powder of Zedoary half an Ounce: Use as above. Timaeus fomented the Head
with the following Mixture.

Take of Vervain Water an Ounce, Betony Water, Elder Water, of each half an
Ounce; Powder of Rhodium Roots two Drams, Rose Vinegar six Drams: Mix, etc.

Emulsions made from narcotic Seeds and cephalic Waters, or Decoctions of
cephalic Herbs, are sometimes used both inwardly and outwardly. The following
Infusion is mightily esteemed.

Take of the Seeds of Henbane one Ounce, Rose Vinegar five Ounces; put 'em into
a Viol well stopped, and let them digest in Balneum Mariae for five or six
hours. Apply it to the Head with a Sponge.

The Ointment of Alabaster is used in all Pains of the Head. Or,

Take of expressed Oil of Poppy Seeds a Dram, expressed Oil of Peach Seeds two
Drams; expressed Oil of Henbane, and distilled Oil of Dill, of each a Scruple;
with a sufficient quantity of Wax make a Liniment to be applied to the Temples.

Take of the Extract or thickened Juice of Vervain a Dram, expressed Oil of
Henbane half a Scruple, make a Liniment. It Is excellent in scorbutic cases.

Take of Extract of Vervain, and of Dill, of each two Scruples; expressed Oil
of white Poppies, and of Henbane, of each half a Scruple; distilled Oil of
Dill, and of Chamomile, of each five Drops.

In Chronical Aches external Narcotics are of no great use. They may be fitly
exchanged for a Plaster of Tacamahac, with distilled Oil of Amber.

10. If the Headache be caused by the Effervescency of the Blood, a Clyster
ought to be injected before Blood-letting. Absorbent diaphoretic Pouders and
gentle acid Juleps are proper: outwardly we apply the Juice of Houseleek and
Purslain warm to the Forehead, Temples and Stones; likewise Emulsions, and
Ointments. As,

Take of Ointment of Alabaster three Drams, Triacle of Andromachus or Philonium
Romanum half a Dram, expressed Oil of Nutmegs half a Scruple. Make a Liniment.
Or,

Take of the fresh Juice of River Crabs three Ounces; Betony Water, Water of
Chamomile Flowers, and Water of Elder Flowers, of each one Ounce; Powder of
Zedoary two or three Drams. Make an Epithema. Or,

Take of the Herb Vervain, of Violets, of each a handful: Of the Flowers of
Roses, of Elder, and of Violets, of each half a handful. Tie them into a Bag,
and boil it in sharp Wine.

If a Plaster be more acceptable, Take of the Plaster de Ranis with Mercury a
convenient quantity, of the Plaster of Betony, and of Alabaster, of each half
as much. Make a Plaster.

If there be any apprehensions of Phrensies or Convulsions, Take of the Leaves
of Rue a handful and a half, Pigeons Dung an Ounce, common Salt half an Ounce;
Capital Lees two Ounces. With Elder Flower Vinegar, make a Cataplasm to be
applied to the Feet.

11. If a Headache be caused by a redundancy or sharpness of the Serum, and the
Person be of a Plethoric Constitution, first of all let Blood. If Bleeding be
inconvenient, inject a Clyster, or exhibit a Laxative; then apply blistering
Plasters to the Neck, or behind the Ears; and in inveterat Pains, to the Head.
In the interim Opiats may be cautiously exhibited; and when the Pain relents,
Purging, Sweating and diuretic Medicines may take their turns. In order to
provoke Sweating and Urine, take what follows.

Take of the Roots of Elecampane, of Avens, and Sarsaperilla, of each six
Drams; Roots of Florentin Orris, and Shavings of Sassafras, of each half an
Ounce: Of the Herbs Rosemary, Sage, and Chervil, of each half a handful:
Galangal two Drams; Fennel-seeds three Drams. Boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Water, and add two Ounces of Syrup of Betony or of red Poppies, to
a Pint and a half of the strained Liquor. Dose, two or three Ounces, twice or
thrice a day.

12. If the Pain be fixed and obstinat, it arises from a viscid tenacious
matter, which ought to be removed by the sweating Decoctions above mentioned;
and applying of Balsam or distilled Oil of Amber, and the Plaster de Ranis
with Mercury, to the Head. When the Sutures of the Head open, this Plaster is
of excellent use, in which case sharp Clysters are also proper. As,

Take of the Electuary of Hiera with Agaric four Ounces, Electuary of
Bay Berries two Ounces, Powder of black Hellebor Roots an Ounce and a half, the
Gall of a Bull thickened three Drams. Mix, and add two Ounces to the common
Decoction for Clysters.

For a change; instead of the Plaster, the Head may be fomented with this
Decoction.

Take of the Herbs Rosemary, Vervain, Betony and Chamomile Flowers, of each
half a handful. Boil them in Wine.

13. If the Pain proceed from Cold, discussing Medicines are required. As,

Take of Millet Seeds tosted a convenient quantity; Common Salt dried upon the
Fire a quarter of that quantity. Quilt them into a Bag: to be fumigated with
Gum Animi, and applied to the Head. Or,

Take of Millet Seeds tosted a handful, common Salt dried over a Fire half a
handful; of Vervain (or Betony, or Elder Flowers) and Chamomile Flowers, of
each half a handful; Powder of Rhodium Roots half an Ounce. Sow them into a
quilted Bag: It Is very proper for old Men, as likewise blistering Plasters.

14. If the Headache be caused by external Accidents, apply the following
Plaster.

Take of the Gum Hedera (or Elemi) three Ounces, Rosin half an Ounce, Wax and
Turpentin of each three Ounces, Oil of Roses two Ounces and a half; the Gum
Animi dissolved in Vinegar two Ounces, Juice of the Flowers of Ivy four Ounces,
Meal of Beans as much as suffices to make a Plaster.

The Ointment of Alabaster, or Hartman's Bag of Amber with the Essence of
Pepper, or a Plaster of Tacamahac with Oil of Amber, are very useful on this
occasion.

15. If the Pains of the Head are caused by Worms, Take of the Powder of Aloe
and of Earthworms, of each two Drams; the Gall of a Bull a Dram, Oil of
Wormwood and Wax, of each a sufficient quantity for a Plaster, to be applied
to the Head. Then make a Fumigation of the following Powder, to be received by
Mouth and Nose.

Take of the Pouders of lesser Centory, Horehound and Betony, of each two
Drams; Zedoary half a Dram, Roots of Angelica two Drams, Amber a Dram, Crude
Antimony an Ounce, Millet Seeds (or Ginger) a Dram and a half, Bole Armenic a
Dram, Roots of round Birthwort two Drams, Wormwood two or three Drams: Make a
Powder for a Fumigation.

A sneezing Medicine, composed of Pepper and Castor; and the Fumes of Spirit of
Wine, Myrrh, and Seeds of Fennel Flower, conveyed into the Ear, are convenient
in this case.

16. If the Pains proceed from immoderat Drinking, Vomits and Purges are first
required: Then Pepper, Cephalic Spirit of Vitriol, and Elixir Proprietatis.
Cold Water with Vinegar may be thrown upon the Head and Stones.

17. When one half of the Head only is affected, it is called a Hemicrania, and
is the highest degree of Headachs. A Cataplasm of the Root of a wild Cucumber,
or Bryony, with Vervain and Wormwood, or a Decoction of them, may be applied to
the Part affected. Or,

Take of Euphorbium one Ounce, sweet Oil a Pound, let them boil together; then
add three Ounces of Wax, and make an Ointment, to be applied to the Temples,
Forehead, etc.

18. If it arise from the Womb, apply a Bag of Amber and Essence of Pepper, or
a Plaster of Tacamahac and Oil of Amber.

In all these particular cases the general Evacuations must be first taken care
of, and no external Medicines are sufficient for the Cure without the
Assistance of Internals.

ART. VII. Of Arthritic Pains.
THE Parts immediately affected are the membranous Ligaments surrounding the
Joints. The Cause is a volatile Acid joined to the Spirits, which gnaws the
Membrans, and thickens their nutritious Juice. This Acid takes its first rise
from the Disorders of the Stomac. It displays it self in the Foot, and is
called the Gout; in the Huckle Bones, and is called the Sciatica; in the Hands,
and several other Parts of the Body. Sometimes it is hereditary. In other cases
it is acquired by the use of acid Wine, Venery and Passion, or any Commotion of
the Spirits that increases the Acid in the Body.

This Acid affects chiefly the solid Parts, and serves to depurat the Blood and
fluid Humors. When it invades a solid Part, it leaves some small Particles in
it that afterward revive, and make a new Paroxism.

The Paroxysm is ushered in by a Constipation of the Belly, difficulty of
Breathing, an unsufferable Heat at the Stomac, Thirst and loss of Appetite. In
the Gout the great Toe is first affected; in the Sciatica the Huckle Bone,
where it receives the Bone of the Thigh, and all the Membrans from thence
downward to the Foot are contracted. If the Acid be sharp and fiery, these
Symptoms are aggravated; if it be viscid, and what we call cold, the Symptoms
are weaker, and the Fits of a longer Duration.

In forming Prognostics, we may expect the Paroxysm when the wonted Excrements
betwixt the Toes disappear, and the Belly is constipated. The Sciatica is more
obstinat than the Gout; which if inveterat, hereditary, or attended by Nodes,
is incurable in old Men. If the Joints adjacent to the Original of the Nerves
be seized, it portends Death. If any part be put out of Joint by arthritic
Pains, it is a hard matter to set it right. The frequency of bad Symptoms, and
the moving of the Pains toward the Throat and upper Parts betokens Death. If
the Paroxysm do not finish its Course, but break off abruptly, it is an ill Omen.

As for the Cure. When we foresee a Paroxysm, it is convenient first to exhibit
the Powder of Crabs Eyes with Salt of Tartar and Osteocolla; then a Vomit, and
afterward the following Purge.

Take of Cream of Tartar, Salt of Wormwood, Arcanum duplicatum, of each eight
Grains; Digrydium three Grains: make a Powder. Or,

Take of the Conserve of Rosemary, Conserve of Sage, of each six Drams;
Paracelsus his purging Powder for the Gout a Dram and a half; Rosin of Jalap
half a Scruple; with Syrup of Buckthorn, make an Electuary.

All purging Medicines ought to be avoided during the increase of the Fit; but
after it has passed the height, and the Fever and other Symptoms have
disappeared, give what follows.

Take of Ruffius his Pills de tribus, Extract of black Hellebor, of each half a
Scruple, Turbith Mineral prepared with Spirit of Sulphur two or three Grains:
make Pills.

Opiats ought never to be used, but after the universal Evacuations, and along
with purging and sweating Specifics. As,

Take of the Pills Aloephanginae two Drams, Laudanum Opiatum half a Dram; make
Pills for four Doses, to be taken in Wine, fasting three or four hours after.

Take of prepared Crabs Eyes, Mynsichtus his Arcanum Duplicatum, of each twelve
Grains, Salt of Amber six Grains, Hysteric Laudanum three Grains: make a
Powder. Or,

Take of Triacle from half a Dram to a Dram, Salt of Wormwood a Scruple: with
Wine make a Draught. Or,

Take of Fennel Water, Water of Carduus Benedictus, of each an Ounce and a
half; Spirit of putrified Earthworms a Dram and a half; Salt Ammoniac,
Magistery of Corals prepared with Juice of Citrons, of each half a Dram;
laudanum Opiatum two Grains, Syrup of Orange Peel half an Ounce: mix.

In Arthritic Pains Blood-letting is pernicious. But in the Sciatica, it is
needful in the beginning of the Paroxysm, to open a Vein in the Foot of the
same Side with the affected Part. Clysters ought to be injected, during the
whole Course of the Paroxysm.

The Specifics that are proper in the Paroxysm are sweating Medicines, both
fixed and volatile, as red Corals, Cinnabar of Antimony, volatile Salt of
Hartshorn or of Vipers; Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, Volatile Spirit of Tartar, and
the Decoction of Sudorific Woods: Antiscorbutics ought to be mixed with 'em.

External Medicines ought not to be applied till the Paroxysm have arrived at
its height. In a hot Gout, attended by Inflammations, take Quick Lime and Sal
Ammoniac; pour Spirit of Wine upon 'em, and distill, adding to the distilled
Spirit a little Camphyr. Apply it to the Part. Or,

Take of Aqua Articularis ad extra two Ounces, Spirit of Worms an Ounce, Spirit
of Sal Ammoniac three Drams: mix and use as above. Or,

Take a sufficient quantity of Elder Flowers beaten, put 'em into a new earthen
Vessel, so that the Vessel may be full: stop it close, and set it under ground
till the Flowers be converted into a Liquor: to be applied hot with a Cloth.

Mullen Flowers, Henbane Flowers, may be boiled in Milk; or the Leaves of
Valerian or Burdock may be applied to the Part with good Success. Or,

Take of the Crumbs of white Bread three Ounces, Powder of Marshmallow Roots one
Ounce, Flowers of Chamomile, Meal of Beans half an Ounce, Meal of Linseeds and
Fenugrec, of each three Drams. Boil them in a sufficient quantity of Milk, to
the Consistency of a Pultise: then add of Vnguentum Anodynum an Ounce, Balsam
of Soap two Drams: with the Yelk of one Egg, make a Cataplasm.

The Lean of Beef applied to the Part, and changed Morning and Evening, is much
commended. Human Dung and Urine are likewise proper. Or,

Take of Ox Dung one Pound, Rose Water, and Water of Speedwel, of each two
Ounces; the Yelk of an Egg beaten up with a little Alum, Saffron a Dram,
Camphyr a Scruple. Mix.

The Plaster of Frogs Spawn with a large quantity of Sugar of Lead, or
Tachenius's Plaster de Alcalibus, with Camphyr, are proper. All oily things
ought to be avoided, and the Cataplasins or Plasters frequently renewed.

If the Gout be cold, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac prepared with Quicklime and Spirit
of Urine may be applied. Or,

Take of Venice Soap an Ounce and a half, Camphyr six Drams, Castor half a
Dram. Dissolve in a sufficient quantity of Spirit of Earth Worms. Apply with a
Feather to the Parts affected.

The Oil of Soap, or the Roots of black Hellebor boiled in Rock Oil; or Balsam
of Peru mixed with the Yelk of an Egg and Spirit of Worms; or Tacamahac, mixed
with Oil of Amber; or Mysinchtus his Diaphoretic Plaster, mixed with Triacle
and stinking Oil of Tartar; or Triacle mixed with Spirit of Salt Ammoniac, are
all much esteemed in this case.

Blistering Plasters ought to be cautiously used. In a cold Gout perhaps they
are not amiss.

If the Pains are followed by Nodes or hard Swellings, apply Spirit of Quick
Lime or old Cheese with the Decoction of Pork, or a thin plate of Lead to the
part.

The Cure of the Sciatica differs in some things from that of other arthritic
pains. In this Leeches applied to the Hemorrhoid Veins are very useful; after
which inject sharp Clysters, as,

Take one Coloquintida Apple, and divide it into four equal parts. Tie one part
in a Bag, and boil it in Wine and Child's Urine, of each a Pint, adding a
handful of Honey-suckles, till two thirds be consumed. Inject it for a Clyster.

Vomits and strong Purges are more allowable in the beginning of a Sciatica,
than of the other sorts. And in the progress of the Disease, Troches Alhandal,
and sweet Mercury, are safely given. As for external Remedies, the following
Cerecloth is equaled by none.

Take of Pitch four Ounces, Turpentine half an Ounce; Mastic, Amber, of each
two Drams; Brimstone in Powder half an Ounce: make a Cerecloth.

I cured the Sciatica in a young Gentleman by this Method. He being plethoric,
I first ordered a Vein to be opened; then I prescribed thus:

Take of Diaphoretic Antimony, Chalybeat Bezoar, of each half a Scruple;
Diaphoretic Gold five Grains: make a Powder to be frequently repeated.

Take of the Waters of Mother of Thyme, of Mint and Elder Flowers, of each one
Ounce; Spirit of Sal Ammoniac a Dram and a half, prepared human Bones two
Scruples, Diaphoretic Antimony a Scruple, Laudanum Opiatum three Grains, Syrup
of Carduus Benedictus six Drams. Mix, and give it by Spoonfuls.

Take of the Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, Liquor of Hartshorn with Amber, of each a
Dram and a half: Mix and reserve for use.

Externally I applied the abovementioned Cerecloth for some days; then I
ordered the part to be rubbed and fomented with the following Mixtures.

Take of Aqua Articularis ad extra an Ounce and a half, Spirit of Salt Ammoniac
prepared with Quicklime six Drams. Mix, etc.

Take of Aqua Articularis ad extra two Ounces, Spirit of Juniper Berries one
Ounce, Balsam of Peru dissolved with the Yelk of an Egg three Drams. Mix.

Cataplasms of Antiscorbutic Herbs boiled in Wine, and bathing in Wine, or in
the Decoction of Ants in Wine, are much commended.

If after the Paroxysm there remain a Swelling, it is proper to fumigate the
part with Wormwood, Rocket and Mugwort, boiled in Wine and Water, or to apply
the Nurimberg Plaster. The Decoctions of Aromatic Vegetables in Wine are good
for strengthening the Joints. If there remain a Weakness in the Joints, without
any Swelling, let Issues be cut in several parts of the Body: And indeed an
Issue in the Groin is not improper.

Thus much for what is proper to be done in the Paroxysms. It remains now
briefly to point out the Method of preventing them. The vicious Acid must be
carefully rooted out of the Stomac, by the use of Mercurial and Antimonial
Preparations, and a regular Diet. Those who are meagre, and can easily digest
Milk, may confine themselves to a Milk Diet.

Vomits are absolutely necessary. Turbith Mineral, sweet Mercury, black
Hellebor and Coloquyntida, are much used. Gentle Purges, and such as regard the
Stomac, are best. Sweat ought to be frequently procured by the use of
Diaphoretic Antimony, Antichecticum Poterii, Antimonial Sulphurs, and urinous
Sudorifics. Next are Diuretics, which are of excellent use in preventing the
Gout: As Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, of Worms, of Hartshorn, etc. or the greazy
Stagflies; or,

Take of prepared Crabs Eyes two Scruples, prepared red Coral a Scruple,
Volatile Salt of Amber fifteen Grains: Mix for three Doses.

As for Alteratives, Aromatic Volatile Medicines are proper. As,

Take of the Roots of Elecampane, Pyony and Avens, of each six Drams; China
Roots one Ounce; Of the Herbs, Sage, Baum, Germander, Ground Pine, of each a
handful. Rosemary tops two handfuls, Juniper Berries an Ounce and a half;
Galangal, Ginger, Cinnamon, of each two Drams; Salt of Tartar from three to
four Drams. Tie them in a Bag to be infused in Wine. Or,

Take of the Herbs Germander and Strawberry, of each a handful and a half; Rest
Harrow, Flowers of St. John's Wort, of each a handful; Bryony Roots an Ounce
and a half, Sarsaperilla one Ounce, Nephritic Wood three Ounces, fresh Juniper
Berries half a Pound, Aromatic Costus three Drams; tie them in a Bag to be put
into fermenting Ale.

A Salivation may be attempted before the Disease be confirmed; but afterward
it is dangerous.

It Is usual also to make Washes for the Feet. As, Take of Juniper Berries half
a Pound; of the Herb Rosemary six handfuls; Mother of Thyme, and Marjoram or
Sage, of each two handfuls. Boil them in Lees; and bathe the Feet at Night
going to Bed.

CHAP. IV. Of the Disorders of the Sense of Tasting.
THE Nerves of the Tongue terminat in a great many Glandules, dispersed along
its Surface; which are endowed with such a peculiar Texture, as to be sensible
of the various Impressions of the minutest saline Particles, according to their
respective Circumstances; in which consists the sense of Taste.

This Sense is extinguished or rendered dull by the misplacing of the Nerves of
the Tongue, the relaxation of its Fibers, sharp Defluxions, or Paralytic and
Apoplectic Diseases. It Is sometimes vitiated, and counterfeits false Tastes, by
virtue of the Depravation of the Spittle; as in Scorbutic, Hypochondriac, and
Catarrhous Cases, or those of a Jaundice or internal Ulcers. This Depravation
is cured by taking a Vomit, drinking Whey with Juice of Citrons or mineral
Spirits, and removing the principal Cause. In case of an Abolition or Flatness,
Aromatic and Cephalic Medicines are proper. Horseradish Roots chewed in the
mouth, or the Juice of Sorrel and Purslain, used by way of Gargal, are of noted
virtue for restoring the Taste.

If the Muscles of the Windpipe, or the recurrent Nerves are seized with a
Palsy or Convulsions, there insues an Aphonia or want of Voice, which, if
attended by a Hick-cough, is very dangerous.

In the Method of curing an Aphonia, the remote causes which occasion the
relaxation or contraction of the Muscles or Nerves must be taken care of.
Internally give the Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, or of Hartshorn with Castor or
Amber. In an inveterat Palsy the Decoction of Sudorific Woods is very proper.
Sometimes it is convenient to procure a Salivation by chewing.

For external Use, apply to the Neck a Bag of aromatic Ingredients sprinkled
with Spirit of Wine; or bathe it with the Essence of Castor, Spirit of Worms or
of Ants, or the distilled Oils of Amber, Lavender, Rue, Juniper, mixed with
Triacle, or Balsam of Peru. After a fit of an Apoplexy give what follows.

Take of the Herbs Sage, and Rosemary, of each a handful; Rocket-seeds two
drams: boil them in a sufficient quantity of simple Water in a close Vessel. To
a Pint of the strained Liquor add Spirit of Black Cherries six Drams, Spirit of
Sal armoniack a Dram; Honey of Rosemary Flowers one Ounce: mix for a Gargal.
It Is proper to open a Vein under the Tongue, if the Circumstances of the
Patient admit of it.

Sometimes the Muscles of the Windpipe are in good order, and the Voice
remains, but cannot be formed into an articulat Sound or Speech, by reason of
the Paralytic or Apoplectic Disorders of the Tongue. In this case

Take of the Herbs, Rosemary, Marjoram, Sage, of each a handful; Roots of
Pellitory of Spain, half an Ounce; Rocket-seeds or Mustard-seeds, two or three
Drams; Cloves a Dram; boil them in a close Vessel in Water. To a pint of the
strained Liquor, add Spirit of Juniper Berries, or of Black Cherries, from six
Drams to an Ounce and a half; Spirit of Sal-armoniac prepared with Quicklime,
or with Cloves, from a Dram to a Dram and a half; Honey of Rosemary Flowers,
from six Drams to an Ounce: make a Gargal. Or,

Take of Sage, Hyssop, Acorus, of each a handful; boil them in Water. Strain
the Liquor, and add an Ounce of Oxymel of Squills. Mix for a Gargal.

Take of Rocket-seeds, Squills, Onyons, Smallage, of each half a Dram; Ginger,
Pepper, Cinnamom, and Nutmegs, of each a Dram; Of the Pouders Diambra,
Diamoschus dulcis, and Dianthos, of each two Scruples. With a sufficient
quantity of Aqua Vitae make a Mixture, and anoint the Tongue and Palate.

The Essence of Castor, or Castor it self applied to the bridle of the Tongue,
is very useful, especially for the stuttering of Children. The distilled Oils
of Cloves or Aniseeds, or Amber; the Cephalic Spirit of Vitriol, or Spirit of
Black Cherries, or Spirit of Triacle with Camphyr, etc. are all very proper. As,

Take of Mithridat three Drams, Extract of Castor half a Dram; distilled Oils
of Lavender, Amber and Aniseeds, of each four drops: mix, and rub the Tongue.

Take of Mithridat three ounces, candy'd Roots of Acorus an ounce; Ginger,
Nutmegs, of each two drams; Volatile Salt of Amber a dram. Mix all together in a
Mortar, and add of the Juice of Sage clarified an ounce, and scum'd Honey as
much as suffices, to make an Electuary, which sprinkle with distilled Oil of
Aniseeds or Amber; rub the Tongue frequently with it, and lay about the bigness
of a Nutmeg upon it, to be swallowed down by degrees.

If old People are seized with a difficulty of Speech, exhibit every Morning
and Evening an ounce of the Essence of Lavender Flowers infused in Spirit of
Wine.

A Cataplasm of Lees with Amber or Oil of Amber, and other Cephalic
Ingredients, may be applied to the top of the Head with good success.

CHAP. V. Of the Disorders of the sense of Smelling.
THE Organ of Smelling is the Membrane placed near to the sieve-like Bone above
the Nostrils; which is variously affected by the different Textures of the
sulphurous Particles that proceed from external Objects.

This Sense is abolished or impaired by the Apoplectic, Paralytic, and
Convulsive Disorders of the Spirits, by the obstruction of the Passages, or
Compression of the nervous Filaments that reach to the Nostrils; and by the
relaxation of the Membrane; which may be occasioned internally by copious
Defluxious, and externally by the forcible Impressions of odoriferous or
sneezing things. If it proceed from this last Cause, it is almost incurable.

As for the Cure. The Disorders of the Spirits ought to be redressed; the
Defluxions prevented, and external offending Objects removed betimes. The
Medicines that are proper for these different purposes are recounted elsewhere.

Marjoram and Fennel Flowers are two noted Specifics in this case. The Extract
or Essence of Marjoram mixed with the Oils or Essences of Penny Royal and
Rosemary, may be taken inwardly from eight grains to half a scruple.

Take of the Oils of Fennel-flower, and of Orris, of each half a dram;
distilled Oil of Marjoram half a scruple. Apply it to the inner side of the
Nostrils; it is admirable in the case of an Obstruction or Catarrh. Or,

Take of Marjoram and Fennel-flower-seeds, each two drams: sprinkle 'em with
some drops of distilled Oil of Marjoram or of Aniseeds; and, according to Art,
make a little Bag for the Nostrils.

Take of Fennel-flower-seeds infused in strong Vinegar, and afterward dried,
Rue, Fumitory and Castor, of each a dram; reduce them to a fine Powder, and
with Child's Urine beat it up into the form of a Syrup. Let the Patient snuff
up five or six drops in the Morning fasting, leaning his head backwards, and
holding warm Water in his mouth.

The Obstruction of the Nostrils may be caused by a Polypus, or fleshy
Excrescency, that fills up the space. Sometimes it rises from the glandulous
Membran at the top of the Nostrils, but more frequently from the nervous
Filaments in the sieve-like Bone. Sometimes it descends to the inside of the
Mouth. Sometimes it has but one stalk, at other times more. Its Color is white
or red; if it be livid and painful, it is near akin to a Cancer.

It proceeds from the Corruption and Redundancy of the nutritious Juice, and
the occasional breach of the Unity of the Part. If it be white, soft, and
painless, it is a good sign. If it is deep rooted, and reaches to the nervous
Filaments, it is dangerous.

The Cure is chiefly performed by external Applications: If the Body be
disordered, it is not improper to prepare it by internal evacuating and altering
Medicines. The external Remedies must be used in the last quarter of the Moon,
because the Swelling then decreases. The milder sort are the juice of
Pomegranats. Mustard-seeds mixed with Vinegar, the juice of Onopostus (a sort
of Thistle) the Powder of Turnsole, the Juice of Watercresses, or the Juice of
the roots of Aron; all which may be applied with Cotton to the part affected.
The fiercer Remedies are sublimate Mercury, Verdigreese and Lees; the Acid
mineral Spirits, Aqua fortis, etc. As,

Take of the Juice of Pomegranats three parts, Oil of Vitriol one part; mix. Or
take of the Oil of Vitriol a scruple, burnt Alum a dram, Plantain Water an
ounce; mix, and sprinkle the Polypus with it. Or,

Take of the Cerecloth of Myrtles an ounce, of the Ointment called Aegyptiacum
two drams; mix for a Liniment: you may sharpen it with precipitat Mercury
frequently washed. Or,

Take of the Ointment Aegyptiacum. half an Ounce, the Rinds of Pomegranats and
Galls, of each half a dram; Oil of Vitriol a scruple: Mix, and touch the
Polypus with it every day.

In applying these Caustics, care must be taken that they touch not the
neighboring parts, by using a silver Fistula, or Cotton, or a Tent.

If a Polypus have any tendency to a Cancer, it ought not to be meddled with.
If it be ulcerated, apply the Water or Ashes of Frogs, Powder of Crabs, Lead
melted and dulcified, the Crocus of Steel, and such like.

If it only hang by one stalk, it may be cut off, or a thread of Silk well
waxed tied about the root. After it is taken off, the bleeding must be stopped
by Astringents, and the Powder of Gentian with the Juice of Figwort applied on
a Tent to the Nostrils, in order to prevent its return.

The Smell may be adulterated by an Ulcer in the Nostrils called Ozaena, which
sometimes seizes only the membranous soft parts, at other times the Cartilages
and Bones. It may occasion bleeding at the Nose, or a plentiful Evacuation of
sordid matter, or a Corruption of the adjacent parts, or a Polypus.

The external Causes of an Ozaena are various; the internal for the most part
is the Pox. It ought to be cautiously handled for fear of a Cancer: If it be
inveterat, and affect the sieve-like Bone, it is not easily cured.

The Ulcer may be cleans'd by snuffing up the Decoction of lesser Centory, and
Aromatic Calami^s in Wine, till the patient be sensible of its falling into the
Palate; or Marjoram Water with Honey, Myrrh, Sugar Candy, and a little Cinnamon.

Take of the Ointment of Tobacco three drams, Balsam of Sulphur for external
use a dram; mix, and apply to the Ulcer. The fresh Leaves of Tobacco may be put
into the Nose, and kept there some months, then taken out and anointed with
this Balsam.

If there appear a Crust upon the Ulcer, it ought not to be removed by force;
but by applying Oil of Sweet Almonds, or Oil of Roses with fresh Butter: and
then proceed to the cleansing Remedies; among which Clary boiled with Honey of
Roses is the most noted. The Decoction of Agrimony and Vervain in Honey, or
Child's Urine, or the smoke of a red Wax-candle received at the Nostrils, are
proper for the same purpose. Or,

Take of Marjoram and Plantain Water, of each an ounce and a half; rectified
Spirit of Wine three drams, Honey of Roses six drams: mix, and inject with a
Syringe. If it do not yield to these Medicines, we must have recourse to
Mercurial Preparations. As,

Take of Plantain Water four ounces, in which dissolve of Sublimat Mercury
twelve grains; strain the Liquor, and apply it to the Ulcer.

Sweet Mercury well dulcified, or precipitat Mercury with Ointment of Roses, or
the Ointment Aegyptiacum may be applied with a Tent to the Ulcer; or Oil of
Vitriol dropped on a little Cotton may be applied twice or thrice, and then
followed by proper Ointments.

SECT. III. Of the Disorders of the Internal Senses and Animal Functions.
THE Internal Senses depend upon the various Motion and Agitation of the
Spirits in the Brain. The Organs of External Sense communicate the Impressions
they receive from Objects to the Original of the Nerves, where a Motion not
unlike to their own insues, and is called Common Sense. This Motion in the
Common Sensory is imparted to the Spirits in the Corpus Callosum, where the
Fancy resides. The Spirits thus moved, roll to and again among the Nerves of
the Cerebrum and Cerebellum; and their frequent returns through the same Passages
are christened, The Memory.

These Faculties are equally compatible to Men and Brutes, and are
distinguished from those of the rational Soul by their unacquaintedness with
reflex Knowledge. If they are disordered, all the Functions and Motions of the
Body suffer by it. The natural and involuntary Motion sof the nervous Fibers
that surround the Stomach and Guts, depend upon the regular Recruits of Spirits
conveyed through the Nerves from the Cerebellum; and those of the Muscles which
obey the command of our Wills, are owing to the due distribution of the Spirits
from the Cerebrum. This Motion of the Muscles is performed by contraction. The
Spirits crowd into the Cavities of the Fibers, and by extending their width
abridg their length, and in the interim the arterial Blood flows copiously into
the middle of the musculary Fibers, where it meets with least resistance. Thus
the bloated Muscle contracts it self, and exchanges its Rhomboides Figure for a
Rectangular Form.

CHAP. I. Of a Swimming in the Head, or a preternatural Commotion of the
Spirits in the Brain.
THERE are several degrees observable in this Distemper: Sometimes there is
only an apprehension that all things are carried round and tossed up and down;
sometimes it is attended by a dimness of the Eyesight, and a false
representation of various Colors; and ofttimes the Sight is quite lost, and
the Person falls down, which is mostly followed by Convulsions and a tingling
in the Ears.

The part affected is the Eye, where the Spirits wheel round, and make such
Impressions on the Retina, as external circular Motions are wont to produce.
This proceeds from the irregular and confused Incursions of the Spirits, and
their imprisonment in the round Globe of the Eye. The dimness and loss of Sight
proceeds from the interruption and deficiency of Spirits; in which case their
whole System is disordered, and the other Senses are brought into trouble.

If a Dizziness proceed originally from some disorder in the Brain, it is called
essential; but that rarely happens: For the most part it is a Symptom of other
Diseases, especially those of the Stomac: For the least disturbance of the
Orifice of the Stomac does quickly disorder the Spirits in the Brain. Some
studious and hypochondriac Persons are apt to be seized with a swimming while
their Stomac is empty, but by eating ward it off. Vomiting generally attends
it: and drinking, eating of windy Meat, and sulphurous Fumes offensive to the
Stomac, are apt to cause it. Old Men whose digestion is weak, hysteric Women,
and Persons troubled with Worms in the Guts, or disorders of the Spleen or
Kidneys, are obnoxious to it: For the Contraction of the Membranes of those
parts is continued to the Brain; which resembles the ascending of Vapors, and
so gives occasion to the vulgar Mistake.

Sometimes a swimming may be caused by a redundancy of Blood, or by its
vaporous halituous Disposition, as in scorbutic and hypochondriac Cases. If it
proceed from an original Disorder of the Brain, it is caused by external
accidents, or the accession of heterogeneous Particles, or an immoderat
Consumption of the Spirits.

A Symptomatical Dizziness is distinguished by the concurring Disorders of
other parts, and the apparent good order of the Brain. If it be inveterat, it
portends an Apoplexy in old Persons, and Convulsions in those that are young.
It Is more or less feared according to the height of its degrees. If it seize
the hinder part of the head more than the fore part, it is more dangerous.

The Cure of preservation takes place after the Paroxysms, and is performed by
Vomits and stomachic Medicines, when it owes its Original to the Stomac. If the
Stomac be not faulty, gentle Purges may stand in the room of Vomits. But fierce
Purgatives ought always to be carefully avoided. Upon the whole, Dizziness and
Convulsions require the same Remedies.

In the time of the Fit it is necessary to commence the Cure by a Vomit, by
reason that for the most part it arises from the Disorders of the Stomac; or at
least sharp Clysters must be injected.

Take Mysichcius his Emetic Tartar two grains, Sal ammoniac depurated nine
grains: mix, and make a Powder.

After vomiting, Take of the Pills of Mastic a scruple, Extract of Agaric five
grains, Scammony sulphurated two grains, distilled Oil of Amber two drops. With
Essence of Amber make Pills. Crato's Pills of Amber with Extract of
Coloquintida, or the Pills called Aloephanginae, are likewise proper. Or,

Take of sweet Mercury fifteen grains, Scammony sulphurated three grains: make
a Powder.

If the swimming be inveterat, strong or frequent Purgatives are improper. It Is
sufficient every New Moon or Full Moon to give at night a dose of gentle
loosening Pills, composed of Aloe, Gum Ammoniac, Myrrh, Mastic, and the like.

Bloodletting is for the most part noxious: But in a suppression of a wonted
Evacuation, or a Redundancy, or Inflammation of the Blood, it is not improper.

Sneezing Medicines ought to be carefully avoided. Issues and Blistering
Plasters, are of excellent use for old Persons, or Cacochymical Dispositions.
In a suppression of the Piles, or disorder of the Womb, the Legs are their
proper Seat. When the Paroxysm is over, the cure of preservation commences. As,

Take of Galangal half an ounce, Cubebs two drams, Sugar a dram and a half:
make a Powder; Dose, two drams with Biscuit dipped in Wine an hour or two before
Supper or Dinner. Or,

Take of Piony Seeds, Coriander Seeds, Nutmegs, Misselto of the Oak, Cubebs,
Galangal, of each two Drams; long Pepper, Ginger, Tormentil Roots, and Rosemary
Leaves, of each a Dram. Make a Powder; Dose, half a Dram at pleasure.

Elixir Proprietatis with Spirit of Mastic, or Elixir of Mint, or Galangal
mixed with Amber, are proper to this purpose. Or,

Take of the Conserves of Rosemary Flowers, of Sage, of Marjoram, of each half
an Ounce; Ginger candi'd in the Indies, Nutmegs candi'd, of each three Drams;
Rocket Seeds, Mustard Seeds, of each a Dram and a half; prepared Amber two
Drams; Cardamom, Cubebs, Galangal, of each a Scruple; volatile Salt of Amber
half a Dram; Spirit of Black-cherries a Dram. With Syrup of Clove Gillyflowers,
make an Electuary. Dose, the bigness of a Nutmeg Morning and Evening. For old
Persons Confection- Alkermes may be added.

Take of the Conserves of Mint, of Baum, of each half a Dram; Cinnabar of
Antimony half a Scruple; distilled Oils of Rosemary, of Amber, of each two
Drops: with Syrup of Mint make a Bolus.

These are the proper Remedies for a symptomatical or less inveterat Giddiness;
but if it prove habitual, Specifics must be added. As,

Take of the Essences of Chervil, Sage, and common Basil, of each a Dram;
Castor a Dram and a half, Amber half a Dram. Dose, forty or fifty Drops twice a
day. Or,

Take of Conserve of Rosemary-flowers three Ounces, distilled Oils of Boxwood
(which is much esteemed) Nutmegs and Mint, of each half a Dram: make an
Electuary. Dose half a Dram. Or,

Take of the Juices of Wormwood, Horehound and Stechas; Pouders of Mastic,
Rhubarb, Germander and Ground Pine, of each three Drams; Hyssop a Dram, Agaric
two Ounces five Drams and a half: make an Electuary. Or,

Take of Triacle of Andromachus, and Conserve of Sage, of each one part;
Conserve of Roses two parts. With Honey of Rosemary-flowers, make an Electuary.

Peacocks Dung is a famous Specific. It Is often dried and given in Powder with
Sugar, or infused in Wine, or any convenient Vehicle; or in the form of an
Electuary with Conserve of Rosemary Flowers. A compound Powder may be
prescribed thus:

Take of Peacocks Dung three Ounces, Male Piony Roots an Ounce, Powder of
Cloves three Drams. Make a Powder.

The Brains of Sparrows are recommended by some. As, Take the Brains of fifty
Sparrows; Veal Brains washed in Wine, and dried in Smoke, Filberds, of each an
Ounce; Mithridat three Drams. With Syrup of Citron Peel make an Electuary.

The Spirit of Hartshorn prepared with Amber, Castor, and Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac anisated, are mightily approved for this purpose.

In the mineral Province Cinnabar is a famous Specific. Let it be used thus:

Take of Peacocks Dung in Powder three Drams, Cinnabar of Antimony or native
Cinnabar two Drams; Cubebs, Galangal, and volatile Salt of Amber, of each half a
Dram: make a Powder. Add as much of distilled Oil of Aniseeds mixed with Sugar,
as suffices to render it grateful. Take now and then as much as will lie upon
the Point of a Knife, or exhibit it in the following Mixture.

Take of Chervil-water three Ounces, Sage-water an Ounce and a half,
Cinnamon Water six Drams; Spirit of Lilly Convally, and of Sage, of each three
Drams: mix for the use abovementioned. Or,

Take of Chervil-water three Ounces, Spirit of Hartshorn with Amber a Dram: mix.

Amber may be given inwardly, and its Oil applied to the Crown of the Head:
Rock Oil may supply the want of Oil of Boxwood. As, Take of Conserve of Mint an
Ounce, Conserve of Rosemary Flowers half an Ounce, white Rock Oil a Dram: with
Syrup of Mint make an Electuary. If you please, you may add fifteen Grains of
Salt of Amber. I have cured some with a Vomit and this Electuary alone.

In the last Extremity we have recourse to Laudanum Opiatum mixed with Amber or
volatile Medicines, which ofttimes proves more effectual than any other thing.
As,

Take of Sage-water an Ounce and a half, Mint-water an Ounce, Spirit of Lilly
Convally three Drams, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac a Dram and a half, Laudanum
Opiatum two or three Grains; Syrup of Orange Flowers three Drams: Mix. Or,

Take of Black-cherry Water, Mint-water, and Lilly Convally Water prepared with
Wine, of each an Ounce; Spirit of black Cherries three Drams; Essence of Castor
a Dram and a half; Volatile Salt of Hartshorn a Scruple; Volatile Salt of Amber
half a Scruple; Syrup of Clove Gillyflowers half an Ounce. Mix; and give a
spoonful or two in the Fit.

If the Disease be caused by the Disorders of the Womb, Take of Swallow-water
an Ounce and a half; Baum-water prepared with Wine an Ounce; Spirit of Lilly
Convally, Spirit of black Cherries, of each a Dram; Spirit of Sal Ammoniac half
a Dram; Volatile Salt of Amber fifteen Grains; Laudanum Opiatum two or three
Grains, Syrup of Orange Peel half an Ounce. Mix, and use as above.

Essence of Castor, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, distilled Oil of Amber, and in a
word whatever is used in Epileptic Fits, may be applied to the Head, Temples,
Nostrils, Breast, etc.

CHAP. II. Of the irregular Incursions of the Spirits into the external Parts.
THE Instruments of all Motion are the Fibers, whether gathered into a Muscie,
or dispersed in a Membran. The Muscles (for the most part) receive Spirits from
the Cerebrum, and their regular Motions depend upon the Will. The other Fibers
are supplied with Spirits from the Cerebellum, and perform involuntary Motions.
If either the musculary or membranous Fibers are preternaturally; moved, the
former without the direction of the Will, or the latter with Violence and Pain;
we call them Convulsive Motions. If the Part be contracted and remain immovable
in the same posture, it is called Convulsio tonica, and divided into several
sorts. If the Head be drawn forwards toward the Breast, it is called
Emprosthotonos. Vid. Hipoc. Sect. 4. Aph. 35. If backwards, Opisthotonos: If it
be stiff and immovable to either side, Tetanos. The Convulsions of the Yard in
a Priapismus, of the Jaws in a Dog Cramp, of the Knees, Arms, etc. are all
included under this general. If the Contraction of the Part cease and return
alternatly, it is called a Concussion or Convulsio Clonica.

ART. I. Of alternat Convulsions, and the Epilepsy or Falling Sickness.
THE Epilepsy is an alternat Concussion of several Members of the Body,
attended for the most part by a Cessation of Sense. It admits of three degrees.
The first is not different from the third degree of a Vertigo; of which above.
The second is, when the whole Body is tossed with convulsive Motions, and the
Senses both internal and external, either remain in their wonted State, or
become delirious. The Person is taken with Laughter, Crying, Screeking,
Singing; beats his Breast, talks ridiculously, skips up and down the room, and
performs a great many antic Actions: And when the Fit is over, is perfectly
ignorant of all that passed. Melancholy Persons are obnoxious to it; and for
them the Spirit of Hartshorn prepared with Amber is a proper Cure. This kind of
Epilepsies is very unfrequent. But the third sort is very common, that is, when
the Body is thrown upon the Ground; all Reason and Sense abolished; the Thumbs
shut close within the Hands; the Feet tremble; the Arms tossed about; the Teeth
gnash against one another, and bite the Tongue and Lips; Froth is cast forth at
the Mouth; and the whole Body is successively lifted up and depressed. And when
these Symptoms remit, the Person slumbers and groans; and when he comes to
himself, complains of a Heaviness of the Head, and a Weariness of the Joints,
but remembers nothing that passed.

The Part immediately affected is the Fibers. If the external musculary Fibers
are only affected, it is called an external Convulsion. If the Internal are
seized, it is called Internal. As in Nephritic, Colic, Hypochondriac and
Hysteric Fits, and the Pains of Women after Delivery. These Convulsions of the
internal Membrans are apt to cause Convulsions in the external Muscles, by
communicating their Disorder to the Brain; and so produce an universal Epilepsy.

The immediate Cause is the rapid, unequal, and disorderly Motion of the
Spirits; for the Spirits are equally the Cause both of natural and
preternatural Motions. If the Sickness be inveterat or hereditary, perhaps the
Animal Spirits are degenerat from their natural Constitution, and become more
elastic and moveable.

The remote Causes are, the Irritation of any sensible part, as the puncture of
a Nerve; the Collection of heterogeneous Particles in the Brain, or their
mixture with the Spirits; as in Wounds of the Head, malignant Fevers, and the
Cessation of any wonted Evacuation of Blood. Sometimes the vicious Recrements
of the Blood are conveyed to the Brain with the Lympha, and infect the Spirits,
or mix with them; and sometimes are lodged in other parts. These noxious
Particles are nitrosulphureous, and in some measure Elastic, according to
Willis; and the nature of the Remedies used against them sufficiently proves
them to be acid. Upon which account it is that Scorbutic, Hypochondriac and
Hysteric Persons are most liable to Convulsions: for the peccant Acid infinuats
it self into the fibrous and tendinous Parts of the Muscles, and renders them
stiff and unwieldy. And besides, supposing it did not lodge in the Muscle, it
affects the Nerves wherever it is, and depraves the chylous Juice of the
Glandules, especially those of the Mesentery, where it often lurks. This Acid
is for the most part bred in the Stomac or first ways, and frequently produces
Convulsions in gouty and arthritic Constitutions.

If the Brain or what it contains be immediately affected without the
intervening of any other part, it is called an essential Convulsion. But if
another part be first affected, it is Sympathical; as when Convulsions are
caused by Worms, by the Disorders of the lower Belly, Ulcers or Aches of
external Parts, by the suppression of the Terms or Piles; neglect of Venery,
causing a Corruption of the seminal Liquor in Women; the Indisposition of the
Stomac, the Disorders of the Kidneys, Bladder, and Mesentery; Arthritic,
melancholy and cholic Fits; Pains of Childbirth, etc.

When a Convulsion proceeds from any inferior part, it resembles the Motion of
a cold Vapor rising from the part toward the Brain. But there is neither space
for that Vapor to move in, nor a sufficient force to put it in Motion:
Therefore it is a false Imagination, and ought to be rectified. The plain case
stands thus. The Part being irritated by the offending Cause, the Spirits
repair in a disorderly manner into it, and contract the Fibers; these Spirits
are followed by large Numbers of others, that not finding room in the
contracted part, rebound; this Convulsion is continued to the Original of the
Nerve, and creates a Disorder in the Brain, which affects all the other Nerves,
and produces the universal Epilepsy. So the gradual Contraction of the Part,
and the disorderly Incursions of the Spirits, create a Sense not unlike to that
of ascending Vapors, and occasion the vulgar Error. These imaginary Vapors are
generally attended by a sense of Cold, by reason that the Spirits have not a
free admission into the contracted part.

Convulsions differ from Trembling in this, that the former invade the part
when resting; whereas the other follows only upon attempting some voluntary
motion. In a Palsy the Part affected may be moved or extended without Pain, but
in a Convulsion it cannot. In Swoonings or sleepy Diseases the Pulse is weak
and low, and the Fits observe no regular Periods, nor are they easily carried
off; but in the first degree of an Epilepsy, tho it resemble swooning, the
Pulse is strong and frequent, and the Fit returning at set times is easily
cured.

In acute burning Fevers, Convulsions are foretold from a tingling in the
Ears, heaviness of the Head, dullness of the Senses, panting of the Heart,
Flashings of Light, and strange Colors appearing before the Eyes. If in the
beginning of the Disease, the Balls of the Eyes are seized with Pain, without
any Inflammation; or if the sick Person attempt as it were to catch Flies, it
betokens a Delirium, and Convulsions. But if he begin to pick at the
Bedclothes, or be sensible of the Contraction or twitching of any Member, or of
the seeming Ascent of Vapors to the Head, the Convulsion is just at hand.

If the Patient dote, and be incapable to give an account of these Symptoms,
the Physician may put his hand to the Wrists or tendinous Parts; and if he
observe that the Tendons start or quaver, it is a sign of fatal Convulsions. An
Epilepsy may be also prophesied in other cases from frequent Swimmings of the
Head, and Nightmares.

If an Epilepsy proceed from Convulsions of the internal Membrans, it discovers
it self by a murmuring Noise in the Guts, Swellings or Contractions or Hardness
of the Belly, drawing the Navel inwards, violent throws in the Guts, Pains in
the Loins, a Distention and Contraction of the Breast, difficulty of Breathing,
an apprehension of being stifled, etc. If it be essential, it surprises the
Person without any preceding signs, or sense of Pain; but a symptomatical
Epilepsy is ushered in by the aching of some affected part, and the
apprehension of Vapors transmitted from thence to the Brain.

The Prognostics are variable according to the Circumstances of the Patient. If
an Epilepsy commence after the twenty fifth year of the Persons Age; if it
succeed Iliac Pains, acute Fevers, immoderat Watchings, excessive loss of
Blood, over-violent Purging, or the use of Hellebor; if the Fits return
frequently, and the Lips, Tongue, Eyelids, or Breast, be much affected; if the
Disease be hereditary, essential, and inveterat; if the Patient does not sneeze
after using Medicines for that purpose: In all these cases there is a great deal
of danger. If a Woman with Child be seized with Convulsions, they threaten
Miscarriage. If it commence from the Infancy, or before the state of Manhood,
it is curable. If it return frequently, it renders the Person stupid or
delirious. If a Chronical Epilepsy be followed by an unmalignant Fever, it is a
good Omen.

The Cure of Convulsions and the Falling Sickness of Children is accounted for
elsewhere. As for adult Persons, the Physician must heedfully inform himself if
the Cause be external or internal; if the Disease be essential or
symptomatical; and if symptomatical, in what particular Member the source of
the Distemper lies. And withal let him carefully observe the following Remarks,
which do not relate to the Paroxysm, but the general method of Cure.

1. That Chronical Convulsions arising from internal Causes, do generally
invade Hypochrondiac and Scorbutic Persons, and are owing to a vicious Acid,
which for the most part is bred in the first Passages. Therefore Evacuations,
and the use of testaceous Alcalin Pouders, Spanish Soap boiled in Milk, and
Chalybeat Medicines, are recommended.

2. That if the Disease arise from any particular Member, the Medicines which
properly regard that part ought to be joined with Specifics; but not exhibited
till after the general Evacuations.

3. That Antimonial Vomits are sovereign Medicines, if the Disease proceed from
the internal Parts. They ought to be given every Month, four days before the
Full-moon.

4. That all purging Medicines ought to be of the milder sort, and mixed with
sweet Mercury thrice sublimated; and exhibited before the Changes of the Moon.

5. That if the source of the Disease be lodged in the Humors of the Body, the
Decoctions of the sudorific Woods, together with proper Specifics, are given
with good Success, after the first Passages are sufficiently cleans'd.

6. That in a desperate case a Salivation with Mercury may be attempted.

7. That sneezing Medicines ought to be used every Morning. As for example,

Take of the Leaves of Marjoram and Rue, of each two Drams, Flowers of the
Lilly Convally a Dram; white Hellebor and Castor, of each half a Dram. Make a
Powder.

8. That if the Distemper proceed from the Disorders of any external part, it is
proper to place a Ligature betwixt it and the Brain, just before the Invasion
of the Paroxysm. Issues, Caustics applied to the part (especially in the
puncture of a Nerve) and opening the Scull with a Trepandiron, are of good use.

9. That if the Falling Sickness be attended by a Suppression of any wonted
Evacuation of Blood, it is fit to open the Hemorrhoid Vein, or a Vein in the
Arm, or in the Ancle of Women with Child; or apply Leeches to the inside of the
Womb, when an Epilepsy follows Delivery.

10. That Opiats ought not to be given before the general Evacuations; nor too
frequently repeated, left they promote a Stupidity, which generally insues
Chronical Epilepsies. They may serve to prevent and mitigate a fierce Paroxysm.
They ought to be mixed with Specifics and Camphyr, and given before the
Invasion of the Fit. The Temples, Nostrils and Wrists may be anointed at the
same time with Oil of Boxwood, which has a peculiar Anodyn Virtue.

11. That the Disorders of the Brain and Animal Spirits ought to be redressed
by the use of Epileptic Specifics and Anti-Acids; as the Bones and Dung of
Animals, native Cinnabar, Castor, Vitriol, Amber, Misselto of the Hazel-tree,
Piony, Opium, Camphyr, etc.

The true Cure of this Disease consists in preservation, and preventing the
Paroxysm. Vomits are the first in order. Next are purging Medicines, which
ought to be strongest in an essential Epilepsy.

Take of the Extract of black Hellebor, sweet Mercury right prepared, of each
fifteen Grains; Extract of Troches Alhandal one or two Grains, distilled Oil of
Amber two Drops: with Essence of Myrrh, or of Castor, make Pills. Or,

Take of sweet Mercury fifteen Grains, Scammony prepared with Sulphur four or
five Grains. Make a Powder. Or,

Take of the Conserve of Rosemary-flowers a Dram, Powder of Jalap half a
Scruple, sweet Mercury fifteen Grains: with the Syrup of Apples make a Bolus.

Sweet Mercury and Mercurius vitae, well pounded and exactly mixed, prove
laxative, and are mighty useful in this case.

The Specifics for this Disease are very numerous; I shall briefly recount
those that are most universally received.

In the vegetable Province Male Piony is a famous Specific, if gathered in its
proper season; the neglect of which has abridg'd its Reputation. It ought to be
gathered at Noonday in July or August; or before the Sun rising, when both the
Sun and Moon are in Aries, during the wain of the Moon. It is both given
inwardly, and tied about the Neck, with good Success.

Next are the Flowers of Lilly of the Valley. They ought to be gathered before
the rising of the Sun, while they are wet with the Dew, and presently distilled
with Spanish Wine; which may be distilled again several times upon fresh
Flowers. If you infuse Castor in this Spirit, it extracts a noble Essence,
which may be given from half a Dram to a Dram.

Hazelwood yields an excellent Spirit and Oil. The Misselto of this Tree, and
the Catkins that grow upon it, are endowed with an Anodyn Sulphur, and are very
successful Specifics against this Disease. The Misselto ought to be gathered in
the wain of the Moon in March, and may be given from half a Dram to a Dram.
Misselto of the Oak is likewise useful. But while they are used, it is needful
to purge now and then, lest their fixing Quality should occasion other
Diseases. In the Spring we gather a Sulphur from the Catkins of Hazel, that may
be given inwardly from a Scruple to a Dram.

The Misselto and Flowers of the Limetree, Boxwood, Lavender Flowers, Flowers
of Dill, Angelica and Valerian Roots, Roots of Swallowort, Acorus, Briony,
Seeds of Soapwort and Rue, are much esteemed. Black-cherries, Assa faetida,
Camphyr, Spirit of Soot, Extract and Essence of the Wood of Aloe, are likewise
Specifics. Some commend the Coals dig'd from under Mugwort, which Deckers takes
to be the ancient Roots of Mugwort, resembling Coals.

These are the most noted vegetable Specifics, to which we generally add
Cephalic and Aromatic Medicines. As,

Take of the Leaves and Flowers of Sage six Ounces, Flowers of Lilly of the
Valley three Ounces, Flowers of sweet Lavender an Ounce, Male Piony Roots two
Ounces, Leaves and Flowers of Marjoram half an Ounce, choice Cinnamom two
Ounces, Cubebs half an Ounce, Cloves three Drams, Mace two Drams; infuse them
in fourteen Pound of Rhenish or Spanish Wine. Let them macerat for fourteen
days; then distill in a Balneum Mariae. You may add Castor, and Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac.

In the Animal Province, the Spirit, Oil, and volatile Salt of human Blood taken
from a beheaded Criminal, are celebrated Specifics. The Spirit of a human
Afterbirth putrified, given from fifteen to forty Drops, is reserved by some
for a Secret: Or the Powder of it dried in an Oven may be given from half a
Dram to a Dram. The Skull of one that dies a violent Death, may be given in
Powder from a Scruple to a Dram. It yields a Spirit and volatile Salt, of
wonderful use; and its Oil when rectified and applied to the Crown of the Head,
prevents the Epileptic Fit. Oil of Amber distilled with the Powder of Man's
Soul, yields a most penetrating Oil for the same use. The human Brain, its
Spirit and Oil, and Bones of Men, are likewise much esteemed.

The Bones of other Animals, especially the Teeth of a Seahorse, the Livers of
green Frogs, the Liver of a Wolf, the Gall of a black Cat, the Spirit of Urine,
the Blood of a hunted Hare, Castor, together with Spirits and volatile Salts,
are much in use. As,

Take of volatile Salt of Amber, volatile Salt of a human Skull, of each a
Scruple; Castor two Drams: Infuse in Spirit of Wine; let them digest and
circulat; and they yield an admirable Tincture against this Disease.

Peacocks Dung, Quails Eggs, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac prepared with Quicklime,
Spirit of Tartar, Assa faetida, Elks Claws, Swallows, with the Spirits and
volatile Salts, are common Specifics.

In the mineral Family: The fixed Sulphurs of Antimony lead the Van. Cinnabar
of Antimony, sublimated several times, and reduced to a fine Powder, with some
spirituous Water, is given in Substance; or a Tincture may be extracted from it
with some vegetable Spirit, that is of sovereign Virtue in this case. Or the
Cinnabar may be dissolved in a Menstruum prepared from Nitre and Sal-Gem; and
precipitated into Crystals, which pass by the name of Astrum Mercurii Secretum.
Native Hungarian Cin^abar is likewise very useful. But above all, the Sulphur
taken from the Dross of the Regulus of Antimony, after this manner. After you
have separated the Sulphur Auratum by a second Precipitation, take the same
strained Liquor, and pour on some distilled Vinegar and Spirit of Urine: It
precipitates a noble Sulphur of incomparable use against an Epilepsy. Three
Grains may be given to adult Persons.

Next to the fixed Sulphurs of Antimony is Vitriol. Its fixed Anodyn Sulphur,
and its sulphurous volatile Spirit right prepared, are mightily applauded by
Helmont and Paracelsus. The common Spirit of Vitriol is corrosive, not volatile;
but the true volatile Spirit is drawn from Vitriol exposed to the Air, and the
preceding Phlegm is chamfer'd. The Spirit drawn from Vitriol and human Urine is
an excellent Medicine; for the Alcali of the Urine dissolves the Metallin
Sulphur, and the Spirit renders it volatile. In like manner any other vegetable
Spirit, mixed with Vitriol, yields a cephalic Spirit of Vitriol, which may be
mixed with Spirit of human Blood, and exhibited in an hereditary Epilepsy.

Amber concludes the mineral Catalogue. It yields a Spirit, volatile Salt and
Oil, which may be mixed with Spirit of Hartshorn, or of human Blood. Sometimes
Camphyr may be added; which is a noted Pacific, and of singular use, together
with Opium, against the Epilepsies arising from the Womb.

The Methods of prescribing these Specifics are as follows.

Take of Black-cherry-water, Lilly Convally-water, and Langius's Epileptic
Water, of each one Ounce; Spirit of Hartshorn succinated, or rectified Spirit
of a human Skull, a Dram, Syrup of Clove Gilly flowers an Ounce. Mix. Or,

Take of the Water of Lime-tree-flowers, Sage-water, Black-cherry Water, of
each an Ounce; Spirit of Hartshorn with Amber three Drams, Spirit of Triacle
camphoriz'd, or Essence of Castor a Dram; Essence of Opium a Scruple, Syrup of
Piony Flowers an Ounce. Mix, and give two or three Spoonfuls twice or thrice a
day.

Take of the Water of the new Horns of a Heart two Ounces, Spirit of human
Brains an Ounce, Spirit of human Blood a Dram and a half, prepared human Skull
a Dram, volatile Salt of human Skull fifteen Grains, volatile Salt of Amber half
a Scruple, Laudanum Opiatum three or five Grains, Syrup of Arabian Stechas an
Ounce. Mix, and use as above.

Take of the Water of Piony Flowers three Ounces, Water of human Brains
distilled with Wine six Drams, essential Spirit of human Blood a Dram and a
half, prepared Unicorn a Dram, Cinnabar of Antimony half a Dram, Laudanum
Opiatum a Grain and a half, Syrup of Arabian Stechas an Ounce. Mix, and use as
above.

Take of the Waters of Piony Flowers, and of Limtree Flowers, of each an Ounce;
rectified Cinnamon Water half an Ounce, unburnt Hartshorn a Scruple; native
Cinnabar, Mineral Bezoar, of each half a Scruple; Hysteric Laudanum five
Grains, Syrup of Piony Flowers half an Ounce. Mix, etc.

Take of the Water of Piony Flowers two Ounces, Misselto of Hazel a Scruple;
native Cinnabar, mineral Bezoar, of each half a Scruple; Hysteric Laudanum six
Grains, Syrup of Piony Flowers half an Ounce. Dose, a Spoonful twice or thrice
a day.

Take of Fennel-water, and Water of Lime-tree Flowers, of each an Ounce; Spirit
of Sal Ammoniac, Spirit of Hartshorn with Amber, of each half a Scruple;
Essence of Castor a Scruple, Syrup of Poppies, and Syrup of Arabian Stechas, of
each half an Ounce: mix as above.

Take of the Water of Piony Flowers two Ounces, Pennyroyal-water an Ounce;
Apoplectic Water, or Langius's Epileptic Water six Drams; volatile Salt of
Hartshorn twelve Grains, volatile Salt of Amber six Grains, Syrup of Piony
Flowers three Drams: mix, and use as above.

Take of Baum-water two Ounces, Sage-water an Ounce, Essence of Castor two
Drams, Spirit of Hartshorn with Oil of Amber a Dram, Syrup of Piony Flowers
half an Ounce: mix, etc.

As for Pouders. Take of Cinnabar of Antimony half a Dram, volatile Salt of
Amber twelve Grains; Laudanum Opiatum prepared by Fermentation, two or three
Grains: make a Powder for two Doses. For a Vehicle,

Take of Sage-water, and Water of Lilly of the Valley, of each an Ounce; Spirit
of Lilly of the Valley, and Spirit of Black-cherries, of each a Dram and a
half: mix.

Take of the Powder of human Skull prepared without Fire a Dram, Cinnabar of
Antimony half a Dram, or two Scruples; volatile Salt of Hartshorn twelve Grains,
volatile Salt of Amber six Grains: make a Powder for four Doses. Or,

Take Cinnabar of Antimony fifteen Grains; volatile Salt of Hartshorn, Volatile
Salt of Vipers, of each four Grains* Camphyr two or three Grains. Make a Powder
as above. Or,

Take of Diaphoretic Antimony, Native Cinnabar, prepared Amber, of each eight
or ten Grains; Volatile Salt of Amber three or five Grains; Laudanum Opiatum one
Grain. Make a Powder as above.

Take Cinnabar of Antimony, prepared Amber, of each a Scruple; Castor twelve
Grains; Volatile Salt of Amber, Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, of each half a
Scruple; Camphyr three Grains: make a Powder for three Doses.

Take of the Powder of a human Scull prepared without Fire a Dram; Cinnabar of
Antimony half a Dram; Castor fifteen Grains; Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, Volatile
Salt of Amber, of each half a Scruple: make a Powder for three Doses.

The common Vehicle for these Pouders, may be this following.

Take of the Water of Lilly Convally, Black Cherry Water, and Water of
Limetree-flowers, of each a Dram; Essence of Rosemary-flowers, or Essence of
Castor, from two Drams to three Drams; Essential Spirit of human Scull a Dram;
Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers six or eight Drams: mix, etc.

As for external Remedies, some are wont to apply Amulets of Elder, or the
Roots of Master-wort sliced to the Thumbs and Toes; or Rings of the Teeth of
Sea-horses, and the like, Cephalic Bags, Emplaisters, Ointments, and the
specific Oils abovementioned, may be applied to the Backbone, Crown of the
Head, and the affected part. But a special regard must be had to the peculiar
Constitution of the Pat^^^t; for some are extremely offended by the approach of
^doriferous Oils. Oil of Amber and Oil of Spike, or the fat of a wild Cat, may
be applied to the Belly, when the Disease is symptomatical, both during the
Paroxysm, and at other times. If the Epilepsy proceed from the Disorders of the
Spleen, the Emplaister de ranis cum Mercurio is very useful. Upon other
occasions a Compound-plaister may be prescribed thus.

Take of the Emplaister Diacalcitheos, two Ounces; Diachylum ^reatum, an Ounce
and a half; Emplaister of Betony two Ounces. Mix, etc. Crato's Plaster is
likewise very proper for this purpose.

Thus far I have considered the Method of preserving from, or preventing
Epileptic Fits: My next business is to show what ought to be done during the
time of the Fits. If the Person be Plethoric, let blood; but take care to draw
forth but a small quantity. Then give a strong Emetic. If the temporal Muscles,
or those of the Gullet, are so affected that the Person cannot open his mouth
or take down any thing, you must open the mouth with a Spoon, and throw it in;
or wet a Feather with the Emetic Syrup, and a Grain or two of Mercurius Vitae,
and thrust it into the Throat.

If a Vomit cannot conveniently be given, inject frequently sharp Clysters,
adding to them antimonial Infusions and volatile specific Salts.

Sneezing Pouders ought to be cautiously used during the Fit, for they cause
Convulsions. In room of them put Spirit of Sal ammoniac, or of Urine to the
Nostrils; or drop it upon the Tongue. The smell of Amber thrown upon the Coals
is very effectual. The external Parts may be rubbed, but withal very gently. If
the Epilepsy proceed from any external Part, Ligatures are very proper. The
Backbone may be anointed with specific Oils or Liniments. In the mean while
it is not improper to throw into the mouth two or three spoonfuls of some
Epileptic Mixture, as above-prescribed.

If the Tongue be hurt by the Teeth, throw upon it the Powder of Crab's-eyes, or
anoint it with some vulnerary Extract and Sugar.

ART. II. Of a Cramp or continued Contraction.
WHEN a nervous Part is affected continually and without interruption, it
becomes rigid and inflexible. The Cause of this Irritation may be either
manifest or hidden. Of the former kind are the pricking of a Nerve, immoderat
Purging, the unseasonable use of Mercurial or Antimonial Medicines, external
Violence, drinking of Aqua fortis or acid Liquors (for all Acids have a
contracting Virtue, as appears by Leather dipped in an Acid.) The hidden Causes
are acute or malignant Fevers, Inflammations, Gout, Arthritic and
Hypochondriac Fits (in which the prevailing Acid fixes in tendinous parts, and
renders them stiff) Collections of Serum in the Brain, and Worms in the Guts,
which are for the most part accompanied by swellings of the Belly. Sometimes a
flatulent serous Humor affects the Muscles, and causes a Contraction.
Sometimes the offending Cause is lodged in the contracted part, and sometimes
elsewhere.

As for the Cure, the universal Evacuations are first in order, especially the
injection of sharp Clysters. The internal Specifics are the same as in the case
of an Epilepsy.

For external use, all spirituous and oily things are proper; but such of 'em
as are more penetrating than viscid or unctuous are pr^^erable, as the Oil of
Worms per deliquium. Or,

Take of the Oil of Orris, Oil of Earthworms, of each two Ounces; Castor in
Powder four Scruples: mix them by continual shaking, and anoint the contracted
part without intermission till the Convulsion cease.

The Oil that drops from a roasted Goose; the Spirit of Wine with Saffron;
Spirit of Triacle camphoris'd with Castor; the Decoction of stale Urine with
white Bread mixed with a small quantity of Assa faetida; Oil of Amber mixed
with Ro^k O^l (when the occasional Cause is of a cold nature) are much approved
for the same use. Or,

Take of Oil of Turpentine, Oil of Earthworms, of each an Ounce and a half;
Human Fat one Ounce; the Fat of Dogs, half an Ounce: make a Liniment. Or,

Take of human Fat three or four Ounces; distilled Oil of Turpentine three
Drams; Oil of Juniper Berries two Drams; Oil of Spike half a Dram: make a
Liniment. Or,

Take of Oil of Turpentine half a Dram; distilled Oil of Cloves six Drops;
Mucilage of Briony as much as suffices for a Liniment.

When a Nerve is pricked by an error in Blood-letting, the Wound must be
dilated, and distilled Oil of Turpentine, or of Wax, or of Bricks, dropped into
it warm. If the Wound be large, apply the following Plaster.

Take of Euphorbium a Scruple, Turpentine half an Ounce; with Wax make a
Plaster.

If after scarifying or letting of blood the Part swell and ache, anoint it
frequently with the following Liniment.

Take of the fat of Foxes, fat of Badgers, of each three Ounces; distilled Oil
of Spike half an Ounce; Oil of Mastic two Drams; Wine two or three Drams: mix
'em before the fire, and use it hot.

If the Part be livid, swelled, and affected with pain, apply the following
Cataplasm.

Take of the Herbs Agrimony, Chervil, and Flowers of Chamomil, of each a
handful; Roots of Larks Spur three Ounces; Roots of Solomon's Seal an Ounce;
Linseeds, Fenugrecseeds, of each half a Dram: Boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Water to the consistence of a Cataplasm.

If the Convulsion proceed from a Wound in the part, drop into it the Balsam of
Sulphur with Turpentine, and anoint the part with Oil of Worms, and distilled
Oil of Turpentine. If it be caused by a poisonous Animal, anoint with Oil of
Scorpions; apply scarify'd Cupping-glasses, or an actual Cautery to the part,
or the magnetic arsenic Plaster; and give inwardly Triacle with Gentian, in
order to procure sweat. If it be occasioned by violent Purgation, give Triacle
with Opiats.

For a windy Cramp, take a rough Cloth hot and dip it into Spirit of Juniper
Berries, or rectified Spirit of Wine, and rub the part; or foment it with
Spirit of Triacle and Juniper Water. In case of extremity apply the following
Ointment.

Take of fresh Goose-tallow four Drams; distilled Oil of Cloves half a Scruple;
distilled Oil of Cinnamom five drops. Mix for an Ointment.

Volatile Anti-acids, Milk, and such like temperat things are proper for the
Convulsions which proceed from an internal Acid.

ART. III. Of Trembling.
TRembling resembles Convulsive Motions, and when it follows Epileptic Fits,
partakes of their Nature. Some particular Members are apt to shake after
drinking or sudden Passion; but this is a lesser sort of trembling: For some
are universal, some particular; some greater, and some lesser. It does not
proceed from any weakness of the moving Faculty, but from the joint Action of
several Muscles that are either Antagonists, or employed in different Motions
of the Member, which is occasioned by the almost equal Incursions of the Animal
Spirits: whereas upon the Will's injoining a particular Motion, they ought to
repair more copiously to the Muscle, whose Office it is to perform the commanded
Motion; than into its other Companions that are supposed to rest.

The Animal Spirits are apt to commit this Error, when disordered by Passion,
or over-fix'd by the use of Narcotics, or excessive drinking of Wine. But
oft-times the Spirits themselves are innocent, and the fault lies either in the
Nerve or the Muscle. If any Obstruction or Irritation happen at the head of the
Nerve, the Spirits designed for the Muscle are diverted another way. If the
Fibers of the Muscle be contracted, dry, misplaced, or not so accessible as
they ought to be, the regular ^rrival of the Spirits is prevented.

Thus mercurial Steams, immoderat Venery, Cold, drinking of cold Liquors,
suppression of wonted Evacuations, and malignant Fevers, are wont to occasion
a Trembling.

Trembling is easily distinguished from a Palsy, by the performance of the
voluntary motion; and from Convulsions by this, that it never appears but when
a voluntary motion is attempted.

If it succeed to a Palsy, it prognosticats a Recovery. If it proceed from
internal Causes, it ought not to be neglected. If it be hereditary, of a long
standing, or accompanied by old Age, it seldom admits of a Cure. If it terminat
in Convulsions, or approach to their Nature; If attended by Doting in Burning
Fevers; If it succeed to Childbirth, or happen in a Lethargy or Apoplexy; it
portends ill. If the under-lip quaver, it betokens Vomiting.

The occasional Cause must be diligently inquired for, and removed. So the
method of Cure must be calculated for the various Causes. In general, it
requires cephalic and nervous Medicines, such as are used against Palsies,
Convulsions, and Apoplexies. Sage is a noted Specific in this case; it may be
eaten with food, infused in Ale; or a Spirit or Essence taken from it, and
mixed with Castor, which may be used inwardly often. The Hands or Part affected
may be fomented with this Spirit, or an infusion of Sage in Wine or Water used
for a wash. Baum is next; its Leaves infused in Wine, or Spirit of Wine, make a
useful Medicine for this purpose. Juniper Berries, their Spirit, Oil, Rob,
Infusion in Wine or Spirit of Wine, and the infused Berries in substance, are
very sovereign in this case. After due Evacuations, there is nothing so proper
as a Diet-drink of the Decoction of Woods, especially of Juniper Wood.

Nutmegs, Cinnamom, Cloves, Castor and its Preparations, the ^rains of Hares
roasted, etc. are mightily esteemed.

Peacocks Dung infused in Spirit of Wine is a sovereign Remedy against
Trembling in old Age. The Oils of Hazelwood and Boxwood are also very proper.

If it proceed from metallin or mercurial Fumes, Cinnabar of Antimony and
antimonial Sulphurs ought to be mixed with human Bones, and exhibited in order
to procure Sweat. The Decoction of Elecampane and Fennel Roots in Wine, taken
Morning and Evening, the Person being covered in order to sweat, is famous for
expelling and correcting Mercury in the Body. Leaves of Gold, or Medicines
partaking of Gold, are proper in this case to be given inwardly; and an
Ointment of Gold may be applied outwardly.

As for external Remedies, Forestus recommends rubbing and washing the Part
with fresh Urine. In room of which you may use what follows.

Take of Aqua Articularis for external use three or four Ounces, Spirit of
Earthworms an Ounce and a half, Spirit of Ants six or eight Drams, Essence of
Castor three or four Drams: mix, and bathe the part affected.

Petrus a Castro orders the part to be frequently fomented with distilled Water
of Nettles. The Leaves of an Ash infused in Lees are commended. If the
Trembling be inveterat, the natural Bathes, or artificial Bathes of a Decoction
of Ants tied in a Bag, are incomparably useful.

CHAP. III. Of the Diseases in which the Animal Spirits cease to move.
ART. I. Of an Apoplexy.
WHEN Persons are seized with Apoplexies, they are like dead People in every
respect, except the beating of their Pulse, Breathing, and the color of their
faces. If the Respiration be much impaired, the Pulse very low, and scarce
perceptible, and the Person snort, and froth at the Mouth, it is a violent Fit.
If the whole Body be equally seized, it is an universal Apoplexy. If only one
side of the Head and Body, or the Trunk of the Body alone, or a particular part
by it self, be affected while the others are at ease, it is called a particular
Apoplexy. It Is usual among Writers to refer the Apoplexies of particular Parts
to Palsies; but indeed these Disorders of particular Members proceeding from
internal Causes, and called by them Paralytic, were by the Ancients accounted
slight Apoplexies. Vid. Hip. Sect. 2. Aph. 42.

The Cause of Apoplexies may be derived from the failure of the motion of the
Animal Spirits, either in the Cerebrum or Cerebellum. If in the latter, the
Circulation of the Blood and Motion of the Heart are in a manner quite
extinguished. If the Animal Spirits be hindered to visit the Heart by the
Convulsion of its Nerves, or such other Causes, the same effect will follow.
These Causes are called Privative, which do not affect the Spirits immediately,
but only prevent their Excursions, or withdraw the matter of their Generation,
as all Obstructions of the Brain, a Fall, etc. The positive Causes are such as
stupify the Spirits, or render 'em unfit for performing their Office, as
narcotic Medicines, etc.

A privative Apoplexy is occasioned by stopping the Circulation of the Blood.
This is caused either by an Obstruction in the Brain imprisoning the Spirits;
or by the Compression, tearing or breaking of the Blood Vessels. As, when
external Violence is used, an Apoplexy may be caused by the Ligature or
Compression of the Carotid Arteries, and consequently the interruption of the
Blood in its Passage to the Brain. This Hippocrates understood by his
Obstructio Venae, it being customary among the Ancients to signify by Veins the
Arteries and Nerves. The other privative Apoplexies proceeding from internal
Causes, are rather owing to the stoppage of the Blood in the Veins, and its
subsequent Stagnation in, or Distention of the Brain; for suppose one of the
Carotid Arteries were straightened by some internal Cause, the other Artery
communicating with it, would supply the Brain with Blood, and so no Apoplexy
would ensue upon that occasion. It Is the hindrance therefore of the Reflux of
the Blood, and its subsequent Stagnation, that in internal cases distends the
Brain, straitens its Passages, extinguishes the motion of the Animal Spirits,
and so causes the Apoplexy.

Sometimes the Blood is so thick and congealed, that of it self it stops in the
Vessels within the Brain, without any determination to that effect from the
Blood Vessels; as in Heart-swooning, which is a case not only parallel, but
near a kin to this, it stagnates in the Lungs.

The Ancients derived the cause of an Apoplexy from a Collection of Serum in
the Ventricles of the Brain; but Anatomical Dissections make it appear, that
the Brains of Apoplectic Persons are not always molested with any such matter;
and that several People are, who were never seized with an Apoplexy in their
Lives. It remains therefore to be concluded, that the immediate Cause of all
Apoplexies is the Abolition either of the motion of the animal Spirits, or of
the Circulation of the Blood.

The remote Causes with reference to a defective Circulation of the Blood, are,
sudden Cold, excessive Heat, gormandizing in a sedentary way of Living; washing
the Head with warm Water, and then exposing it to the Cold; Swellings in the
Scull; suppression of wonted Evacuations of Blood; using Dragons Blood after
violent Purges; immoderat Venery, especially in old Age; Anger, and all
turbulent Passions of the Mind.

With reference to the motion of the animal Spirits, the remote Causes of
Apoplexies are a Contusion or violent Commotion of the Brain, by Thunder,
Cannon shooting, etc. any sudden and impetuous Force that drives inwards the
Lymph which waters the Cortical part of the Brain; Impostumes or any vicious
matter lodged in the Head; all which straiten the Passages of the Brain, and
Original of the Nerves, and so cramp the Spirits that they cannot perform their
wonted Office.

Excessive Drinking may occasion a Prevalency or Redundancy of Serum in the
Brain, that presses down the Walls of the Passages. Accordingly we sometimes
meet with great quantities of Serum in dissecting the Heads of such as die of
Apoplexies. The Smallpox or Scab struck inwards, and several other Causes, may
likewise produce the same effect. Upon this account I shall not scruple to
admit the distinction of privative Apoplexies into such as are Sanguin, and
those which are Serous; tho a nice Theorist might cavil against it. The former
kind is apt to invade those whose Blood is thick and prone to congeal; the
latter for most part seizes old decrepit Catarrhous Constitutions.

Mercurial and subterranean Vapors not only clog the Spirits, but thicken the
Blood, and so cause a privative Apoplexy. As for positive Apoplexies caused by
an immediate Depravation and Fixation of the Spirits, I am of Helmont's Opinion,
that not only external things, but an internal Ferment bred in the Stomac
oft-times causes 'em. This I am induced to believe by these Considerations.

1. Vomits, sharp Clysters and stomachic Medicines are sovereign Remedies
against a positive Apoplexy; which is a sign that the Stomac is concerned. 2.
The Steams of Coals, Smoke of Tobacco, and eating ungrateful Food, cause
Apoplexies. Now undoubtedly these affect the mouth of the Stomac most
immediately. 3. I remember an instance of a Woman that was seized with a
positive Apoplexy, of a sudden, without any known Cause: her Spirits were not
exhausted or deficient, but she had an invincible Propensity to Sleep, with a
grievous Anxiety and Trouble in her Breast; and after Recovery happening to
take a Vomit upon another occasion, was thrown into the same Symptoms again.
Now, as I take it, the source of the Disease lay in the Stomac, and the Vomit
wakened it afresh. 4. A Giddiness proceeding from the Stomac is frequently a
Forerunner of an Apoplexy; and where this is hereditary to a Family, that is a
sure ground of Prediction. 5. Poterius his Diaphoretic Gold and Cinnabar of
Antimony are Specifics against Apoplexies. Now they do not positively reach
further than the first Passages. 6. The sudden and surprising way of Invasion
of some Apoplexies, seems to intimate that there is a virulent Ferment in the
Body which immediately extinguishes or fetters the Spirits.

Supposing therefore that there is a virulent Ferment bred in the Stomac, we
can give no other account of its manner of Operation than this, that as Opium
in the Stomac disposes the Spirits to Sleep, so it fixes 'em to an Apoplectic
height.

When an universal Apoplexy terminates in a particular one, if it be sanguin, I
doubt it is uncurable, unless it yield to Blood-letting. Or perhaps the clotted
Blood may have left some Serum in the Brain, which falls deeper upon the spinal
Marrow, or is thrown upon some particular Nerves; or if the Apoplexy was
originally Lymphatic, the Lymph may have sunk in, and so caused an Obstruction
of some particular Nerves. This Solution will serve for privative Apoplexies;
but as touching the positive, I am at a loss to advance any plausible Reason,
unless you admit of this, that the Contraction of the upper Extremity of the
Nerves, near to their original Insertion, may produce a mere Apoplexy, without
Convulsions, which always ensue the Contraction of their outward Parts.

The Signs and Prognostics of an Apoplexy are these: The Person is seized with
a profound Sleep, deprived of all Sense and Motion; the Respiration remains
entire more or less, according to the violence of the Fit. If the Patient froth
at the Mouth, the Respiration is even almost abolished; for the Froth is the
Blood stagnating in the Lungs, impregnated and rarified by Air, and so thrown
up. This is a mortal Sign according to Hipp. Sect. 2. Aph. 43. for all that die
of Apoplexies, are actually stifled. But we ought carefully to distinguish this
Froth of Blood, which is of a whitish red Color, and cast up from the bottom of
the Breast, from the thin Spittle-like Froth, caused in the Palate by the
Agitation of Air in a viscid Humor. If the Apoplexy proceed from a Stagnation
of the Blood, the Face and Eyes are bloated, and of a red Color, and the Body
is hot; otherwise they are pale and cold. If the Person snort high, it is an ill
Omen. If the Memory decay of a sudden, it is a Presage of an Apoplexy. Sometimes
the Urine and Excrements are voided without the Person's sense, by reason of
the Relaxation of the Sphincters.

A positive Apoplexy is distinguished from a privative by the Constitution of
the Patient, of which above; and the Anxieties of the Breast attending the
former. An Apoplexy is distinguished from a Syncope Cardiaca, or
Heart-swooning, by this, that the latter is not attended by Snorting; the
Respiration in it is always extremely difficult, and the Breast mightily
troubled, the Face pale, the extreme Parts cold; a cold Sweat breaks forth, and
the Pulse is very weak, and not so hard as in Apoplexies.

It Is distinguished from Hysteric Fits, by this; that in these the Face is
always pale, the Pulse very low and imperceptible, Respiration pretty entire,
the sense of Feeling oft-times remains; and the Disorders of the lower Belly
have ushered 'em in.

A Carus steals on by degrees, and the Respiration is easy, and oft-times
without Snorting. But an Apoplexy pursues a contrary method.

If a violent Apoplexy be not followed by a Fever in seven days, it is mortal.
If a difficulty of Breathing be attended with Sweating, it is a fatal Omen. If
the Fit persist beyond tweuty four hours without remission, there is no hope. In
general, all Apoplectic Persons, tho cured, are apt to relapse, and young
strong Persons are more likely to recover than the old and feeble.

If it be not mortal, it either determines in a particular Apoplexy, or is
discussed by Stool and Sweating. Barbette relates an instance of its being
cured by voiding Lymph by the Ear, and upon that account recommends a
Salivation for its Cure.

In prescribing the Cure I shall first take notice of what is fit to be done
during the Paroxysm; and then how we ought to behave after the Paroxysm is over.

As for the time of the Fit; sharp Clysters and Suppositories are approved by
the general Consent of all Physicians. They are proper in all Apoplectic Cases.
They must be sharp to the last degree, injected in moderat quantities, in order
to be easily retained; and in case of a total Relaxation of the Sphincter,
repeated often; or converted into Cataplasms by longer boiling, and applied all
over the Belly.

Vomits and Blood-letting are generally prescribed; but unseasonably
administered, murder a great many. In order to avoid mistakes in this important
matter, let us mind the following Cautions.

If the Patient be young, lusty, accustomed to a sedentary Life; if the Face in
the Paroxysm appear red, if there be a suppression of any wonted Evacuation of
Blood. In a word, if there appear any signs of a sanguin Apoplexy, or a
Stagnation of Blood, it is highly convenient to bleed. In a serous Apoplexy,
Bleeding can only act a preservative part. In a positive internal Apoplexy, it
can do no manner of good, unless by accident, by correcting the Stagnation of
the Blood in the Breast; upon which account it may be useful in the other sorts.

If the Apoplexy be attended with Crudities in the Stomac, occasioned by
drinking and gluttonizing, as it frequently happens in Germany; If the Patient
be old or weak; If any narcotic Virulence be suspected, or any Deficiency
discovered in the Lymph, and the Blood originally faultless; If a Giddiness or
any sign of a principal Disorder in the Head appear; it is more advisable to
omit Bleeding, and administer a Vomit. To sum up all, a privative Apoplexy
requires Bleeding; or if the Patient be old, Cupping-glasses, Scarifications,
etc. A Positive demands Vomiting, or in room of that for old Persons sharp
Clysters, which turn to the same thing; for the Guts are a continuation of the
Stomac. Some recommend Bleeding from the jugular Veins. As for Vomits, the Dose
must be augmented in the Paroxysm; and if one do not operat, repeated till they
prove effectual. It Is most convenient to exhibit them in a liquid Form, with
some spirituous cordial Water.

The Person ought to be set upright, whether in Bed or out of Bed; the Room
well air'd, and the more sensible Parts of the Body frequently twitch'd and
pulled. Then let Blood in the right Arm, if it be convenient; and exhibit a
Vomit with all possible Expedition, or inject a Clyster of Aromatic Herbs with
Pulp of Coloquintida, or Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, with Sal Gem or Sal
Ammoniac, and other volatile Salts. All oily Ingredients must be omitted. As,

Take of the Leaves of Tobacco and Sage, Chamomil Flowers, of each a handful;
Roots of Pellitory of Spain from half an Ounce to six Drams; Pulp of
Coloquintida tied in a Bag a Dram. Boil in a sufficient quantity of Water. To
nine Ounces of the Liquor strained, add Honey of Roses, or of Rosemary Flowers,
half an Ounce, or six Drams; Electuary of Hiera with Agaric, from half an Ounce
to an Ounce; Castor in Powder, from a Scruple to half a Dram; Sal Gem from half
a Dram to two Scruples: mix for a Clyster. Or,

Take of Mother of Thyme, Tobacco-leaves, tops of lesser Centory, of each a
handful; Lavender Flowers half a handful; Roots of Pellitory of Spain, Roots of
common Flower de-luce, of each three Drams; Nettle-seeds two Drams; Pulp of
Coloquintida tied in a Bag, a Dram and a half; boil in a sufficient quantity of
human Urine. In eight Ounces of the Liquor strained dissolve of Electuary of
Hiera with Agaric an Ounce; Extract of Troches Alhandal, half a Scruple;
Essence of Castor a Dram; mix for a Clyster. Or,

Take of the Decoction of Rue, in which half a Dram of Crocus Metallorum has
been boiled, nine Ounces; Bulls Gall thickened a Dram and a half; Extract of
Troches Alhandal half a Scruple; Honey of Rosemary-flowers an Ounce and a half:
mix for a Clyster. Or,

Take of the Decoction of Chamomil Flowers half a Pound; Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum in Wine two or three Ounces; Honey from half an Ounce to an Ounce:
mix and make a Clyster. As for Suppositories,

Take of the Roots of white Hellebor in Powder, Scammony sulphurated, Troches
Alhandal, of each half a Scruple; Castor in Powder eight Grains; Sal Ammoniac a
Scruple. With a sufficient quantity of Honey make a Suppository.

In the Interim, some Apoplectic mixture may be thrown down the Throat. As,

Take of strong Apoplectic Water one Ounce; Water of Lilly Convally half an
Ounce; Matthiolus's Quintessence two Drams; Spirit of Hartshorn a Dram; Syrup
of Clovegilly-flowers half an Ounce: Mix.

Spirit of Black-cherries is of extraordinary virtue in this case. As,

Take of Black-cherry Water, Mint Water, of each an Ounce and a half; Spirit of
Black-cherries six Drams; Spirit of Hartshorn succinated, or Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac, or Spirit of human Blood, two or three Drams; distilled Oil of Amber
four or six Drops; Syrup of Clovegilly-flowers half an Ounce. Mix and give a
Spoonful now and then.

Take of Lavender-flower-Water, Sage-water, of each one Ounce; Langius his
Epileptic Water six Drams; Essence of Castor a Dram and a half; Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac one Dram; distilled Oil of Amber eight drops; Syrup of French Lavender
one Ounce: mix, etc.

Take of Apoplectic Water two Ounces; Spirit of Mother of Thyme two Drams;
Spirit of Hartshorn succinated a Dram; Syrup of Clovegilly-flowers half an
Ounce: mix and use as above.

Take of Apoplectic Water two Ounces; Water of Swallows with Castor an Ounce;
Spirit of Triacle camphoriz'd; Spirit of Hartshorn succinated, of each three
Drams; Confection Alkermes half an Ounce: mix as above.

Take of Lilly Convally Water prepared with Wine an Ounce and a half;
Elder-flower Water an Ounce; Carminative Water half an Ounce; Spirit of
Hartshorn succinated a Dram and a half; Confection Alkermes a Dram: mix as
above.

Take of Black-cherry Water two Ounces; Spirit of Black-cherries, simple Spirit
of Triacle, of each half an Ounce; Syrup of Clovegilly-flowers six Drams: mix.

Timaeus's Arcanum is of excellent use in a speechless Fit. viz.

Take of volatile Salt of Amber half a Dram, Triacle of Andromachus a Dram and a
half; Powder of Castor two Scruples; distilled Oils of Rue and Rosemary, of
each three Drops: make an Electuary. Dose as much as will lie upon the point of
a Knife, to be exhibited in some Apoplectic Vehicle. The Palate and Tongue may
be rubbed with this Electuary, or distilled Oils and Apoplectic Spirits. As,

Take of Lilly Convally Water prepared with Wine two Ounces; Spirit of
Juniper Berries an Ounce; Essence of Castor three Drams; volatile Aromatic Salt
half a Dram: mix for the abovementioned use.

This Method being observed, if the sick Person do not come to himself in a
quarter of an hour, blow the following Powder into the Nostrils, viz.

Take of the Roots of white Hellebor, and Pellitory of Spain, Marjoram Leaves,
Flowers of Lilly of the Valley, Castor, of each a Scruple: make a Powder, and
use as above. Or,

Take of the Flowers of Lilly of the Valley a Dram; Roots of white Hellebor a
Scruple: reduce 'em to Powder, and add distilled Oil of Cloves and Marjoram, of
each three Drops.

Spirit of Urine, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, and Spirit of Hartshorn succinated,
are fit for the same use; or the Fumes of Castor and Amber may be received at
the Nostrils; and the Temples and Nose anointed with Apoplectic Balsams, or
bathed with the following Mixture.

Take of Baum Water, Lilly Convally Water prepared with Wine, of each two
Ounces; Apoplectic Water, an Ounce; Vinegar of Rue, two Drams. Mix, etc.

The rectified Oil and volatile Salt of Amber, mixed with Apoplectic Waters, are
given inwardly with wonderful success; or with Camphyr, or Oil of Camphyr
dropped into the Ear. The Back, Neck, Temples and Stomac, may also be fomented
with it, or the following Mixture.

Take of expressed Oil of Mace, a Dram and a half; distilled Oil of Rue, a
Scruple; Oil of Spike, Oil of Amber, of each half a Scruple. Or,

Take of white Rock Oil two Drams; distilled Oil of Amber a Dram; distilled
Oils of Lavender, Marjoram and Sage, of each a Scruple; mix and anoint the
abovementioned parts; but withal we must be cautious in not overdoing, lest
the Head be affected by an indiscreet quantity of odoriferous Oils applied to
the Body.

If the Paroxysm do not yield to these Medicines; the Vomits and Clysters must
be repeated, blistering Plasters applied to the Neck, Arms, Thighs, Wrists,
behind the Ears, etc. the Feet rubbed and chafed with Pickle, or Vinegar and
Salt, and the external Parts of the Body pricked and twitch'd.

Having thus discussed the Fit, it remains now to corroborat Nature, and
prevent future Paroxysms by a preservative Cure. For which purpose, after
Purgation, Sudorifics and Stomachics are most proper. Sage is much applauded;
as also Cubebs, Cardamom, Rocket-seeds, and Mustard-seeds. As,

Take of Cardamoms, half a Dram; Coriander-seed, two drams; Rocket-seeds, half
an Ounce: make a Powder for several Doses to be taken when going to Bed. It Is a
very good Preservative. If an Electuary be more acceptable,

Take three large Figs, and a spoonful of Rocket or Mustard Seed; mix them in a
Mortar, adding a spoonful of strong Lavender Water, and half an Ounce of the
Juice of Violets. Dose, the Bigness of a Walnut to be taken every Morning, and
after Dinner. Let the Person take some drops of Spirit of Sal Ammoniac
anisated, or the Carminative Spirit de tribus.

Some distill a urinous Spirit from Rocket-seeds and Quick lime, which is of
admirable use. Spirit of Black Cherries is received by all as a great Specific;
And likewise the Spirit of Vitriol, thus prepared.

Take of Hungarian Vitriol calcined in the Sun, a convenient quantity; with
Spirit of Wine drawn off from Aromatic Plants, reduce it to the consistence of
a Pultise. Let it stand and digest some weeks, and then distill with an open
fire. Take the Spirit thus drawn off and distill it through an Alembic; 'twill come
off chafer'd; when it appears Cloudy, change the Receptacle, and receive a
volatile Spirit of Vitriol. Mix all the Spirits, and after digestion cohobat 'em.

Maebius his Apoplectic Spirit is very useful, viz. Take of the Flowers of
Lilly Convally six pound; Cinamom one pound; Zedoary half a pound; Saffron an
Ounce; Mace and Cloves, of each half an Ounce. Let 'em digest in Spanish Wine
for a Month, and then distill the Spirit, in which steep the following
Ingredients.

Take Roots of Valerian, Swallowwort and Piony, of each two Ounces; the Leaves
of Baum, Oak of Jerusalem, and Rosemary, of each three handfuls;
Lime-treeflowers six handfuls; Flowers of Lavender, Spike, Sage and Thyme, of
each a handful. Macerat them in the Spirit for a month in a close Vessel; then
add a sufficient quantity of Spanish Wine, and distill the Spirit, which may
afterward be rectified upon-Amber, Mosch and Camphyr. It Is a noble Apoplectic
Medicine; but is not fit to be given in the Paroxysm: For such inflammable oily
Spirits have a stupifying quality, and are very offensive to some People. In a
sanguin Apoplexy, the volatile urinous Spirits, and lean volatile Salts are
preferable to these sulphurous Medicines.

Essence of Castor mixed with vegetable Spirits, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac
camphoris'd, the volatile Salts of human Blood, human Scull, etc. are all much
approved. In fine, from the infinite variety of Apoplectic Medicines, I shall
single out the following Recipe's.

Take of Quintessence of Rosemary, two Drams and a half; Quintessence of
Lavender, a Dram and a half; mix, and give twenty drops every Morning; and in
the Evening thirty drops of Spirit of Sal Ammoniac. Or,

Take of the Essence of Castor, a Dram and a half; Spirit of Sal Ammoniac
anisated, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac succinated, of each a Dram. Dose, thirty or
forty drops twice a Day.

Take of the Waters of the Flowers of the Lime-tree, Lavender and Primroses, of
each an Ounce; Apoplectic Water, Spirit of Black Cherries, of each a Dram and a
half; Essence of Primroses, three Drams; volatile Salt of Amber, half a Dram;
Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers, an Ounce and a half. Mix. Dose, two spoonfuls
every three hours.

Take of Mint Water, Lilly Convally Water, Black Cherry Water, of each an
Ounce; Spirit of Black Cherries three Drams; Essence of Castor, a Dram and a
half; volatile Salt of Hartshorn, a Scruple; volatile Salt of Amber half a
Scruple; Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers half an Ounce.

Poterius's Diaphoretic Gold, given with Conserve of Clove Gilly-flowers, is a
famous Specific: Likewise the following Powder.

Take of prepared red Coral a Dram; Cinnabar of Antimony half a Dram; volatile
Salt of Amber a Scruple; Cubebs, half a Dram. Make a Powder. Or,

Take of the Conserves of Sage-flowers, Rosemary-flowers, and Clove
Gilly-flowers, of each half an Ounce; Confection Alkermes, Mustard-seeds, of
each three Drams; Cardamoms, Cubebs and Mace, of each half a Dram. With Syrup
of Clove Gilly-flowers make an Electuary.

Take of the Conserves of Rosemary and Lavender-flowers, Conserve of Baum, of
each an Ounce; candy'd Orange-peel, six Drams; candy'd Ginger, half an Ounce;
Mustard-seeds, Rocket-seeds, of each three Drams; Cubebs, Cinnamon, Cardamoms,
volatile Salt of Amber, of each a Dram. With Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers make
an Electuary.

Take of Conserve of Mint two Ounces; Conserve of Rosemary-flowers one Ounce;
Powder of Mustard-seeds six Drams; Cinamom, Cloves, of each half a Dram;
volatile Salt of Amber a Dram; distilled Oils of Mint and of Mace, of each eight
Drops. With a sufficient quantity of the Confection Alkermes make an Electuary.

Take of the Conserves of Rosemary-flowers, and of Sage-flowers, of each an
Ounce and a half; Ginger candy'd in the Indies, Mustard-seeds, of each six
Drams; prepared red Coral, a Dram and a half; Unicorn, Cinnabar of Antimony,
volatile Salt of Amber, of each a Dram; distilled Oil of Amber half a Dram. With
the Brodium of Ginger make an Electuary.

Take of Confection Alkermes, or Conserve of Clove Gilly-flowers, an Ounce and
a half; Nutmegs candy'd two Drams; Rocket-seeds two Drams; Cumin-seeds a Dram;
prepared Amber a Dram and a half; Cardamoms, Cubebs and Cinnamom, of each a
Scruple; Spirit of Black Cherries a Dram. With Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers
make an Electuary.

Take of Conserve of Rosemary-flowers, Conserve of Sage-flowers, of each half
an Ounce; Confection Alkermes two Drams; Powder of Castor, the Powder Diambra
and Diamoschus dulcis, of each a Scruple; Cinnabar of Antimony, distilled Oil
of Amber, of each half a Dram. With Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers make an
Electuary.

Take of the Pouders Diambra and Diamoschus dulcis, of each a Dram; prepared
Pearls, prepared red Coral, of each a Scruple; prepared white Amber four
Scruples; Confection Alkermes two Drams; Extract of the Roots of Elecampane two
Scruples; Extract of Orris half a Dram; Extract of Aromatic Calamus a Scruple;
Extract of Piony, and of the wood Aloe, of each half a Scruple; the distilled
Oils of Sage, Rosemary and Amber, of each sixteen Drops; distilled Oil of
Lavender twenty Drops; the distilled Oils of Spike, Aniseeds, Fennel, Mace and
Nutmegs, of each twelve Drops; distilled Oils of Cubebs and Cloves, of each
eight Drops; distilled Oil of Rue six Drops; fine Sugar seven Ounces. Mix, etc.
This was Kolbius's Mixture, so much celebrated for its Virtue against
Apoplexies: But it may be rendered more effectual by adding Rocket-seeds, and
Mustards-seeds.

All these Prescriptions are proper to be used both in and after the Paroxysm.
Now in pursuance of the preserving Cure, let us view the evacuating Medicines
fit to be given after or before the Paroxysm. Among which, Vomits obtain the
Precedence, as Mercurius Vitae. Or,

Take of Mynsichtius his Emetic Tartar two Grains; Sal Ammoniac nine Grains.
Make a Powder. Or,

Take of Tartar vitriolated six Grains; Mynsichtius's Emetic Tartar two Grains;
Scammony sulphurated one Grain.

Purgative Medicines are next in order. As,

Take of Crato's Pills of Amber, Extract of Wormwood, of each half a Scruple;
Extract of Troches Alhandal, one Grain; distilled Oil of Amber two Drops. With
Essence of Primroses make Pills.

Take of sweet Mercury a Scruple; Scammony sulphurated five Grains. With
Conserve of Clove Gilly-flowers make a Bolus.

Take of Ruffus his Pills de tribus, half a Scruple; Extract of black Hellebor
five Grains; Tartar vitriolated, three Grains. With distilled Oil of Caraways
make Pills.

Take of Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar, of
each half a Dram; Vitriol of Steel calcinated till it become white, a Scruple;
Magistery of the Gum of Peru fifteen Grains; Scammony prepared according to
Brendelius's Method, a Scruple; Extract of Troches Alhandal six Grains: make a
Mass for Pills, fifteen of which are one Dose.

The Decoction of sudorific Woods are very proper in the declination of the
Paroxysm, and ought to be continued for some time.

If these and such like Remedies do not accomplish the Cure, we must have
recourse to Setums, Cuppingglasses, Issues, etc. If the Person be of a
Catarrhous Constitution, an Issue in the pit of the Neck is very proper. But
these external Helps are of no use in positive Apoplexies; in the privative
indeed, where the Blood or Lymph is faulty, they frequently afford relief.

The Plaster de Ranis, with Mercury, mixed with Balsam of Peru dissolved with
the Yelk of an Egg, may be applied to the Head with good success. When the
Disease declines, a Salivation perhaps may not be improper.

ART. II. Of particular Apoplexies.
WHEN an Apoplexy seizes a particular part, it is called Paraplegia, and by most
of Writers is referred to Palsies; but the frequent reciprocal Permutation of
general Apoplexies and Paraplegia's vouch for their near alliance. Sometimes it
is only a retainer to a universal Apoplexy, at other times it comes of it self
in the form of a principal Disease. It admits of three degrees; 1. When the
Sense of the Part remains, and only its motion is lost. 2. When it is deprived
both of Sense and Motion; but retains its natural heat. 3. When it is destitute
of Sense, Motion and Heat, and becomes flaccid and soft.

Some assign the Obstruction of the Nerves for its Cause, but Experience
teaches us that it may proceed by consent from other parts; from Hysteric Fits,
Worms in the Guts, and the Pastions of the Mind. The true cause seems to be the
contraction of the nervous Parts about the root of the Spinal Marrow, which
interrupts the intercourse of the Spirits to the part affected, perhaps by the
consent of the Nerves; as the Stone in the Kidneys is wont to stupify the Leg
of the respective side.

It undergoes a frequent Permutation into Convulsions and Palsies. The manner
of its succession to privative Apoplexies is accounted for above. It succeeds
likewise to positive Apoplexies, and in that case seems to be tinctured with a
convulsive Quality.

The Method of cure is the same, as that of an universal Apoplexy. Vomits are
always proper, especially if it follow an universal Apoplexy. As,

Take of Mercurius Vitae two Grains; Scammony sulphurated three Grains: with
Conserve of Bugloss-flowers make a Bolus.

If Vomiting be very uneasy to the Patient, give a strong Purge. As,

Take of Resin of Jalap half a Scruple; dissolve it with the yelk of an Egg in
Fumitory Water six drams, Cinnamom Water a Dram. Mix.

When it follows privative Apoplexies, Bloodletting is proper; otherwise it
ought to be avoided, except in the case of a Plaethora. Issues, Blistering
Plasters laid on the Pit of the Neck, and scarify'd Cupping-glasses applied
between the Shoulders are likewise useful against this privative sort.

These general Remedies being premised, Sudorifics come next, as the volatile
Salts and Spirits of human Scull, or human Blood, and all Apoplectic or
Epileptic Specifics. The Decoction of Woods, with Juniper and Laurel-berries,
and Roots of Elecampane, is very much used for this purpose. As,

Take of Sassafras Wood two Ounces; Rosemaryleaves, a handful or two; fresh
juicy Juniper Berries, or Laurel-berries, an Ounce and a half, or two Ounces;
boil 'em in a Balneum Mariae in Wine and Water, of each a pound and a half,
with an Alembic. Mix the strained Decoction and the distilled Liquor, and add
of Spirit of Juniper Berries four Ounces; Spirit of Sal Ammoniac three or four
Drams; Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers three Ounces. Mix, and give a large draught
thrice a day.

Poterius's Diaphoretic Gold is admirably fitted for this Case. He either
prepared it of Gold calcined by Amalgamation; or, mixed Aurum fulminans with a
double quantity of flowers of Sulphur, and reduced it to a Powder of a purple
Color, by putting red hot Coals into the Crucible; then digested it for
fifteen days in rectified Spirit of Wine impregnated with Aniseeds; and
afterward separated the Spirit either by distillation or deflagration, and
reserved the Powder for use. It Is not fit to be given in a liquid form, for
that it sinks to the bottom: but thus,

Take of Conserve of Clove Gilly-flowers a Dram; Diaphoretic Gold, from fifteen
Grains to a Scruple. Make a Bolus for two Doses. Or,

Take of prepared human Scull, prepared Unicorn's Horn, of each fifteen Grains;
Diaphoretic Gold half a Scruple. Mix. Or,

Take of human Scull prepared without fire, prepared red Coral, of each fifteen
Grains; fulminatory Gold three Grains. Mix. Or,

Take of human Scull prepared without fire, prepared Unicorn's Horn, of each
twelve Grains; fulminatory Gold four Grains; volatile Salt of Vipers six Grains.
Mix.

After the first Dose of these Pouders, the Person may take a spoonful or two
of Spirit of Triacle, and then make account to sweat. Cinnabar of Antimony is
likewise a noble Sudorific. As,

Take of Cinnabar of Antimony fifteen Grains; Amber half a Scruple; volatile
Salt of Amber five Grains: make a Powder. Or,

Take of prepared human Scull, prepared red Coral, Cinnabar of Antimony, of
each half a Scruple; distilled Oils of Cinnamom and of Cloves, of each a Drop.
Make a Powder to be taken in a convenient Vehicle. Or,

Take of Black Cherry Water, Lilly Convally Water, Mint Water, of each an
Ounce; Spirit of Black Cherries six Drams; Cinnabar of Antimony half a Dram;
volatile Salt of Hartshorn fifteen Grains; Syrup of Clove Gillyflowers an Ounce.
Mix.

For an Apoplexy of the Hands, foment the Pit of the Neck with distilled Oils
and spirituous Waters. If the Feet be affected, apply them to the Loins and
neighboring Parts. But fat expressed Oils must be avoided.

Take of Mustardseeds one part; Juniper Berries two parts; bruise and infuse
them in Spirit of Wine, which reserve for Fomentation.

Take of Spirit of Wine camphoris'd, or Spirit of Ants, three Ounces; Spirit of
Earthworms an Ounce and a half; Essence of Castor six Drams; Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac with Quicklime three Drams: mix and bathe the Backbone immediately
after sweating, applying afterward a warm Cloth fumigated with Gum Ammoniac,
or rubbing it with distilled Oils mixed with Oil of Tartar, or some of the Oils
of the fat and hard parts of Animals, stripped of their nauseous stink by
frequent Cohobation upon their Caput Mortuum. If they are of themselves too
sharp, or apt to draw Blisters, qualify 'em with the Oil of Earthworms by
decoction.

If the part affected be apt to wither and consume; tho the root of the Evil be
not seated in it, it is not improper to anoint it with the following Mixture, in
order to provoke and waken the Spirits.

Take of Spirit of Earthworms three Ounces; distilled Oils of Spike, and of
Juniper, of each a Dram and a half; distilled Oils of Lavender and Marjoram, of
each half a Dram; distilled Oil of Amber two Scruples; plumous Alum (which
ought always to be added in this case) a Scruple.

If this prove too sharp, as it frequently does to scorbutic Constitutions,
take of human or Goose fat three or four Ounces; distilled Oil of Turpentin
three Drams; Oil of Juniper Berries two Drams; Oil of Spike half a Dram. Mix,
and use as above.

Let the following Plaster be likewise applied to the Backbone, viz.

Take of Gum Galbanum two parts; Gum Caran one part; soften 'em with stone Oil
into the Consistence of a Plaster.

Bathing in a Decoction of Ants is of singular Virtue both in this and many
other cases; of which more elsewhere.

ART. III. Of a Palsy.
A Palsy ought to be carefully distinguished from a stupidity of any part, and
particular Apoplexies, tho it be near allied to both. The former retains the
power of moving, tho deprived of the Sense of Feeling; the latter relates to
the Disorders of the Nerves: whereas a Palsy is principally a relaxation of the
Tendons, Fibers and Ligaments by which the part is moved, the Nerves being only
secondarily affected. So a true formal Palsy affects chiefly the moving
Faculty, and if the Nerves are not much touched, the sense of Feeling remains.
Now by this it appears that in many Cases a Palsy is accused, where particular
Apoplexies are the true Criminals. Their difference is thus made out, 1. The
particular Apoplexies are retainers to the Disorders of the Brain and spinal
Marrow; whereas Palsies follow another set of Diseases, as the Scurvy,
Hypochondriac and Colic Fits, and excessive Drinking. 2. In the former the
original and uppermost part of the Nerves is chiefly affected, and upon that
account external Remedies are applied to the Neck and Backbone, without regard
to the Apoplectic Part. But in the latter, that part of the Nerve which
accompanies the Muscles of the place, is principally injured, and accordingly
external Applications are confined to that quarter. 3. The former deprives both
of sense and motion; the latter oftimes retains the sense, and is molested with
pains. 4. The former are constant and obstinat; the latter relents now and
then, and it is not quite so hard a matter to compass its Cure.

Some Palsies are called Privative, when the Passages for the Spirits are
straightened and embarass'd, by Obstructions or Compressions of the Nerves, the
sudden retreat of the small Pox, Wounds, Falls, and such like external Causes.
But these are more properly particular Apoplexies. A true positive Palsy may be
occasioned by a cold moist Air, bathing in cold Water, etc. Thus old Men and
Children are as it were half paralytic; the former by reason of a watery Serum
that succeeds in the room of their exhausted nutritious Juice, and unbends the
Fibers; the latter by virtue of overflowing Moisture.

The usual internal Cause of a Palsy is an acid Humor conveyed along with the
Lymph or Serum to the affected part, where it vitiats the Fibers, and renders
'em unfit for their wonted Motions. Palsies of this kind are frequently
occasioned by immoderat drinking of some Wines that partake of a notable
volatile Acid, which not being concocted in the Stomac, is thrown upon the
external parts, and creates in them sometimes a tickling sort of Pain,
resembling the motion of Pismires; sometimes a stupid, and sometimes a tearing
Pain: Thus the Fibers are corrupted, but the Nerves are at first secure; and
accordingly the moving Faculty is extinguished, while that of Feeling remains
entire, tho in progress of time it may dwindle away.

A scorbutic Acid joined to a serous Vehicle, frequently causes Palsies. It
proceeds insensibly; at first causes a wandering Stupidity and Titillation of
the Fingers or Toes. One day they are quite well, another day mightily swelled,
and retain the Sense of Feeling, tho rendered in some measure stupid; and the
Person when lying can move 'em; but if he attempt to stand, can perform no
progressive Motion without a great deal of pain. It Is a volatile austere Acid
that gives rise to these Symptoms; and if Austerity prevail, Convulsions and
Contractions invade the part.

The French Pox, Worms in the Guts, and Suffocations of the Matrix may procure
Palsies: But the Bilious Colic, that proceeds from thin sharp Humors, more
frequently introduces 'em. If these Colic Pains be exasperated by violent
Purgation, or otherwise, as it frequently happens, the Navel being drawn
inwards, and the Belly very much bound and gripped, there follows a Stupidity,
and afterward a Paralytic Disposition of some Members of the Body. In this
case the Cause seems to be a Scorbutic Acid lodged in the nervous Knot of the
Mesentery, which contracts the Nerves, and so prevents the regular distribution
of the Spirits to these Parts: So that partly by the mutual consent of
Membrans, and partly by the Translation of the morbific Matter to the external
Parts, such Palsies take their rise. The suppression of wonted Evacuations of
Blood, and the Passions of the Mind, especially Grief and Want are likewise apt
to cause 'em.

Besides these internal Causes, there are several external Occasions of
Palsies; as touching the Cramp-fish, or some Indian Shell-fishes, reported to
be endowed with a numming Virtue; approaching to mercurial and mineral Fumes,
and an indiscreet tampering with Narcotics.

If the Nerves be chiefly affected, as in a total Privation of feeling, or when
the Disease proceeds from a Wound, Fall, or other external Accidents, or
succeeds an Apoplexy, the Original of the Nerves must be chiefly regarded,
according to the Method proposed for particular Apoplexies. If the Sense of
Feeling be entire, or not much impaired, the Ligaments and Tendons of the part
affected ought to be most taken care of. If a Palsy invade the Face, it is
distinguished from a Dog-Cramp by this, that in the former the paralytic part
is soft and flaccid, and easily reduced to its natural posture; but in the
latter, the contracted Part is hard, and cannot be brought to join the others
without pain. As for the privative Palsies that approach to the nature of
Apoplexies, or in which the Sense of Feeling is quite lost, or the Evil
inveterat and fixed to a Part, their Cure will be very difficult: but if once
cured, they are not so apt to relapse, as the proper positive Palsies
proceeding from internal Causes. If the heat of the part be quite extinguished,
and Contractions seize it: If the Eye of the paralytic Side be lessened: If the
Person be old and of a Cacochymical or Cachectic Constitution: they are all
cross Circumstances. If a Trembling invade the Part: If a Looseness succeed to
a light Palsy, or an acute Fever to the Apoplectic Sort: they are esteemed
Signs of Recovery.

In regulating the method of Cure, we must heedfully distinguish the privative
apoplectic Palsies from the positive sort: If the former arise from external
Causes, the Cure turns upon their removal, and inunctions of the part with the
Queen of Hungary's Water, Rock Oil, Oil of Juniper, Oil of Lavender, and above
all Balsam of Peru. Internally nothing equals Oil of Lavender taken to the
quantity of four or six drops in bed, in order to sweat; for which purpose
distilled Oil of Amber is likewise proper. If they proceed from internal
Causes, Sudorific and Cephalic Medicines are used in the same manner as for
particular Apoplexies; and in an inveterat Case a Salivation is the last Refuge.

As for positive Palsies, the peccant matter must be corrected and discharged
by aromatic and volatile Sudorifics, and the nervous Parts corroborated and
restored to life by the external application of penetrating meagre Oils. In
order to compass these ends, 'twill be needful to observe the following Rules.

1. Since the peccant matter is an Acid that owes its Original to the first
Passages, Saline Digestives, Vomits and sharp Clysters ought to be premised;
and whatever purgative Medicines are used, they must be very gentle, especially
in the beginning. 2. A temperat milk Diet ought to be closely pursued; for that
it vanquishes any Acid, and supplies the Nerves with a Chyl-like Juice, capable
to repair their loss of moisture, occcasion'd by copious Sweats. 3. When a
Palsy is caused by a Colic or Scurvy, by all means avoid strong Purges, lest
Convulsions ensue. Soft Laxatives, in which black Hellebor is the chief
Ingredient, may be ventured upon. Or Clysters impregnated with Carminative Oils
may be frequently injected; but at first they must be gentle and soft, as those
of Milk and Turpentine, etc. and in the progress of the Disease if the Patient
reap no benefit by 'em, you may add a small Whet, 4. Fat viscous Oils are
improper for external Use. Penetrating and spirituous Liniments are only
convenient, and ought always to be used immediately after Sweating, while the
Pores are yet open. Indeed if the Person be scorbutic, temperat things are best
to begin with. And when the affected part begins to wither, and the Person
withal is of a choleric Constitution, it is advisable to abstain from applying
these subtle volatile Remedies. But where a Palsy proceeds from a Corruption of
the Lymph, and the part is swelled up, they are very needful. 5. If the
stopping of any wonted Evacuation of Blood give rise to a Palsy, repeated
Blood-letting is wont to finish the Cure.

I am now advanced to the Prescriptions of proper Remedies. For Vomiting, the
Flowers of Antimony, with Extract of Scammony are recommended by Hartman. For
Purging, Sweet Mercury is much applauded by Sylvius, and Turpentin by Platerus:
Hellebor and Turbith are generally approved; but Coloquintida ought always to
be added for a Whet.

Take of the Arthritic Pills a Scruple; Scammony sulphurated four Grains;
Extract of Troches Alhandal a Grain: With Essence of Sage make Pills. Or,

Take of the Herbs Germander and Groundpine, of each a handful; Flowers of
Rosemary, of Primroses, and of Sage, of each two little handfuls; Roots of
Angelica, Masterwort, and Florentin Orris, of each three Drams; Roots of black
Hellebor a Dram; picked Senna, six Drams; Roots of common Spurge half a Dram;
Cardamoms and Cubebs, of each three Drams; Salt of Tartar a Dram and a half.
Mix for a Bag to be infused in Wine.

Sudorific Decoctions of Guajacum, Burdoc, etc. are much in use: But Willis has
remarked that those whose Blood is stuffed with a fixed Salt, and not much
diluted with inspid Serum, are apt to be offended by Sweating.

The internal Specifics for this Disease are much the same as those for
Apoplexies and Epilepsies. The Decoction of Rosemary over a gentle Fire in
Balneum Mariae, mixed with a little Essence of Castor, is a noble Medicine. A
large draught of it ought to be taken in the Morning with a fasting Stomac.
Primroses, French Lavender, distilled Oils of Lavender and Amber are much
approved. The Decoction of Elecampane is a sovereign Remedy for Palsies arising
from a Colic. Sassafras and Guajacum are of excellent use, especially the
former; Rosemary and Juniper or Bay Berries ought always to be boiled with em.
Poterius found great benefit by the following Prescription.

Take of the shavings of Sassafras Wood one Ounce; Bay Berries an Ounce and a
half; boil them in six pound of Wine to three pound, and reserve it for use.

Instead of the Decoctions of these Woods, Essences and Spirits may be prepared
from 'em, that are of singular use. Lindanus recommends a Wood called Pavana,
given to the quantiry of two Scruples in a spoonful of Spirit of Wine: It
procures Vomiting, Purging and Sweating, without impairing the strength of the
Person. Millet-seeds are likewise very proper for procuring Sweat. The volatile
Preparations of Tartar, are wonderfully extolled. Its volatile Salt or Spirit,
drawn from the dregs of Wine or stinking Oil of Tartar, or the Spirit of Tartar
cohobated with tartaris'd Spirit of Urine, are very useful in Cholic,
Hypochondriac, and Scorbutic Palsies. Sylvius was wont to cure Cholic Palsies
with his Sal volatile Oleosum. Next are the Spirit and volatile Salt of Urine
prepared by putrefaction, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, Spirit of Lavender, the
Spirit and volatile Salt of Vipers, Spirit of Hartshorn succinated, volatile Salt
of Amber, given along with Cinnabar of Antimony, and Magistery of Pearls: But
above all, the volatile Preparations from Worms and Ants, have merited the
greatest approbation. If you digest a vegetable Spirit with Ants for some time,
you will have an incomparable Medicine that may be used both internally and
externally.

But withal we are to remember that these volatile Remedies are not fit to be
given upon the first invasion of the Disease, till the Acid in the first
Passages be in a good measure vanquished. Upon which account the fixed
Absorbents ought to lead the Van. As,

Take of prepared human Bones, from a Scruple to half a Dram; Cinnabar of
Antimony, from twelve to twenty Grains; volatile Salt of Amber, from ten to
twelve Grains. Make a Powder for two Doses. Now after a discreet use of such
like fixed Medicines, is the time to exhibit the volatile Sudorifics.

Poterius's Diaphoretic Gold is a noted Specific. Six Grains may be given for a
Dose. Helmont commends the volatile Tincture of Coral. I have seen an admirable
Tincturemade with volatile Spirit of Tartar in his Majesty of Great Britain's
Laboratory; but Mr. Febure concealed the way of Preparation.

If a positive Palsy proceed from the Relaxation, or prevailing Moisture of any
Part, it is convenient to anoint both the Part it self, and the Backbone, with
the following Liniment.

Take of human and Goose Fat, of each an Ounce; Oil of Earth three Drams. Mix.
Tacamahac and Balsam of Peru are fit for the same use. The Plaster for the
Nerves of Tacamahac and Galbanum softn'd in distilled Oil of Amber and Oil of
Bricks may be applied to the Joints. If the Ligaments are much unbended and
flat, apply Crollius's styptic Plaster softened with Oil of Bricks and Oil of
Earth, and in the mean while endeavor to procure Sweat, by giving Venice
Triacle inwardly. Barbette recommends the following Plaster,

Take of Gum Caran half an Ounce; Galbanum an Ounce; Oil of Euphorbium a Dram
and a half. Make a Plaster.

If the Disease proceed from mercurial Fumes, exhibit the Decoction of
Elecampane and Fennel; and after the Mercury is thrown out by sweating, let the
Patient drink Whey or Milk.

In a scorbutic light Palsy, the urinous volatile Medicines, and Milk are
proper. The Decoction of Pineapple is likewise much commended. Or,

Take of the Tendrels of Fir an Ounce and a half; China Roots an Ounce; cut
them small, and boil them in Ale and Water till the half be consumed. Give a
draught of the strained liquor twice a day. These Ingredients may be also
boiled in Milk.

The Decoction of Betony with Juniper berries; or an Essence prepared from the
Rob of Pine-apples with some Antiscorbutic Spirit, and mixed with Castor, are
very proper. After a regular use of fixed Absorbents and volatile Medicines,
Milk or Whey mixed with Antiscorbutics is a sovereign Remedy; but it ought
always to follow these Premises. Issues and Setums are not improper in this
Case.

If a Palsy proceed from the Colic; the Belly must be chiefly taken care of;
Lenitive Clysters of Turpentin and Milk frequently injected: and strong
Purgatives carefully avoided. The Decoction of Elecampane, of Millet-seeds and
the four hot Seeds, and Sassafras, are proper Sudorifics. Whey mixed with
Antiscorbutics is much esteemed. Let the Navel and part affected be fomented
with Spirit of Tartar or of Sal Ammoniac, and anointed thrice a day with
Paracelsus his Galbanetum.

So much for the internal Cure of Palsies, It remains now to consider the
external Forms. If the Disease be inveterat, and the Part begin to wither,
temperat fat Oils are proper. If the sense of Feeling be not much impaired, and
the power of Moving only lost, the strong Apoplectic Waters, or rectified
Spirit of Wine, in which the Pouders of Mustard-seeds, Pepper, Rue-seeds,
Nettle-seeds, Aronroots, and Pellitory of Spain, have been infused and
digested, are fit for external Fomentation. Or,

Take of fresh Tobacco-leaves a handful or two; Leaves of Origanum, Flowers of
Elder, of each a handful; Roots of Angelica, from an Ounce to two Ounces; Roots
of Pellitory of Spain, Aron-roots, of each an Ounce; Euphorbium, Castor and
Myrrh, of each from half an Ounce: to six Drams; white and black Pepper, of
each three Drams; Flowers of Arabian Stechas, of Lavender, and Lilly Convally,
of each half an Ounce; Rocket-seeds or Mustard-seeds, Seeds of Mountain-Siler,
from six Drams to an Ounce and a half: cut and beat them small; and pour upon
'em of rectified Spirit of Wine two parts, of Spirit of Earthworms one part:
digest 'em in a Balneum Mariae; and draw off the Spirit by distillation. With
which foment the parts immediately after sweating. Or,

Take of the Herbs Rosemary, Sage, Marjoram or Lavender, of each a handful;
Lavender-flowers, Lilly Convally-flowers, and Rosemary-flowers, of each two
little handfuls; Juniper Berries an Ounce; Mustard-seeds, from half an Ounce to
an Ounce; Castor three Drams; black Pepper a Dram and a half. Infuse them in
Spirit of Wine, and after digestion reserve the strained Liquor for use as
above. And if the Disease be accompanied by scorbutic Pains, add to it some
Spirit of Sal Ammoniac prepared with Quicklime. Or,

Take of Aqua Articularis for external use, two, three or four Ounces; Spirit
of Sal Ammoniac with Quicklime, from an Ounce to two Ounces; Spirit of
Earthworms prepared by putrefaction half an Ounce. Mix, and bathe the part
thrice a day. Or,

Take of Spirit of Wine camphoris'd three Ounces; Spirit of putrified
Earthworms an Ounce; Essence of Castor six Drams. Mix, and use as above. Or,

Take of Apoplectic Water three Ounces; Spirit of putrified Earthworms, and
Spirit of Sal Ammoniac succinated, of each half an Ounce. Mix, etc.

In a Colic Palsy, rectified Spirit of Tartar mixed or cohobated with Spirit of
Wine tartaris'd, are externally used with great success. Balsam of Peru
dissolved with the Yelk of an Egg, and mixed with Essence of Amber extracted by
rectified Spirit of Wine, is much approved for external use in all sorts of
Palsies.

Take of common stinging Nettles three handfuls; Chamomil one handful;
Cumin-seeds a Dram; Salt three Ounces: beat 'em well in a Mortar, and boil them
in a sufficient quantity of human Urine, till the fourth part be consumed.
Bathe the part Morning and Evening with this Decoction, and wrap it up in a
Cloth dipped in the Liquor, and after three or four days anoint it with Oil of
Foxes. In Apoplectic Palsies pricking with Nettles is a very successful Remedy.
Bathing in fermenting Wine, or such as is reduced to a Fermentation by throwing
Quicklime into it, is of extraordinary use both against Palsies and
Sciatica's; for by this means the volatile Tartar of the Wine insinuats it self
into the Part. A bag full of Ants thrown into boiling Water yields a Vapor,
which is conveniently received upon the part, is very serviceable; after the
Bag has lost its smell, it may be boiled in Water for the Patient to bathe in.

Take of Brimstone, and Bay Berries, of each half a pound; Roots of Gentian
three handfuls; Roots of Elecampane, and long Birth-wort, of each two handfuls:
boil them in Quicklime Water for an artificial Bath.

The last Refuge is the Hot-baths: But if a Colic, or use of Wine gave rise to
the Disease, or arthritic and gouty Pains accompany it, they are not proper. In
a word, they are more convenient for a Sanguin or Phlegmatic, than a Choleric
Constitution.

Take of the Herbs Marjoram and Sage, of each a handful; Rosemary two handfuls;
Juniper Berries four Ounces; Bay Berries two Ounces; Roots of Pellitory of
Spain an Ounce. Boil them in Water, and place the hot Decoction under the
Person's Feet, that the Fumes may ascend.

Take of Galbanum half a pound; Oil of Turpentin a pound and a half: distill the
Oil from them, to which add an Ounce of Oil of Lavender; and then repeat the
distillation, which produces an excellent Balsam to be digested and circulated
with rectified or tartaris'd Spirit of Wine. This may be applied to the Navel,
Back, or Part affected, as occasion requires.

Take of white Rock Oil two Drams; distilled Oil of Amber half a Dram;
distilled Oils of Lavender, Marjoram and Spike, of each a Scruple: mix, and
anoint the affected parts.

As for Plasters, those of Tacamahac are most approved, especially when the
Nerves are overcharged with Moisture. But if the Person be scorbutic, or the
Part deprived of all manner of Sense, temperat oily things are best: As,

Take of human or Goose fat, of each three, four, or six Ounces; distilled Oil
of Turpentin three Drams; Oil of Juniper Berries a Dram; Oil of Spike half a
Dram. Mix, and anoint the Part. Or,

Take of human Fat two Ounces; Oil of Earthworms an Ounce; Rock Oil three
Drams; Oil of Amber a Dram and a half. Mix, and use as above.

Take a bowell'd Goose, and fill it with the Leaves of Sage, Rosemary, Spike,
and Avens; to which add of the fat of a wild Cat, an Ounce and a half;
Frankincense, Mastic and Amber, of each half an Ounce; Castor and Eupho^bium,
of each two Drams: Sow 'em in, and roast the Goose on a Spit; reserving the Fat
that drops from it, ^s an admirable Liniment for Paralytic Parts. Or,

Take a bowell'd Gander, and wash it well with Wine, then stuff its Belly with
Frankincense, Myrrh, Mastic, of each two Ounces; Ointment called Martialum, six
Ounces. Roast it on a Spit; throw away the watery Phlegm that drops from it, and
take of the Fat well separated an Ounce, and Powder of Earthworms two Ounces.
Mix, and distill through a Retort an incomparable Oil for anointing paralytic
Members.

These external Remedies are applied to the paralytic Members when the
Ligaments and Tendons are faulty; but if the source of the Distemper be lodged
in the Nerve, then we apply 'em to the Back or Neck, or crown of the Head,
according to the Progress of the Nerve.

CHAP. IV. Of the Deficiency of Rational Operations.
THE Intellect or Rational Faculty being immaterial, cannot be vitiated of it
self by any morbific Cause; but for so much as it is conversant about the
Objects of our internal Senses, it makes use of their Ministry; and if they are
out of order, shares of the common Calamity. The internal Senses are the
Imagination and Memory, which depend upon the regular Motion of the Animal
Spirits in the Brain, and run into disorder upon their Enormities, as appears a
posteriori by ridiculous Gestures, Words and Actions. Thus whatever impairs the
right use of Reason, must immediately affect the Imagination and Memory.

Our rational Faculty is injured either by being diminished or abolished, as by
Stupidity and Folly; or by being perverted, as in Deliriums, etc.

ART. I. Of the defect of Memory, and Stupidity.
OUR Reason is impaired or extinguished by the deficiency of Memory, which is
an Endowment common to us with Beasts, and is generally affected by the
Disorders of the Head. The remote Causes that prejudice the Memory may be
reduced to three Classes. 1. Whatever alters the regular form of the Brain, its
Pores and Passages; as Falls, Bruises, Wounds, or any preternatural form of the
Head. 2. Whatever corrupts the Blood and Animal Spirits; as immoderat Drinking,
unseasonable Fasting, stopping of any wonted Evacuation of Blood, excessive
Bleeding, etc. 3. Whatever exhausts, disperses, or stupifies the Spirits; as an
indiscreet use of Opium, Poison, Love-Potions, excessive Venery, sudden Fear,
Care and Watchings, and excess and multiplicity of Studies, sleepy Diseases,
Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Madness, acute Fevers, the Plague, and old Age.

A natural want of Memory being incurable, dos not fall within the compass of
our present inquiry. If it be preternaturally occasioned, we ought to consider
the Circumstances and past life of the Patient. If the Person be old, drousy,
and inclined to sleep much, and voids a great deal of Phlegm by the Mouth and
Nostrils, but retains a vigorous Judgment, we will find that in his Youth he
was not given to study, or perplexed with Business and Care; and that the loss
of Memory proceeds from an inundation of Lymph in the Brain. Old Persons whose
Youth was employed in much study and thought, have generally a dry habit of
Body, void but little by the Mouth or Nose, sleep not much, and are easily
wakened: and their want of Memory proceeds from the dryness of the Brain, and
agility of the Spirits. If young Persons are seized with a loss or deficiency
of Memory, whose Apprehension and Genius was and continues lively, it argues a
dryness occasioned in the Brain by the nimble Revolutions of the Spirits; and
generally such Persons are in danger of losing both Judgment and Memory when
they grow old. And those whose Memory and Judgment are very fresh and keen in
their Youth, are apt to run the same risque. If a Youth have a weak Memory, and
withal a drousy inactive Temper, it is owing to the Humidity of the Brain, and
Deficiency of Animal Spirits.

The sudden loss of Memory without any visible Cause, is a Forerunner of an
Apoplexy, Palsy or Epilepsy. If it surprise one already enfeebled and weak,
it is a sign of Death. If it arise from the moisture of the Brain, it is easier
cured, than when it flows from an excessive dryness. If it be caused by Poison,
Love-potions, inveterat Diseases of the Head, malignant and acute Fevers, it is
almost incurable.

As for the Cure. The remote Causes must be specially accounted for: If it
proceed from a dryness of the Brain, aromatic and spirituous Medicines are very
noxious; nor are there any Medicines so effectual, as moist and juicy Food,
Milk, Chocolate, etc. If it arise from the Moisture of the Brain, attended by a
stupidity and drousiness of the Spirits, Purgatives are first proper, then
Aromatics, sneezing Pouders, and Medicines to be chewed.

The aromatic Medicines are Rosemary, Baum, Stechas, Spike, and all the Spices.
Three Cubebs taken in the Morning with a fasting stomac, corroborat the Memory
wonderfully. Cardamoms are very good, but more proper for old than young
Persons. Frankincense and Amber are likewise very useful. But above all,
Ambergrease is the most powerful Medicine. It Is given in Powder with Sugar, or
by way of Essence or Tincture prepared with Spirit of Roses or black Cherries.
It ought to be given in a small Dose, by reason of a Stupidity that sometimes
follows it. Where the Brain is dry, or the Patient young and of a hot
Constitution, it is not proper. But for old People it is incomparable, if
discreetly used. Besides, it is an incentive to Venery, which is a mortal Enemy
to the Memory.

Laurembergius recommends the four following Compositions for corroborating the
Memory, which are chiefly to be used when the Brain is moist, and the Spirits
drousy.

Take of juicy Tobacco-leaves two handfuls; Roots of Pellitory of Spain three
Drams; Ginger a Dram. With Honey reduce 'em to the consistence of a Pultice, and
make little round Balls to be chewed or rolled to and again in the Mouth.

Take of the Herbs, Baum, Marjoram, Sage and Rosemary, Bay Leaves, of each a
handful; Flowers of Lavender, Lilly Convally, Lime-tree, and French Lavender,
of each a little handful. Boil them in Spanish or Rhenish Wine, and wash the
Head with the Decoction every fourth, fifth, or sixth day.

Take a convenient quantity of Spanish Wine, in which macerat for fourteen or
fifteen days the following Ingredients: Take of the Herbs, Basil, Marjoram,
Sage, Baum and Pennyroyal, of each half a handful; Flowers of Borrage, of Sage
and Primroses, Flowers of Rosemary, of French Lavender, and of Lilly Convally,
of each a little handful. Distill through an Alembic, and receive the Spirit in a
large open Body, which set into a heap of large black Ants, such as resort to
resinous Trees. When four or five handfuls of Ants have crept into it, stir
them with a stick till they be all stifled. Then set 'em to digest for fourteen
days in the Sun, and after that draw off the Spirit, and infuse into it of the
Confection of Anacardium, Cinnamom, of each an Ounce; Saffron half a Dram;
Mosch twelve Grains. Mix, digest and strain out the Spirit; of which exhibit a
spoonful in a Glass of Wine every Morning.

Take of Tobacco-leaves two handfuls; Flowers of Common Basil, of Baum, of
Primroses, and of Marjoram, of each a handful. Bruise 'em, and mix with Oil of
Olives and fresh Butter, of each three Ounces; Rhenish or Spanish Wine five
Ounces: boil for a Liniment to be strained and applied to the Temple and top of
the Head.

Montagnana extolled the following Prescription for a valuable Arcanum: Take of
Cubebs, Calamint, Mastic, Nutmegs and Cloves, of each a Dram; Eastern
Ambergrease half a Dram; Mosch five Grains. With Juice of Marjoram make Pills.
Let the Patient take down a few at Night, and double the quantity next Morning.

Sebizius recommends the following Pills, viz. Take of Aloe an Ounce; Rhubarb
two Drams; Myrrh, Saffron and Agaric, of each a Dram; Gentian and Zedoary
Roots, of each a Scruple. With Venice Triacle make small Pills. Dose, seven or
nine.

Tea boiled in Wine is a sovereign Remedy for corroborating the Memory and
Judgment. Or,

Take of the Cephalic Water for internal use, and Aqua Sophorum, of each two
Ounces; Matthiolus's Quintessence half an Ounce; Spirit of black Cherries,
Spirit of Lilly Convally, Spirit of Primroses, and Essence of Amber, of each a
Dram; Syrup of Betony an Ounce: Mix for internal Use. Or,

Take of Conserves of Rosemary-flowers, of Sage-flowers, and of Clove
Gillyflowers, of each half an Ounce; Candy'd Nutmegs three Drams; of the
Pouders Diambra and Diamoschus dulcis, and Spirit of Lilly Convally, of each a
Dram and a half. With a sufficient Quantity of Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers
make an Electuary. Or,

Take six fat Figs; Rocket-seeds six Drams; Bastard Saffron a Scruple. With
Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers make an Electuary: of which take every morning the
bigness of a Walnut; using after Dinner Spirit of Hartshorn, or Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac, succinated.

Silver dissolved in Spirit of Sal Ammoniac is likewise commended.

As for external Applications. Let Oil of Myrrh per deliquium be applied to the
Temples and hinderpart of the Head. When the Head is oppressed with cold
Humors, let the Sutures called Coronalis and Sagittalis, be fomented with
Spirit of Wine, with Pepper infused in it. In the like Case Hildesheim
recommends the following Essence, viz.

Take of the Leaves of Betony, of Sage, of Lavender, of Rosemary, and flowers
of red Roses, of each a handful; Nutmegs, long Pepper, Galangal, and round
rooted Cyperus, of each four Scruples; Castor two Drams; Nutmegs half an Ounce;
Myrrh and Frankincense, of each three Ounces; Saffron half a Dram or two
Scruples. Infuse them in Spirit of Wine; digest and strain it for anointing the
Nostrils, Temples, and top of the Head.

ART. II. Of Deliriums in general.
THE Depravation of the Rational Faculty is called a Delirium or Doting, which
sometimes seizes the Apprehension alone, and at other times reaches to all the
three Operations of the Intellect together. The immediate Cause is the disorder
of the Animal Spirits, in respect of their Substance and Motion; which
occasions varions Deliriums according to the Humor and Constitution of the
Patient; as one and the same Wine fills one Man with Anger and Fury, a second
with Mirth and Jollity, and inspires a third with Love.

The remote Causes are either external, as narcotic Vegetables, poisonous or
mad Animals, etc. of which more anon: or internal, as Fevers, Melancoly, etc.
These internal Causes determine the Animal Spirits to such and such particular
Motions, after the same manner as the Titillation of the Genital Liquor
occasions particular Dreams and nocturnal Pollutions.

ART. III. Of Deliriums arising from Internal Causes.
WHEN a violent Fever attends a Delirium, it is called a Phrensy; or if the
Delirium be not very high, a Paraphrenitis. If it be quite free from a Fever,
we call it a melancholic Madness.

Of Phrensies.
THE immediate Cause is the confused and rapid Motion of the Spirits in the
Brain, especially in the Corpus Callosum. The remote Causes are either the Heat
and Effervescency, or the Stagnation of the Blood in the Brain. In the
beginning of burning Fevers, the former occasions the Agility and Perturbation
of the Spirits; and consequently the Watchings and light Deliriums that then
molest the Patient. (If these Symptoms happen without a notorious
Effervescency, it is a fatal sign of Malignity.) The latter inflames the
Membrans and Cortical Part, and so causes a Phrensy, properly so called. This
Inflammation is made to appear by diffecting Phrenitic Persons after death; and
is justly suspected when Pleurisies and Inflammations of the Lungs or any
external Inflammations, disappear of a sudden, and are succeeded by Phrensies.

The remote Causes are excessive Heat, drinking of spirituous Liquors,
suppression of any usual Evacuation of Blood, or of a virulent Gonorrhy, Anger,
and the exalted Passions of the Mind.

It ought to be remarked, that tho all Phrensies are attended with Fevers,
they do not always proceed from the Fever, as in malignant Fevers, where the
Blood does not boil high. Sportive ridiculous Phrensies ought to be carefully
distinguished from those of a serious, angry, and eager Character. According to
Hippocrates, the former are of a more benign Stamp than the latter.

As for the Symptoms. An actual Delirium is easily perceived. An imminent
Delirium is discovered by a sudden alteration of the Patient's Humor, a bold,
fierce way of talking much, unquietness and tossing in Bed; the nauseous
repetition of one thing, or forgetfulness of what was said or done; obstinat
Watching, or the interruption and uneasiness of sleep. When the Delirium has
actually seized upon 'em, they become morose and furious, leap out of Bed, and
talk strangely; the Urine is at first thick, and in a little time after grows
thin and transparent; the Head feels hot; the Eyes look glittering, fiery, and
very moveable. (If they appear stiff and staring, it is an infallible sign of a
furious Phrensy.) If in the beginning of an acute Disease, the Person complain
of a pain of the Eye Balls, or an Inflammation of the Eyes, or be apt to imagine
strange Colors, it is a fatal Presage of Doting and Convulsions.

A proper Phrensy which proceeds from the Inflammation of the Membrans of the
Brain, is foreseen from the violent beating of the Arteries in the Neck and
Temples. It is attended by an unsufferable Pain of the hinder part of the Head;
a difficult Respiration; an invincible Heat, and continual Fever free from the
sense of Thirst; a proneness to rub and toss the Head, and pull up the Hairs.
When the Inflammation relents, it tends to a Gangrene, which occasions
Convulsions, Lethargies, and a total inactivity.

A true Phrensy proceeding from the Inflammation of the Brain is very
dangerous. If it increase after sleeping; if it be serious and fierce; if a
clammy cold Sweat drop from the Head, while the Body is unconcerned; if it be
attended by a difficult Respiration, immoderat Watching, Headaches, notable
Weakness, a ghastly Countenance, an invincible Forgetfulness, a Hiccough,
gnashing of the Teeth, trembling of the Tongue and Hands, and involuntary
voiding of Excrements; if the Person he speechless, apt to gather up or pick
the Bed-cloaths, or become lethargic; if the Nostrils drop, and the Urine be
not tinctured: All these Symptoms portend Death. A Paraphrenitis, proceeding
only from the Heat and Effervescency of the Blood and Spirits, is more
tolerable.

A Symptornatical Phrensy is a proper Subject of Cure; but a Critical one ought
not to be meddled with. It is followed for the most part by bleeding at the
Nose, and is distinguished by the following Symptoms. The Urine affords signs
of Concoction; the Pulse is unequal, but strong and large; the Eyes sparkle, a
murmuring Noise disturbs the Ears, the Nostrils itch, the Face is red, and the
lower Belly softly distended. Sometimes it is ushered in by a sudden Headache;
or the sick Person is young and apt to bleed at the Nose. If these Symptoms are
wanting, the Phrensy is symptomatical, and ought to be cured by allaying the
Heat and Turgency of the Blood and Spirits, or removing the Stagnation.

In the first place let the Physician take care that he be not imposed upon by
drunken Persons, whose Phrensies resemble those of Fevers. In the next place,
if the phrentic Person be molested with Headaches and immoderat Watchings,
Narcotic Medicines are very proper, but ought to be cautiously administered, for
fear of exalting the Phrensy, or converting it into a Lethargy. In order to
avoid such Consequences, let us take notice of the following Cautions. 1. That
in acute hot Diseases, Opiats ought to be prepared with Vinegar. 2. That they
ought not to be administered in the beginning or height of the Distemper, but
only during its increase. 3. That when the Person is very weak, they should be
omitted. 4. They ought still to be mixed with Bezoardic, Diaphoretic Pouders.

Blood-letting is always convenient, unless the Fever be very malign; and
ought to be liberally performed, and in the following manner. 1. Let a Vein in
the Hams be first opened; then in the Arm; and afterward in the Forehead.
Incase of a particular Suppression of Blood in the lower Region, let the Vein
in the Ancle be first opened. Instead of breathing the Vein in the Forehead,
some recommend the Application of scarify'd Cupping-glasses to the forepart of
the Head. 2. Let the Surgeon, while the Vein is open, lay his hand upon the
Patient's Head, and mind the beating of the Artery, in order to adjust the
quantity of Blood to be drawn forth, and the strength of the Patient. 3. Let
the Orifice of the Vein be stopped and opened by turns by the Surgeon's Finger.
Thus the stagnating Blood is evacuated without impairing the strength of the
Patient in so great a measure as otherwise.

As for external Applications, all strong smelling things, except Camphyr,
ought to be avoided; Vinegar must be added, but in small quantities, because
its sharpness hinders sleep.

A symptomatical Phrensy disappears upon the removal of the principal Disease.
Cooling and narcotic Medicines are its proper Cure; to which Diaphoretic
Febrifuga's are joined according to the Degree and Circumstances of the Fever.

Take of the Waters of Male Pimpernel, Purslain, and white Water Lillies, of
each an Ounce and a half; Syrup of Water Lillies, and Syrup of Poppies, of each
six Drams.

The Acid Mineral Spirits of Vitriol, Salt, Sulphur, dulcified Spirit of Nitre,
and dulcified Spirit of Salt, are very useful against Phrensies. Camphyr has a
peculiar pacific Virtue. If it be added to Opiats, their Dose ought to be
proportionably lessened: As,

Take of the Conserve of red Poppy-flowers vitriolated half a Dram; Langelot's
Laudanum Opiatum one Grain; Camphyr two Grains. Mix, etc.

Sugar of Lead prepared with Spirit of Nitre is a powerful Pacific. The
Decoction of the Flowers of Male Pimpernel in Water, whetted with a little
Rhenish Wine, is of excellent use.

Take of the four great Cold-seeds, of each a Dram and a half; white
Poppy-seeds three Drams. With Purslain-water make an Emulsion. To which add
human Scull prepared without Fire half a Dram; Bezoar Mineral a Scruple; Syrup
of Purslain half an Ounce. Mix for use.

In a malignant Phrensy let the following Powder be exhibited, viz.

Take of Cinnabar of Antimony twelve or fifteen Grains; Lunar Bezoar six or
eight Grains; Laudanum Opiatum a Grain; Camphyr two Grains. Make a Powder for
two Doses to be exhibited in the Emulsion of white Poppy-seeds made with
Pimpernel and Purslain Water. Or,

Take of the Cephalic Specific Powder a Scruple; Sugar of Lead six Grains;
Camphyr two Grains; Laudanum Opiatum a Grain and a half.

Acid Juleps are likewise very proper; and if the Belly be constipated,
Tamarinds may be boiled in 'em.

Externally let Cataplasms of Rue, Chamomile, Vervain, Briony-roots and Soap;
or of Radishes, Salt, sharp Vinegar and Yest, be applied to the soles of the
Feet. Or,

Take of the Juice of Houseleek new drawn six Drams; sharp Wine Vinegar an
Ounce and a half; Nitre two Drams; Camphyr half a Dram. Mix, and apply to the
Stones, soles of the Feet, and forepart of the Head. When the Person sleeps, it
ought to be taken off the Head.

A Cataplasm of Houseleek, Purslain and Roses, may be applied to the Temples
and Forehead. The Pulp of a Gourd applied to the Head shaved is commended by
Bartholet. Some set their Feet into an excavated Gourd, and find benefit by it.
The Juice of live River-Crabs newly expressed is applied to the Forehead with
wonderful success. Or,

Take of Rose Water ten Ounces; Opium a Dram; Saffron half a Scruple. Mix them,
and apply with a doubled Linen Cloth to the Forehead.

Take of the Water of Frogs Spaun six or eight Ounces; fresh Juice of
River-Crabs, two, three or four Ounces; Opium dissolved in Vinegar half a Dram
or two Scruples; Camphyr and Saffron, of each six, eight or ten Grains. Mix,
etc. Or,

Take of the Juice of River-Crabs, extracted with the Water of Frogs Spawn, six
Ounces; Vinegar of Roses two Ounces; Triacle of Andromachus two Drams; Camphyr
half a Scruple; Saffron six Grains. Mix, and foment the Head and Temples. Let
the Liquor be lukewarm or somewhat cold.

Lindanus attributes much to the ancient way of applying live Creatures, cut up
along the middle, as a Dove, a Cock, etc. to the Head shaved: But in the first
beginning of a Phrensy they rather enforce it.

Oftimes the phrentic Persons, through inadvertency, neglect to void their Urine;
in which case, Take of Pellitory of the Wall two handfuls; of Parsley (the
whole Herb) one handful. Boil them in Water. Bruise them into a Pulp, and with
two Ounces of Oil of Scorpions make a Cataplasm to be applied to the Pubes.

Or, Let the Pubes and Perinaeum be fomented; and then anointed with the
following Liniment, viz. Take of Cony Fat, or Ointment of Marshmallows an
Ounce; Oil of Scorpions half an Ounce. Mix, etc.

Of Melancolic Deliriums.
THE Doatings of Melancoly are free from a Fever. They ought to be heedfully
distinguished from the Melancoly it self, which is a principal Disease arising
from internal Causes, attended by a sorrowful, fullen, peevish, pensive Humor,
an unaccountable Straitness and Anxiety of the Breast, a proneness to Anger,
and a facility of being frighted: Whereas those are for the most part
occasioned by external Causes. The Epithet of Melancoly is joined to them, not
as if Melancoly and Grief were inseparable Companions, for some are merry and
sportive; but because they proceed from a vicious fixed acid Humor, which the
Ancients called Melancoly.

All Persons seized with this sort of Doting, have peculiar Symptoms and
Humors according to the variety of their Objects, and the manner in which they
are carried out in pursuit of 'em. But in general they all jump in the
following Particulars.

1. The Mind and Thought are always confined to one Object, or one Set of
Objects. 2. Fear and Anxiety still haunt them: tho they imagine themselves rich,
Monarchs, etc. and seem to be tickled with the Fancy; yet still the Joy is but
short-lived, and Fear, Vexation and Trouble fill its room. 3. They all sleep
little or none at all; or if they happen to sleep, are still haunted with
fearful Dreams, and scaring Phantasms. 4. All of 'em have their lucid
Intervals. 5. The Disease is more apt to disappear or remit upon some sudden
alteration of Diet, or any other such occasional Cause, than by all the force
and application of Art. 6. The Source of the Disease is always seated in the
lower Belly. Upon which account Vomiting is the most sovereign Remedy. 7. The
Cure never succeeds without abating the immoderat Watchings. 8. Foolish
Deliriums are ofttimes cured by foolish Remedies, which serve only to rectify
the Fancy; as a Man imagining Serpents to be in his Belly, was cured by
conveying Serpents into his Excrements, and giving him occasion to think that
they were voided by himself. We may read a great many such Instances, in
Thonerus, Platerus, Forestus, etc.

The Seat is referable only to the Imagination or Fancy, which receives the
Ideas of Objects conveyed through the external Senses, and stamped upon the
Spirits. Now if these Animal Spirits degenerat from their lucid temperat
Quality, and perform uncouth, awkward Motions, the rational Soul must needs
consequently entertain it self with suitable Ideas.

Tho this kind of Delirium be different from Melancoly it self, yet it does not
invade any but such as have a Melancoly disposition of the Blood and Spirits;
which by the way is the true reason why it does not always follow, where its
ordinary Causes take place.

Suppose we then that a melancoly Person meets with an Object which is
extremely agreeable or disagreeable to him; and is forcibly stamped upon the
mind by the introduction of some violent Passion, Love, Grief, Fear, etc. as if
a Hypocondriac Person be molested with a murmuring noise in the Guts,
resembling the croking of Frogs: This fills him with fear and amazement: It
determines the Spirits to new Passages which they are unwilling to forsake: The
Idea of the frightful Noise still haunts his thoughts, till at length by the
repeated and continued Rack, and inuring the Spirits to that unwonted
particular Motion of Thought, the Rational Soul is brought into a habit of
entertaining and dwelling upon that Subject; and so the Person is insensibly
wrought into the fixed Opinion that Frogs are lodged in his Belly. Now that the
Spirits being forcibly driven into new Channels are apt to persist in the same
course, and are unwilling to return to their wonted Devoirs, is evidently made
out by the Influence of Passion, or any weighty Concern upon Watchings, or the
Dreams of sleeping Persons, which is only owing to the proneness of the Spirits
to retain the same new Passages, as the preceding Business, and the Commotion
it occasioned had so effectually cut out for 'em. The verity of this advance
may be likewise evinced by the many Instances of Persons liable to this
Distemper.

The Doting that follows Melancoly being thus accounted for, our next business
is to offer the Causes of Melancoly it self. They are either external or
internal. The former are such Objects as are apt to occasion violent Passions,
which immediately disorder the Spirits, and consequently the Blood and first
Digestion. The latter are such Circumstances of Diet and way of living as alter
the Juices of the Body, which impart the respective quality to the Blood and
Spirits.

This Constitution of the Blood and Spirits is ofttimes natural and hereditary,
arising from the nature of the Seed; for so much as most of our Humors and
Propensity to particular Passions is owing to the natural Idio-sincrasy of the
Blood and Spirits.

All melancoly Dispositions that have a tendency to Doting, owe their immediate
Original to some vicious Fermentation or Digestion in the first Passages. The
remote Causes may be sometimes external, sometimes internal; but they never
reach the length of Doting, till they have stamped a vicious Character on the
Belly and its Entrails. Some imagine a Chymeric Melancoly proceeding
essentially from the Head; but if they view the matter thoroughly, they will find
cause to acknowledge their Error.

It Is usual to ascribe Melancoly to the Spleen: And doubtless in melancolic
Constitutions the Spleen may be damaged by the Stagnation of the Blood in the
Arteries, and may serve to exasperat the Disease: it being a part enriched with
good store of Nerves, and communicating with the wandering and intercostal Pair,
cannot well miss of being prejudiced by the membranous Convulsions that
Hypocondriac Persons are subject to. But originally the Spleen is faultless,
and the principal Cause must needs be a vicious Acid bred in the first
Passages, that thickens the Blood, and destroys its due Fermentation. This is
evinced both by the Symptoms and Method of Cure. The former are a voracious
Appetite, a constipated Belly, and Acid Belchings; the visible Effects of an
Acid sculking in the Stomac or first Passages. As for the Cure, it turns upon
absorbent Anti-acid Medicines.

The Blood thus perverted by the prevailing Acid, stands accountable for the
difficult Respiration, beating of the Heart, and the like Symptoms. It is not
so productive of volatile lucid Spirits as otherwise; upon which account they
become stiff and more fixed, and consequently apt either to move irregularly in
the Brain, or still to retain the same course of Motion. In the former case the
Doatings are wandering and undetermined. In the latter, the whole force and
vigor of Thought is confined to one Object, so that ofttimes the melancoly
Persons are enabled to discourse and reason about it with much more accuracy
than in their healthy state, when other Objects claim a larger share in their
Thoughts, and cramp their Application to that one. Ofttimes the sick Person
reasons calmly on any other Object beside that of his Melancoly, by reason that
the Spirits are not so keen and eager in pursuing the former.

The change of Air and Seasons, or of any not natural thing, sensibly alters
the Crasis of the Blood and Spirits, and consequently the nature of this
Delirium, either by quite extinguishing, or heightning, or depressing it; or by
removing it from one Object to another: As Wine by altering the state of the
Blood and Spirits, first makes some Men cheerful, then inspires 'em with a
talkative Humor; afterward disposes 'em to Strife, Anger, Madness, etc. and
last of all, covers 'em with drousiness and sleep.

Melancoly being grounded on the Constitution of the Blood and Spirits, becomes
an inveterat Companion, and ofttimes propagates it self by an hereditary
Succession, especially among Women, who convey the Legacy to their Daughters,
that surely visits 'em when with Child, or upon point of delivery, if not at
other times.

It is ofttimes cured by the Stratagem of cheating the Patient into a contrary
Humor or Passion; which if forcible and strong, recals the Spirits from the
Passages in which they deviate.

It Is highly necessary to obviat Melancoly betimes, before its Settlement. Now
a melancolic Disposition is ushered in by these Signs. The Person is troubled
in sleep, and haunted by awkward Dreams; he becomes fullen and sorrowful, and
courts solitude; he is pensive, and apt to dwell long upon one thought; and is
timorous to a high degree. If he begin to tell ridiculous Stories, and withal
is full of his own Wisdom, the Delirium is at hand.

Let the Causes be diligently inquired after. If it proceed from the Passions
of the Mind, the Pulse is low, inconstant, contracted, ofttimes unequal, and
sometimes resembles the Motion of Emmets or Worms; and when the Mind is
unbended by cheerfulness, etc. the Pulse is proportionably altered.

If Melancoly steal on by degrees, without the influence of external Objects,
and be followed by wandering unfix'd Deliriums, it proceeds from the
Hypochondriac Distemper; and is attended by the Palpitation of the Heart,
Anxiety of the Breast, acid Belchings, a murmuring noise in the Guts,
constipation of the Belly, Wind, an uneasy obscure Pain in the left side of the
Abdomen, with a Pulsation in the same place, or in the Back, a notable heat in
the Forehead, and wandering Inflammations over the Body.

If it proceed immediately from the Depravation of the Blood, it remits now and
then; the Patient is querulods and anxious, oppressed with Grief and Sorrow,
and a frequent Palpitation of the Heart.

If Melancoly be caused by Passions of the Mind, or external Objects, it is much
more easily cured than when it ows its Original to the internal Indisposition
of the Blood and Spirits. If it be followed by Doting, recur frequently, or
claim a hereditary Privilege, it accompanies the Person to the Grave. If it be
occasioned by preceding Diseases, as Fevers, Phrensies, etc. a regular Diet
carries it off. It is more uncommon among Women than among Men; yet the Cure of
the former is more difficult, especially if they be with Child, or passed the
season of their Terms. If the Countenance be cheerful: If the Delir^ums begin
to relent: If the Urine exchange its thin Consistence for that which appears
thick, muddy and black: If a Flux of the Emrods or Womb ensue: If a S^ab and
such like Eruptions beset the Skin; we hope a Recovery. If the Person be
subject to uncouth Laughter or Crying, immoderat Grief attended by a sort of
Fury, it tends to a Palsy or Apoplexy, or Convulsions. If he obstinatly decline
eating or drinking, or totally deprive himself of Sleep, he posts to his Grave.

We are now arrived at the Method of Cure, which consists in rectifying the
Blood and Spirits by proper Correctives, and reducing the Animal to orderly
Motions. The following Remarks are worthy our observation upon this matter.

1. The remote Cause must be taken off either by moral Persuasions, or
deceiving the Person with some cunning Stratagem, so as to bring him off the
melancolic Fancy. If the Cause be internal, as suppression of the Terms, the
hypocondriac Disease, etc. it must be particularly taken care of. In geneneral
the hypocondriac Specifics and comforting Cephalic Medicines are always proper.
2. Vomiting is an essential part of the Cure, and ought to be frequently
repeated. 3. Let the Physician be very cautious in visiting the Patients alone,
for they hate the Person that pretends to cure 'em, and retain the Odium even
after they are cured. 4. When the melancolic Fancy is deeply lodged within 'em,
they ought to be undeceived by the means of some Stratagem or Trick. 5. By all
means the Belly must be kept open: If it do not answer every day of it self,
let Clysters or lenitive Draughts provoke it. 6. During the Solstices and
Equinoxes, the Person ought to ply proper Preservatives, for fear of the
Relapses which are wont to happen at those times. 7. Blood-letting is improper,
excepting the Case of Suppressions, Inflammations and Plethora's, or where
Madness is feared. Willis fancies that when the old unactive Blood is drawn
forth, it gives occasion to the Generation of new spirituous Blood; but he
should have remembered that it is Blood that begets Blood, and that by Blood
letting, Stupidity and dull Folly is promoted. Trepanations, Issues, and
blistering Plasters are sometimes used with Success. 8. In the beginning of
the Disease, Purgatives may succeed to Vomits: but in the progress of the
Distemper they are very improper. Dieuretics are incomparable Medicines for
this Disease. Melancolic People naturally void large quantities of Urine; and
its deep Tincture, muddiness or blackness, betokens the declension of the
Distemper. 10. The Hypochondria must be particularly taken care of in all sorts
of Melancolies. 11. By all means let Sleep be promoted by moist temperat Food,
etc. 12. Opiats ought not to be exhibited alone, nor before the Acid in the
Stomac be removed by the universal Evacuations. They ought to be mixed with
Specific and moistening Ingredients. Externally Anodyn Fomentations for the
Head, Washes for the Feet, etc. are very proper. 13. Their Diet must be very
regular. Their Food nourishing, moist, and temperat, as Milk, Raisins, Apples,
etc. A Glass of generous Wine is very proper now and then; a moderat Exercise
and the regular Evacuation of Excrements ought to be heedfully procured.

Now of the Medicines answering the foresaid intentions, Antimony is the chief
both in its vomiting and purgative Capacity; but especially the former. This
and all other Emetics must be given in very large Doses, tho it is proper to
begin with the ordinary one, and from thence advance gradually. The Flowers of
Antimony, Aurum Vitae, the Infusion of Mercurius Vitae, Sylvius's vomitory
Soap, and Sala's Emetic Syrup are all useful: As,

Take of Fumitory Water one Ounce; Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Wine, from a
Scruple to half a Dram; Emetic Syrup a Dram and a half; Scammony sulphurated,
Extract of Troches Alhandal, of each one Grain; Simple Syrup of Roses two
Drams. Mix for a Potion.

The Dose of Purgatives must be likewise augmented or sharpened with Salts: As,

Take of Extract of black Hellebor a Scruple; Extract of Troches Alhandal two
Grains; Purgative Antimony, or Mercurius Vitae, five Grains. With Essence of
Steel, or Tincture of Tartar, make Pills. Or, if a Potion be more acceptable,
with the Waters of Pimpernel, or of Flowers of St. John's-wort, make a Potion,
and sweeten it with laxative Syrup of Apples.

The Troches Alhandal are of incomparable use for subduing the viscid matter,
that reigns in this and all other Chronical Distempers.

Take of Extract of black Hellebor, sweet Mercury, of each a Scruple; Magistery
of Jalap six Grains: with Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, make Pills.

Take of Mint-water one Ounce; Liquid Extract of Steel half a Dram; Extract of
black Hellebor a Scruple; Extract of Troches Alhandal one Grain; Syrup of
Apples half an Ounce. Mix, etc.

Take of Mint-water one Ounce; Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar a Scruple, or
half a Dram; Tartar vitriolated half a Scruple; Extract of Troches Alhandal one
Grain; Syrup of Apples half an Ounce. Mix, etc.

Take of picked Senna two or three Drams; Roots of Polypody three or four
Drams; Roots of black Hellebor one or two Drams; Salt of Tartar half a Dram.
Infuse them warm in clarified Whey over night. In the Morning let 'em boil
gently; and add to three Ounces of the strained Liquor, a Dram and a half of
Cinnamom Water; and three, four or six Drams of Syrup of Apples. Or,

Take of Corants bruised three Ounces; picked Senna six Drams; choice Cinnamom
three Drams; Cloves a Dram and a half; Cream of Tartar three Drams. Bruise 'em
and tie 'em in a Bag, to be infused for the space of a night in three Pound of
simple Water.

Take of Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar five Grains; Tartar vitriolated
three Grains; Extract of Gummy Aloe two Grains. With Essence of Gum Ammoniac
make Pills.

Next to Hellebor and its Productions, are the Infusions of Senna;
Quercetanus's Pills of Ammoniac, or of Tartar, of Fumitory, etc.

Absorbent Digestives ought to precede the use of Purgatives; such are Cream of
Tartar, Vitriol of Steel, or its Tincture, Essence of Steel, etc. Or,

Take of prepared Crabs half a Dram; prepared red Coral, Alterative Crocus of
Steel, of each half a Scruple. Make a Powder for two Doses. Or,

Take of Sal Ammoniac, Salt of Wormwood, and prepared Crabs eyes, of each
fifteen Grains; Laudanum Opiatum two or three Grains. Make a Powder for two
Doses.

Alteratives in this Disease either correct the Acidity of the Blood, or amend
its Indisposition, and purify it by Urine.

Of the former kind are Preparations of Steel, such as its Infusion and
Extract, with the Juice of Apples; all the Aperitive Crocus's of Mars,
Mynsicht's Tincture of Steel, etc. Lead also, but especially its Sugar; Coral
and its Preparations, and chiefly its true Tincture; in room of which, if it be
wanting, you may take of the Tincture of Coral prepared with Spirit of Stag's
Heart, or that of Roses, one Dram; Essence of Baum and Saffron, of each half a
Dram. And mix 'em.

Of this sort also is the true Tincture of Silver and its Magistery, either
alone or mixed with other Anti-acids, as Coral and such like.

Mynsicht's Arcanum Duplicatum is frequently used with good success; likewise
Lapis Lazuli, either in Powder, or its Tincture mixed as follows.

Take compound Essence of Pimpernel three Drams; Tincture of Lapis Lazuli a
Dram. Dose from forty to fifty Drops.

For altering and purifying the Blood by Urine, the Vegetable Kingdom affords
many excellent Remedies; amongst which Tartar and its Preparations excel, as
Cream of Tartar plain or vitriolated; or, mixed with lixivial Salts; Spirit and
volatile Salt of Tartar; Rhefeldius's Diaphoretic Liquor of Tartar with Juices
made thus.

Take of the expressed Juices of Dittander four Ounces; Scurvy Grass, Sea
Radish, Water and Garden Cresses, of each an Ounce; rectified Spirit of Tartar
one pound. Mix and digest, and then distill in a Bath over a slow Fire. Dose,
half an Ounce.

Remedies also are prepared of Borrage, Bugloss, Fumitory, Saffron, Camphyr;
which last ought always to be joined with Alteratives in melancolic and maniac
Distempers. As, Take liquid Essence of Steel two Drams; compound Essence of
Fumitory, and that of Saffron, of each a Dram; Camphyr five Grains. Dose,
thirty or forty Drops. Or,

Take of the Leaves of Hart's-tongue two handfuls; of Fumitory an handful and a
half; Flowers of Borrage and Bugloss, of each a handful; of Clove Gilly-flowers
and Violets half a handful; Barks of Tamarisk and the Ashtree, of each six
Drams; Roots of Polypody or Elecampane, Filings of Steel, of each an Ounce;
Cinnamom two Drams. Cut, bruise and tie them up in a Bag. Or,

Take of the flowers of Rosemary, Borrage and Bugloss, of each four Ounces; of
Saffron a Dram; Quinces four Ounces; best White Wind two Pound. Mix and digest
fifteen days, and then distill. Dose an Ounce, to be reiterated.

Take of Hartman's Cachectick Powder a Dram; red Coral prepared half a Dram;
Camphyr fifteen Grains. Mix and divide into three equal parts, to be taken in
so many Mornings.

The following Pills may be taken before sleep.

Take of the Sugar of Lead, from five to nine Grains; Laudanum Opiatum two
Grains; distilled Oil of Camphyr three Grains, and make Pills.

The Spirit of Sal Ammoniac is an incomparable Sudorific, especially mixed with
an equal quantity of the Carminative Spirit.

If Pains seize the Head, apply to the Forehead this Epithem.

Take Waters of Elder-flowers, and St. John's-wort, of each an Ounce and a
half; Camphyr six Grains. Mix 'em.

This will yet prove more effectual, if a Plaster of Tacamahac be applied to
the shaved head.

If the Spleen is faulty, beside Preparations of Lead taken inwardly, apply the
Plaster of Tobacco to the Region thereof.

Of Madness.
THE Blood which in Melancoly abounds with a vicious Acidity, is oftentimes by
an intestin and fermentative Commotion volatilized, and so acquiring an
Acrimony, and furnishing the Brain with Spirits suitable, occasions Madness,
which is Melancoly arrived at the highest degree.

In Madness we may observe three Circumstances; 1. A remarkable Fury and
temerarious Boldness, hurrying one to attempt any thing tho never so cruel and
tragical. 2. A prodigious Strength, able to break in pieces the strongest
things, and surpassing that of two or three Men. 3. A wonderful Sufferance of
even the extremest Cold. It is also accompanied with most stubborn Watchings.

The Disorder of the Stomach, Intestinum Duodenum, and Bowels under the short
Ribs, is the cause of the grossness, thickness and vicious Acidity of the
Blood, which is the immediate material Cause of Madness.

The formal Cause is the Spirits, which degenerating from their seminal and
friendly Complexion, become of a sharp, saline, and as it were sulphurous acid
Quality: and consequently being too too movable, and less capable to be checked
in their ordinary Motions, and withal penetrating every where by virtue of
their pointed parts, they become the Cause of Restlesness, Watchings, Fury,
extraordinary Strength, etc.

This Disease is more incident to the Young than Old, to Men than to Women, but
especially to melancolic Constitutions.

If it proceed from internal Causes, it is an Evil of long continuance, and of
difficult Cure; which tho it remit for some Months or Years, yet it often
leaves Melancoly behind, which being easily exasperated, returns with fresh
Rage, and accompanies the Patient till Strength failing through Watchings,
Fastings, and almost perpetual Movings, it kindly shuts up their miserable Life.

In curing this Disease we must endeavor, 1. To mitigat the Fury, that the
Patient may be the easier managed, and Medicines exhibited. 2. To remove the
Distemper of the Blood and Spirits.

The first is excellently performed by strong Vomits and frequent Bleeding.
Preparations from Steel and Lead, joined with Anodine Medicines, correct the
Blood and other Humors; as Remedies from Camphyr and Musk do recreat and
restore the Spirits.

The Foundation therefore of the Cure must be laid by administering strong and
generous Vomits, not only in the beginning, but progress of the Disease: For
this purpose the Ancients used white Hellebor-roots with excellent success. But
it ought not to be given in substance.

Take of white Hellebor-roots, from half a Dram to a Dram; boil them in Wine
till it become soft: infuse the Root thus prepared in fresh Wine all night in a
hot place; strain the Liquor, or squeeze more or less, according to the measure
of its desired strength. Dose, a Dram.

Some instead of this use Infusions of Antimonial Emetics, but they prove too
weak. Morcurius Vitae is good: Aurum Vitae Kegleri is much commended; also the
Leaves of Asarabacca: but all these must be given in a greater Dose than
ordinary. As,

Take of the Conserve of the Leaves of Asarabacca, a Dram, Powder of its Roots
two Scruples; Mercurius Vitae one Grain: make a Bolus.

The Infusion of human Nails, is also a strong Emetic, surpassing those of
Antimony.

If in the beginning of this Disease Purging is required, you may use what I
have above prescribed for Melancoly; chiefly black Hellebor and its Extract;
the Extractum Melanogogum Quercetani, etc. to which Antimony Purgative, or
Mercurius Vitae Laxative, ought still to be added. As,

Take of the Essence of black Hellebor a Dram and a half; of that of Pimpernel
half a Dram; Emetic Syrup of Angelus Sala half an Ounce.

After strong Purgation, copious and frequent Bleeding is proper; first in the
Ancle, then in the Arm and Forehead: some have been cured by opening an Artery.

Cauterizing and trepaning of the Skull have been successfully used; as has
also Salivation by Mercury.

But while these things are a doing, such Alteratives are to be given, as may
restrain the boiling and wild Motion of the Blood and Spirits, and together
with these Opiats and sulphurous Minerals and fixed Anodines, and that in a
strong Dose.

Such altering Remedies as we prescribed for Melancoly, may be used here.
Particularly those from Tartar, Steel, Lead, etc. But withal Nitre and its
Preparations are not to be neglected. As,

Take purified Nitre half a Dram; Camphyr eight Grains. Mix 'em, and make a
Powder. Or,

Take purified Nitre two Scruples; Laudanum Opiatum two Grains. Make a Powder.

We may also use appropriated Specifics, such as the Arterious Blood of an Ass,
Pimpernel with the red Flowers, St. John's-wort, Fumitory, Water-Lilly,
Borrage, Baum, Spleen-wort, the Herb True-love, Polypody of the Oak; to all
which Camphyr may be added. As,

Take a clean Linen Rag of a hands length and breadth, dipped in Asses Blood,
infuse it in a sufficient quantity of Water of St. John's-wort: to two Ounces
of the strained Infusion add Essence of Pimpernel half a Dram; Laudanum Opiatum
about a Grain. Or,

Take the Leaves of True-love, together with the Berries, two handfuls; Leaves
of red flowered Pimpernel; Flowers of St. John's-wort, of each an handful;
Roots of Polypody of the Oak an Ounce; small Raisins bruised two Ounces: boil
these in a sufficient quantity of Whey: to three pounds of the strained
Decoction, add Essence of Pimpernel an Ounce and a half. Mix them. Or,

Take leaves of Baum cut small, an handful; infuse 'em in four Ounces of Spirit
of Wine; add half a Dram of prepared Pearls. Dose, two Spoonfuls to be repeated
every day.

The Epitheme prescribed for Melancoly may also be used here. Or,

Take of Musk twelve Grains; Camphyr a Scruple; Red-rose-water impregnated with
the Tincture of red Saunders, fifteen Ounces. In this Mixture dip several Folds
of Linen Cloth to be applied to the shaved Head and Temples, wetting the Cloth
as it dries for twenty four hours space; or anoint with the following Liniment.

Take of the Sleep-causing Ointment two Drams, distilled Oil of Camphyr a
Scruple; Musk half a Scruple; Saffron eight Grains. Mix 'em. Or,

Take Rose Water, or Juice of River-Crabs ten Ounces; Opium half a Dram;
Saffron half a Scruple: make an Epitheme for the Forehead and Temples.

ART. IV. Of Deliriums from an external Cause.
THIS Cause for the most part is the biting of some other Creature enraged with
Anger, or taken with Madness. As in the case of a Canina Rabies, which is so
called, because it is oftenest occasioned by the biting of a mad Dog; tho the
Infection may be derived from any other Creature. For if any Creature chafed
with Anger bites another, 'twill cause either Madness, or a very malignant and
dangerous Wound.

These things relating to this Disease are most worthy our Observation, viz. 1.
The manner of Infection, which may be by the slightest bite or hurt of the mad
Creature, or even the least touch of its Spittle. 2. A Hydrophobia, or the fear
of Water and other liquid things accompanies this Distemper. 3. The malign
Contagion lies hid, and as it were asleep in the Body, sometimes two, three, or
as some say, thirteen or twenty years. 4. In the Spittle and Urine of rabid
Animals are often seen other small Creatures, resembling the Form of the first
Authors of their Madness. And lastly, the infected Creature exactly imitates
the Actions and Mien of that which gave the Contagion.

The Cause of this Disease consists in a certain peculiar Ferment, which
affecting first the Spirits, and then the Blood, does in some sort assimilat
'em to those of the furious Creature. This Ferment is carried along with the
Saliva into the Wound.

It is of importance to know whether the Creature by which a Man has been
bitten, be mad or not, in order to prevention: the manner of the Discovery is
this; apply and rub upon the Wound Crum of Bread, till it is impregnated with
the moisture, and if a Dog will neither eat nor smell to it, or dies if he
does, it is a sign the Creature was mad.

Sometimes this Disease is accompanied with a Fever, and sometimes not: The
Signs that attend its beginning are, an anxious heaviness of Heart; Anger
without a manifest Cause; complaining of the offensiveness of the Ambient Air;
heaviness of the Body, etc.

The Signs of a perfect Rabies are, Convulsive Distentions of the Members; a
bloated Face; anguish of Heart; frothing at Mouth; frightful Eyes; barking like
a Dog, or otherwise aping the infecting Animal; restlesness, perpetual
Watching, etc. but especially an Hydrophobia, or shrinking at the sight of any
Liquor.

If taken at the beginning, it may be cured with proper Remedies; but if it is
come to perfection, and accompanied with an Hydrophobia, it is an acute
Distemper, which seldom admits of Cure, but brings Death the second or third,
or at most the fourth day from the Invasion of this Symptom.

In the Cure of this fatal Distemper, two Periods of times are to be noted. 1.
That of receiving the first Hurt or Wound. 2. That of the supervening Madness,
and subsequent Hydrophobia.

To begin with the latter: we must endeavor by all means to explode that
venomous Ferment already possessing the Mass of Blood. This must be done by
internal Antidots, as well common as specific: such are Roots of Gentian and
Swallow-wort; Galen's Mad-wort, Rue, St. John's-wort, Pimpernel, Carduus
Benedictus, Fuller's Thistle, Sage, Betony, Myrrh, and the like. As,

Take of the Leaves of Rue, Sage, Plantan, Polypody, Vervain, common Wormwood,
Mint, Mugwort, Baum, Betony, St. John's-wort, Lesser Centory, of each a
convenient quantity; beat them into a Powder, to be taken from one to two Drams
in hot Broth, or a draught of Wine, or in half a Dram of Venice Triacle and
Syrup of Lemmons, for forty days together at least.

The Waters of Germander, Carduus Benedictus, Tormentil, Triacle, white
Maidenhair, and the like, are convenient Vehicles for such Pouders.

Moreover, sealed Lemnian and Melitean Earths are good; also Venice Triacle,
Mithridat, Electuarium de Ovo, etc. but above all, Theriaca Diatessaron with
Opium. As,

Take of the Water of the Flowers of St. John's-wort an Ounce and a half;
Venice Triacle half an Ounce; Bezoardic Tincture a Dram and a half; Essence of
Crab's-eyes a Dram: mix them for one Dose. Or,

Take of Venice Triacle one Dram; Salt of Wormwood half a Dram; let them be
taken in a Draught of sharp Wine.

The use of these and such like Antidots must be persisted in for two or three
Months; for oftentimes after it has lain hid for some Months, nay sometimes
years, the Hydrophobia will again show it self; so that tho the use of
Sudorifics may, yet that of Specifics ought not to be discontinu'd. As for
example,

Take of prepared Crab's-eyes, burnt Hartshorn prepared, and prepared Jaw Bone
of a Pike, of each a Dram. Mix and make a Powder.

The River-Crab alone is a Specific against the biting of a mad Dog: It must be
gathered in the Dog Days, and calcined alive: A Dram or two of the Ashes, with
a Dram of Powder of Gentian, may be given in a Cup of good Wine, the Patient
being prepared for Sweating.

But the better way of exhibiting River-Crabs, is to distill them (being well
bruised) with an Alembic in a Water-bath; so you shall have the famed Water of
Crabs: and what remains at bottom may be given inwardly from half a Dram to a
whole one, in their own distilled Water, adding Powder of Gentian-root or
Pimpernel. Or,

Take of Venice Triacle a Dram; River-Crabs thus prepared, Roots of Pimpernel,
of each half a Dram.

The Root of the wild Rose-tree is commended by the Ancients.

Staeckerus used to give a Dram of Powder of Gentian, mixed with as much Venice
Triacle, every Morning for three days, injoining the Person to fast five or six
hours after, and make account to sweat; having first tied on the Wound Garlic,
Rue and Salt, bruised and mixed in the form of a Cataplasm: which Method he
says never failed him.

Some Remedies are taken from the mad Creature it self, such as its Blood
pulverized, given to a Dram for three days: Its Hair, Heart, or Liver boiled or
powdered.

Some plunge the Patient into cold Water over head and ears suddenly, keeping
him under Water a small time.

Purging is sparingly to be used, and that only when the Hydrophobia is but
just a beginning; in this Case white and black Hellebor, as also Species of
Hiera picra, are proper.

Strong Diuretics are not amiss; among which Valerian and Cantharides are
Specifics.

As to the Wound by which the Infection is received; so soon as possible the
malignant Poison is to be drawn forth, lest it diffuse it self through the
blood. Let the Hair of the mad Creature, if it can be had, be laid on the
Wound: or the place being scarify'd and cleans'd with the exactest care, apply
this Cataplasm.

Take one of the sharpest Onions, five Cloves of Garlic, and half of its Root;
Venice Triacle six Drams; with half an Ounce of Yest make a Cataplasm.

Several other things may be added, such as Honey, Mustard Seed, Germander,
Gentian, etc.

Some apply the Liver or Flesh of the Creature, as also live Pigeons; others
use Scarification and Cupping-glasses: others wash the scarify'd Wound with
Wine, or its Spirit camphoris'd, Brine, Salt Water, Decoction of Germander, or
Gentian-root in Water or Wine; applying afterward the following Plaster.

Take six Ounces of Wax, Oil of Olives and Goats Fat, of each three Ounces;
melt them, and add of best Frankincense half an Ounce.

The Wound is to be kept open for some time, or even enlarged; and if it is
closed up before the complete Cure of the Disease, it must again be opened.

But the most safe, and withal the most speedy Remedy is burning with a hot
Iron or an actual Cautery, which utterly destroys all the Poison, abolishing
its seminal Crasis; and so leaves the Patient secure as to the fear of dismal
Events.

This were the proper place to treat of the Delirium Musicum occasioned by the
biting of the Tarantula, and cured by Music; but seeing it is not to be found
with us, we shall pass it over.

As for Deliriums proceeding from poisonous things, whether taken down by the
Mouth, or drawn in with the Breath; the first is cured by a Vomit given at
first; and the last, after universal things are premised, by Vinegar, Castor
and Camphyr given together, or separately with proper Medicines.

As for Love-fits; they are removed partly by rational Persuasions, and partly
by such Medicines as have been prescribed in Melancoly, and Melancolic
Distempers, with this only difference, that the milder sort will here prevail.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF ETMULLERUS HIS Practice of PHYSIC, etc.
BOOK III. Of the Diseases peculiar to the Male Sex.
HAving dispatched the Diseases incident to both Sexes; I shall now enter into
the Consideration of those peculiar to Males.

SECT. I. Of the Diseases which disorder the Genital Liquor in Men's Bodies.
SOME part of the Chyle accompanying the Blood in the Arteries, is conveyed by
the Spermatic Vessels to the Stones, where it is in good measure prepared, by
virtue of a particular Ferment for that purpose; and afterward finished in the
Epididimes, which forward it to the seminal Vesicles, to be there reserved
under the Character of the Genital Liquor, till the Act of Venery dislodg it.
It Is improperly called Seed, till such time as the Association of the Woman's
Genital Liquor have entitled it to that Character.

It is enriched with a large stock of Spirits, especially by the eagerness of
the Venereal Encounter, and is thereby enabled to reach and impregnat the
Women's seminal Eggs. It is likewise covered with a soft serous Vehicle prepared
in the Prostatae, that joins it in its Passage, and accompanies it through the
Vrethra.

The manner of its engaging with the seminal Eggs in Women, and their
Counterpart in the Act of Generation, is accounted for elsewhere.

When the Generation of this Male Genital Liquor is disturbed, it appears in
its Deficiency, Redundancy, or Depravation. The two last are referred to the
Paragraph of Gonorrhaea's; the first is the Subject of the following Chapter.

CHAP. I. Of the Defect or Insufficiency of the Genital Liquor in Men.
THE Causes relate either to the Matter it self, or the Stones in which it is
prepared. As touching the former, naturally it is the Chyle, or mucilaginous,
fat, milky part of the Blood, as appears by its Consistence, Color, etc. Now
whatever impairs this, must consequently cause a Deficiency of Seed. Such are
Hunger, the Disorders of the digestive Faculty, excessive Evacuations,
Watchings, etc. Violent Passions of the Mind, immoderat Exercise, and such
like, rarify and sharpen the Blood beyond its due pitch, and so exhaust the
Chyle or seminal Matter. Fat and corpulent Persons are liable to the like
Inconvenience. The milky part of their Blood, which should be disposed of for
seminal Use, is diverted and anticipated by its Conversion into Fat.

The Causes relating to the Stones, proceed either from the defect of the
Ferment, or the Indisposition of the Stones themselves. As for the former;
questionless it is a spirituous oily volatile Substance, as appears by the
notable Changes occasioned by it in the Mass of the Blood at the time of its
Commencement. Now whatever fixes the Animal Spirits, and strips them of their
volatile Capacity, must needs weaken the Ferment. Such are Spirit of Vitriol,
Crude Nitre; external Cold, or exposing the Stones to be wet; Application of
mercurial things to the Region of the Pubes; excessive or unseasonable Venery,
or an indiscreet abstinence from it; Drunkenness; Crudities in the Stomac, or
any Disorder of the first Digestion; Dropsies, Cachexies, etc.

If the Deficiency of the Ferment be occasioned by any Cause respecting the
Stones themselves, it must proceed either from Tumors in 'em, or from being
gelded. It Is much doubted if there be any natural Eunuchs; for many whose
Stones are not visible, may have 'em hid within the Abdomen, and give
sufficient proof of their Manhood.

The Signs are easily distinguished: If the Ferment be faulty, the Person is
dull and unactive; the venereal Appetit flat; and the Seed when cast forth is
thin, watery, and void of heat. The Prognostics are more fatal to the Species
than to individual Persons. If the Person be old, or have over-acted in his
Youth, the Cure is very difficult. Sometimes this Deficiency produces not only
Effeminacy and Unmanliness, but an universal Faintness and Consumption, for
want of the due Influence of the Ferment upon the Mass of Blood.

In regulating the Cure, a peculiar regard must be had to the Stomac and
digestive Faculty; for the flatness of this will cause a Deficiency of Seed. If
the Disease proceed from a Defect in the Stones themselves, the following
Paragraphs account for its Cure. As for the Faults of the Ferment, or those
respecting the matter of the Genital Liquor; the former must be amended by
aromatic sharp Incentives; such as Ginger, Amber, Cubebs, Cloves, Cinnamom,
Castor, Savin-berries, Borrace, Satyrium, Eryngo, Mustard-seeds, Fennel-seeds,
Rocket-seeds, Pepper, Cantharides, Spirit of Ants, etc. The latter by temperat
Fat, and chylelike Ingredients, as Milk, the milky Seeds, Emulsions, Yelks of
Eggs, with Spanish Wine, Oysters, Chocolate, Dates, etc. But neither of 'em
ought to be used separatly; but in conjunction with one another. As,

Take of Milk three Ounces; Sugar three or four Drams; Pepper half a Dram: mix
for a Draught.

Take of the Oil of Fistic-nuts one Spoonful; the Yelk of one Egg; Ambergrise
as much as will lie upon the point of a Knife, with the triple quantity of
Sugar. Mix 'em before the Fire, and exhibit for one Draught.

Take of the Water of Magnanimity three Ounces; Cinnamom Water prepared with
Wine, Essence of Satyrium, of each three Drams; Tincture of Coral two Drams;
Essence of Amber a Dram. Make a Potion. Dose, a Spoonful now and then.
Electuaries are very usual in this Case. As,

Take of Indian Chocolat an Ounce and a half; Electuary of Satyrium half an
Ounce; Eryngo-roots candy'd, Satyrium-roots candy'd, of each six Drams; Nutmegs
candy'd two Drams; candy'd Ginger two or three Drams; Shavings of the Pizzle of
a Stag killed in the act of Venery, half an Ounce; Cubebs, Cardamoms, of each a
Dram; Pouders of Diambra, and Diamoschus dulcis, of each four Scruples;
Rocket-seeds, Fistic-seeds, Nettle-seeds, Ash-seeds, of each a Dram; Ambergrise
and Mosch, of each ten Grains. With Syrup of Canel make an Electuary; and when
you are about to use it, sprinkle it with Spirit of Ants. Dose, the bigness of
a Walnut.

Take of the Electuary Diasatyrium a Dram; Mynsichtus's provoking Tablets a
Scruple; Ambergrise, Mosch, of each two Grains; Laudanum Opiatum one Grain. Mix
for a Bolus.

Take of the Conserve of Eryngo-roots, Conserve of Satyrium, of each three
Ounces; candy'd Citron-peel, candy'd Ginger, of each half an Ounce; Pine-nuts,
Sweet Almonds, and Fistic-nuts, of each three or four Drams; Pulp of Dates and
Nutmegs, of each an Ounce; Bull's Pizzle five Drams; Rocket-seeds,
Parsnep-seeds, Mustard-seeds, of each two Drams; Cinnamom, Galangal, and white
Pepper, of each a Dram; distilled Oil of Cloves half a Dram: With the Brodium
of Ginger make an Electuary. Some add the Powder of Cantharides, but they are
improper for any purpose, save that of promoting the Erection of the Yard.

The Stones of a Cock, or the Spirit of a Cock's Blood: The Blood, or Brains,
or Pizzle of a Buck or a Bull killed in the act of Venery; or the shaving of a
Bull's Horn taken at the same time; the Tincture of Gold with Oil of Cinnamom;
the Troches of Vipers, or Pullets fed with Vipers; Borrace taken in a potch'd
Egg, etc. are all approved Remedies for provoking Venery.

External Inunctions are not Improper. Let the Perinaeum, Cod, Stones, Groyn,
and Nut of the Yard, be anointed with the Apoplectic Balsam; or distilled Oil
of Mace with Oil of Cloves, Mosch and Civet; or with the Spirit or Juice of
Ants. But care must be taken that their smell do not reach the Nostrils.

As for the Causes of the Deficiency of the Seed relating to the Stones; if
they be hid within the Abdomen, we must endeavor to bring 'em down by jumping,
leaping, etc. by emollient Baths, and anointing the place where they are lodged
with Balsam of Sulphur.

The swelling of the Stones is occasioned either, 1. By Blood, and is called an
Inflammation. Or, 2. By Wind, called Pneumatocele. 3. By a Collection of Serum
within their Membrans, called Hydrocele. 4. By a schirrous Tumor. 5. By a
superfluous Flesh called Sarcocele. 6. By the dilatation of the Spermatic
Vessels called Hernia Varicosa. Of these in order.

ART. I. Of the Inflammation of the Stones.
THE Stagnation of the Blood causes Inflammations of the Stones or Cod. That
may be occasioned by the suppression of a Gonorrhaea, violent Ligatures,
Contusion, Blows, Compression by riding, etc.

The Signs are a pricking shooting Pain, notable heat and redness besetting the
affected Testicle and neighboring parts, accompanied by a slow Fever. The
Pain is exasperated by touching, and reaches almost to the Loins.

If it be not quickly discussed, it tends to a Gangrene or Impostume,
especially the Inflammation of the Cod.

The Cure consists in discussing the swelling, and mitigating the Pain. If that
cannot be obtained, it must be ripened and opened. For the former purpose,
Bleeding and the common Evacuations, and such gentle Diaphoretics as promote
the Circulation of the Blood, are the proper internal Remedies.

Outwardly apply the following Cataplasm. Take of the Meal of Beans three or
four Ounces; Powder of Cuminseeds two Ounces: With Vinegar make a Cataplasm. If
the Vinegar be too sharp, add of Lytharge of Ceruse from one to three Ounces.
(For Lead and its Productions dulcify the sharpness of Vinegar.) Apply this
Cataplasm warm to the part, for all sorts of Inflammations.

Take of Quick-lime-Water a Pound, or a Pound and a half; Spirit of Wine
camphoris'd half an Ounce, or an Ounce; Ceruse or Sugar of Lead a Dram and a
half. Make an Epithema to be applied hot: And if the pain be violent, add of
Opium dissolved in Vinegar one Scruple.

For venereal Inflammations let the Part be fomented with the Decoction of
China-roots and Elder-flowers in Ale or Wine.

Rue, Agrimony, Vervain, Chamomile, the Herb Paris, Elder-flowers, etc. are
also proper Ingredients for Cataplasms or Decoctions. If the Pain be violent,
add to them Leaves of Henbane, thus:

Take of the Leaves of Wormwood, Lady's Mantle and lesser Centory; the Flowers
of the Sloe-tree, Chamomile and Mullein, and Leaves of Henbane, of each a
handful. Boil them in Wine with a little Water, and apply the strained Liquor
with a warm Cloth to the Part. The Mucilage of Fleawort-seeds, extracted with
Water of Frog's Spawn, may be added to the foregoing Ingredients.

If the Tumor cannot be discussed, emollient suppurating things are proper; as
the Plaster called Filii Zachariae softened with Balsam of Sulphur prepared
with Oil of Turpentin. If the Pain be overbearing, let the Leaves of Henbane be
roasted under the Ashes, bruised and applied with Lard in the form of a
Cataplasm. When the swelling is ripe, let it be opened with a Lance by a
skilful Surgeon.

ART. II. Of a Pneumatocele, or distention of the Stones by Wind.
IT is ofttimes accompanied by a Hydrocele or Collection of Water. The Wind is
either derived from the Abdomen, or owing to the acid vicious quality of the
nutritious Liquor of the Membrans surrounding the Stones.

The Signs are a swelling and distending pain, without any sense of weight. If
it likewise seize the Cod, it moves too and again when pressed by the hand.

All internal carminative Medicines are proper. Externally let Carminative and
discussing Cataplasms be applied. As,

Take of the Powder of Chamomile and Melilot-flowers, and Meal of Beans, of
each six Drams; Goats Dung and Bay Berries, of each half an Ounce. With Wine
and Oil of Dill make a Cataplasm.

Take of Cows Dung two pound; Brimstone and Cuminseed, of each an Ounce. With
Honey or Oil of Dill make a Cataplasm. This is more effectual than the former.

If it be accompanied by a Hydrocele, anoint the part with Balsam of Sulphur
prepared with Oil of Turpentin or Juniper, and afterward apply Rulandus's
Plaster Diasulphuris, tempered with Oil of Nutmegs by expression. Or,

Take of Coriander-seeds half an Ounce; Cumin-seeds, Aniseeds, of each two
Drams; Alum half a Dram; Wine, common Water, of each a pound; and foment with
the Infusion.

ART. III. Of a Hydrocele, or Collection of Water within the Membrans of the
Stones.
THE Cause is the Rupture of the Lymphatic Vessels in the Stones, or whatever
stops the reflux of the Lymph from thence.

The Signs are a sense of something floating in the Cod, the alteration of the
form and bigness of the Stone, the lucid and unwrinkled appearance of the Cod
before a Candle. At first the Swelling is soft and yields to the touch, but
does not retire into the Belly by lying down or compression; afterward by
continuance it becomes harder, but is capable of receiving Pits, and the
Membrans grow thick and stiff.

The Cure is performed inwardly by Antihydropic Medicines. Externally let the
Balsam of Sulphur prepared with Oil of Turpentin, or Schroder's Plaster ad
Horniam, or the Ausburg Hydropic Plaster be applied. Or,

Take of the Plaster of Bay Berries, Goat's Dung, of each an Ounce and a half;
Cumin-seeds, Flowers of Sulphur, of each two Drams. Mix with the Oil of Rue and
Chamomile, and make a Plaster.

Take of the Flowers of Chamomile, of the Herb Paris, of each two handfuls;
Meal of Beans, from half an Ounce to an Ounce; Goat's Dung three Ounces; Powder
of Cockle-shells two Ounces. Boil them in four parts of Chamomile-water, and
one part Vinegar, to the Consistence of a Cataplasm.

Take of Goat's Dung one Pound; Chamomile-flowers, Elder-flowers, of each two
handfuls; Cumin-seeds, an Ounce. Boil them in Child's Urine. Foment with the
strained Liquor; and make a Cataplasm of the remainder.

Take of Cockles bruised together with the Shells four Ounces; Bay Berries,
Brimstone, of each two Ounces; Goat's Dung three Ounces. With Lees make a
Cataplasm.

If a Hydrocele be inveterat, all external Discussives are in vain, and only
Surgery can afford relief. There are two ways by which it performs the Cure. 1.
By pricking, or boring a hole in the Cod and outermost Coat of the Stone, under
which the Lymph is wont to be lodged. It Is a safe Operation in a simple
Hydrocele; but in hydropic Tumors for the most part it causes a Gangrene. 2.
By cutting away the affected Stone; for ofttimes it relapses after a pricking,
or the neighboring parts are in danger of a Gangreen, in which case Amputation
is needful.

ART. IV. Of the Schirrous Swellings of the Stones.
A Hard painless Swelling, free of all Inflammation or Heat, is called a
Schirrus. If a pricking Pain attend a hard Swelling, it degenerats to a Cancer.

The Cause is the indiscreet Treatment of a preceding Inflammation, which gives
the accompanying Acid liberty to settle and thicken the matter. Platerus
mentions an Instance of little Stones within the Testes causing a Schirrus.

As for the Cure, it is performed by the Application of Gums dissolved in
Vinegar, and discussive Plasters. As,

Take of Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar six Drams; Plaster of Hemlock
softened with distilled Oil of Tartar, as much as suffices for a due
Consistence.

The Balsam of Sulphur, or Rulandus's Plaster Diasulphuris, or the
Ausburg-Plaister of Ammoniac, are of good use. Baths of Wine, and, in venereal
Cases, the Plaster de ranis with Mercury are not improper. Timaeus recommends
the following Composition.

Take of the Mucilage of Marshmallow-roots, Fenugrec-seeds, and fat Figs
tosted, of each three Ounces; Gum Ammoniac, Bdellium, Galbanum, of each an
Ounce; Goose-fat, Hens-fat, Goat's Tallow and Turpentin, of each six Drams; Oil
of Lillies, and Wax, as much as suffices for a Plaster.

If it be attended by pain, we ought to proceed very cautiously for fear of a
Cancer; upon which account Gummy Ingredients are only to be insisted upon. If
it tend to suppuration, it must be opened, or the Stone cut quite off.

ART. V. Of a Sarcocele, or fleshy Swelling of the Stones.
EXternal Blows, Falls, and such like Accidents do not only cause
Inflammations, but sometimes tear the Vessels and Membrans of the Stones, and
so oblige the Blood and nourishing Juice to stagnat and settle into a fleshy
Substance, sticking to one or both the Stones, or to the Membran of the Cod
called Dartos.

The Signs are these; the Swelling is indolent, hard, constant, and increases
by degrees. There is a near resemblance between it and the swelling of the
Epididimes occasioned by a Redundancy of Seed, or the Stagnation of the Blood
caused by the Schirrus of the Stones; but the preceding Signs, if carefully
traced, will discover the difference.

If it be attended by a shooting, it discovers a malignant nature and tendency
to a Cancer, and ought not to be meddled with.

As touching its Cure, inward Remedies are seldom effectual. Let the universal
Evacuations be first premised; then exhibit the Antiscrophulous Specifics, as
the Powder, or Decoction, or Essence of Restharrow-roots, and dulcified Spirit
of Salt; Powder of Comfrey-roots, sealed Earth, Rupture-wort, and Spunge-stone,
etc. Outwardly foment with a Mixture of Vinegar, Nitre, and the Ashes of
Vinetwigs: or apply a Cataplasm of Sulphur, Cockle-shells, and Vinegar, or the
following Plaster, which is mightily extolled.

Take of Gum Ammoniac an Ounce and a half; Bdellium, Mustard-seeds,
Nettle-seeds, of each six Drams; Spungestone, one Ounce; Powder of
Birthwort-roots, Sulphur, of each half an Ounce; Turpentin an Ounce; Spirit of
Wine an Ounce and a half; Oil of Olives four Ounces; Wax six Ounces. Make a
Plaster.

Take of the Gums Animi, Sagapenum, Opoponax, and Galbanum, of each an Ounce.
Dissolve 'em in Vinegar of Roses. Then thicken it, and with a sufficient
quantity of Oil of Bricks, make a Plaster: which is equally fitted for
Suppuration or Discussion.

If it tend to Suppuration; after opening, apply the Plaster of Gums and black
Rosin; and afterward, when it is proper to consolidat, a styptic Plaster.
Vigo's Plaster with Mercury is of incomparable use, but the Mercury may
deprive the Stones of their prolific Virtue. The natural Baths are of very good
use.

If these Medicines prove ineffectual, the Excrescence must be cut out either
alone or together with the Stone, as its Circumstances will admit.

ART. VI. Of a Distention of the Spermatic Veins, or Hernia Varicosa.
WHatever disturbs the Reflux of the Blood by the Spermatic Veins, causes an
uneven, inconstant sort of rising toward the Stone, resembling a Cluster of
Grapes. The Stone drops and hangs loose, and the Swelling is painless unless
the Guts be molested with Wine, or the Feet exposed to cold.

Bathing is very proper. Let the Plaster of Mucilage mixed with the Plaster
of Ammoniac and Oil of Bricks; or the Ointment Basilicum mixed with the Fat of
Animals, be applied to the part.

If it be inveterat, it must be committed to the care of a Surgeon.

CHAP. II. Of the irregular Ejaculation of the Seed.
THE Ejection of the Genital Liquor is irregular; 1. When it is cast forth
without any venereal Provocation. 2. When in the act of Venery its Egress is
too precipitant and hasty. 3. When it is too slow. 4. When it is not ejected at
all.

ART. I. Of a Running, or involuntary Emission of the Genital Liquor.
A Running is either spurious or genuin. To begin with the last, a simple
running is said to be such, when the true, genuin, seminal matter is cast forth
without the erection of the Yard, or venereal Pleasure.

The Part affected is the seminal Vesicles; it is attended or followed by a
weariness of the Limbs, Weakness, inability to move, a pale Countenance, hollow
Eyes, diminution of Sight, Inappetency, trembling, and tendency to a
Consumption. In a word, it robs the body of its balmy Moisture.

The Causes are threefold; 1. The Redundancy or Turgescence of the seminal
matter. 2. Its sharpness, which stimulats and contracts the Fibers of the
seminal Vesicles, and adjacent Muscles. 3. Its tenuity and watriness, together
with the concurring flaccidity of the Vesicles, and the patency of their
Passages into the Urethra.

The remote Causes of the first are high feeding and drinking; an entire
freedom from Labor and Care; abstaining from the wonted Measure of Venery;
frequent Correspondence with venereal Objects; lying upon the Back, etc.

The Remote Causes of the second, are a sharp saltish Disposition of the Blood,
as in scorbutic and hypochondriac Constitutions; an immoderat use of sharp
aromatic volatile things, as Pepper, Mustard, Rocket-seeds, Watercresses, Wine,
Cantharides, and sharp volatile Purgatives. Those of the third are, excessive
Venery (especially in ones Youth) and manual Violence, which not only relaxats
the seminal Vesicles, but destroys the Ferment in the Stones, as appears by the
watery inelaborat Consistence of the Seed.

If a genuin Running be inveterat, it degenerats into a Hectic, and is not
easily cured; nor is it safe to stop it suddenly, lest the Suppression of the
wonted Evacuation should cause an Inflammation or Tumor in the Testicles.

The general Indications of Cure, are to lessen the vicious quantity, or
qualify the sharpness of the matter, or to corroborat the Ferment and Texture
of the parts.

For the first of these Purposes, acid thin Food, short Commons, frequent
Exercise and Watchings are proper. Spirit of Vitriol and Crude Nitre powerfully
curb the Ferment of the Testicles: But the Juices of Citrons, Pomegranats and
Lemons, are more temperat and universally applauded for stopping all manner of
Runnings. The Juice of Lemons with Spirit of Turpentin, and Camphyr, is
extolled by Faber. Some commend the solution of Coral with Juice of Citrons.
Emulsions of Hempseeds are of sovereign use in desperate Runnings, but they
enjoy a narcotic Virtue prejudicial to the Animal Spirits.

Take of Hempseeds half an Ounce; Seeds of the Chasttree two Drams. With the
Water of Yarrow make an Emulsion. Add of prepared Amber and Bone of the
Cuttle-fish, of each a Dram. Sweeten and reserve it for use.

Take of the Seeds of the Chast-tree, Melon-seeds, of each two Drams;
Hemp-seeds, white Poppy-seeds, of each a Dram and a half: With the Waters of
Purslain and Water Lillies make an Emulsion. To which add the Bone of the
Cuttle-fish prepared, a Dram; Crollius's Compound Powder of Sperniola, two or
three Scruples; prepared white Amber, and Diaphoretic Antimony, of each half a
Dram: mix and sweeten with pearled Sugar. This is of noted efficacy, especially
if the Perinaeum and Loins are girded with heat. Some commend the following
Decoction.

Take of the Leaves of white Archangel four handfuls; Leaves of white Yarrow
two handfuls; Seeds of the Chasttree four or six Drams. Boil them in Mint or
Rue-water, or in Wine, and sweeten with Syrup of Water Lillies.

Some recommend a Spoonful of the Juice of Ceterach to be taken now and then,
as a singular Remedy for stopping a Gonorrhaea; as also two Drams of the
following Powder to be taken in Chalybeat Wine.

Take of the Leaves of Mint and Rue, Seeds of the Chasttree, and Powder of
Galls, of each equal quantities. Beat 'em into Powder for the use
abovementioned.

Spirit of Turpentin and Sugar of Lead is a delicat Remedy. The Juice of Yarrow
or of Mallows with sweet Milk is also approved. Some apply outwardly the Juice
of Lettuce with Camphyr to the Testicles.

As touching the second Indication, viz. qualifying the sharpness of the
seminal matter, the Tincture of Coral with Spirit of Woods, or of Sassafras, is
very useful. The Astringent Crocus or Tincture of Steel, Sulphur of Vitriol,
Sugar of Lead, and white Amber prepared, are all very proper. Or,

Take of the Conserve of Red Roses, Conserve of Mint, of each an Ounce or an
Ounce and a half; prepared Bone of the Cuttle-fish (which in this Case is a
noted Specific) two Drams; Calcined Borace a Dram; Nutmegs half a Dram; Syrup
of dried Roses as much as suffices to make an Electuary. Of which the Patient
may take a convenient quantity twice or thrice a day. Crude Borace provokes
Lust; but when calcined, it leaves a Styptic Caput Mortuum of contrary use.

Take of the Bone of a Cuttle-fish prepared a Dram; prepared red Coral two or
three Scruples; Sugar of Lead half a Scruple. Mix for six Doses.

Take of prepared Crystal, Bone of the Cuttle-fish, prepared Amber, of each
two Scruples; Chalybeat Diaphoretic Antimony a Scruple; Crollius's Sperniola a
Scruple; Sugar of Lead fifteen Grains. Make a Powder for five or six Doses.

The Turpentine of Cyprus reduced to Pills with prepared Amber, or Crocus of
Steel, or Rhubarb, is very effectual. Of late the Balsam Capivi is mightily
esteemed. Sugar of Lead, and the Antiphthisical Tincture prepared with it is of
noted efficacy.

Take of the Waters of Rue and Water Lillies, of each half an Ounce; Juice of
Lemons six Drams; Bole-Armenic a Dram; Cuttle-bone, and Diaphoretic Antimony
with Steel, of each two Scruples; Syrup of Citrons half an Ounce. Mix, and give
a Spoonful now and then.

If the Yard be exulcerated by the sharpness of the matter, take of Woman's or
Cowed Milk four Ounces; prepared Tutty two Drams; Aloe a Dram; Sugar Candy half
a Dram. Mix, and inject half an Ounce or six Drams at a time.

As for the third Indication, viz. corroborating the relaxated parts, and
correcting the watriness of the seminal Liquor; Mint, Wormwood, Amber, Mastic,
Astringent Tincture of Steel, Tincture of Coral, Powder of Frankincense (which
if too frequently repeated, causes a suppression of the Urine) Sugar of Lead;
Extract of Tormentilroots; sealed Earth, and Bole Armenic used with Vinegar;
Tincture of the Sulphur of Vitriol, etc. are all proper Ingredients.

Take of the Extract of Tormentil-roots two Drams; Crollius's Compound Powder
of Sperniola two Scruples; Plantain-seeds, Seeds of Chaste Lamb, Roots of
Comfrey, of each a Scruple; Venice Turpentine boiled, Camphyr, of each twelve
Grains. Make Pills.

I have cured a desperate Running with giving thirty or forty Drops of the
Tincture of Sulphur of Vitriol in a warm Vehicle every Morning; and half a Dram
of the Troches de Carabe every Evening; without any other Injunctions, except
that of lying on the sides, and a spare Diet.

If in the Declination of this Flux, a thin, watery Humor continue to run, as it
frequently happens; take of Gum Arabic, Tragacanth, prepared white Amber,
prepared Mummy, Bole Armenic, of each a Scruple; Laudanum Opiatum half a
Scruple. With a sufficient Quantity of the Tincture of Catechu, make Pills for
five Doses.

The natural Baths that partake of Alum are proper in an inveterat Case.

Outwardly the parts may be fomented with the Decoction of the Rindes and
Flowers of Pomegranats, Roses, Comfrey-roots, Plantain, etc. or let the
Perinaeum be anointed with the following Mixture.

Take Oil of Myrtles three Drams; distilled Oil of Mastic a Dram; distilled Oil
of Cloves, expressed Oil of Nutmegs, of each half a Dram. With Wax make a
Liniment.

If the ferment of the Testicles be desicient, Milk, Rice, Eggs and aromatic
Ingredients are proper. Ofttimes it is needful to purge both in the beginning
and progress of the Disease; as thus,

Take of boiled Cyprus Turpentin a Scruple; Scammony prepared with Juice of
Roses, Rosin of Jalap, of each five Grains. Make Pills for one Dose.

I am now arrived at the spurious Flux of Seed, which is called such when the
matter voided is of a different nature from the Genital Juice, being
discolored, sharp, stinking, attended sometimes by Pain and other Symptoms;
but not occasioned by venereal Actions, or partaking of any venereal Virulency.
It corresponds to the Whites in Women, and is called by some Gonorrhoea
Catarrhalis; but there are few Authors that have taken any notice of it.

The part affected is the Prostratae, whose Office it is to separat a Lymph for
a Vehicle to the Seed. Now if they are relaxated or exulcerated, they separat
and void larger quantities, as in the like case the Glandules of the Eyes, or
those in the Throat, are wont to do.

The material Cause is the serous cachectic Disposition of the Blood. The
remote Causes are the Disorders of the Stomac and digestive Faculty, or
whatever equips the Blood with crude and watery Particles. The formal efficient
Cause is the Relaxation of the Prostratae, occasioned by excessive Venery,
manual Violence, Riding, a Fall, etc.

Tho this Flux may serve to cleanse the Blood, yet if it continue long, it
degenerates into a Consumption.

The Cure turns upon corroborating the Stomac, correcting the Crudity of the
Blood, and cleansing and fortifying these Glandules. The first of these Designs
is compassed by the use of Wormwood, Mint, Rosemary: The second by the
Decoctions of Woods with Tormentil, Essence of Sassafras, volatile Salt of
Amber, Turpentin, Mastic, Gum Animi, Powder of Frankincense taken in a potch'd
Egg, drinking Spaw-waters, etc. After which bathing in natural Baths, or
artificial ones partaking of Alum, answers the third Indication. But this last
is not to be attempted till the former are accounted for.

As for the Virulent Clap, it is referred as a Symptom to the Pox, of which
elsewhere.

ART. II. Of the overhasty Ejaculation of the Seminal Matter.
THIS was the second Disorder relating to the ejection of Seed. The Cause is
either the Patency and Looseness of the Seminal Vesicles, or the spirituous
Turgescence and over-bearing youthful heat of the seminal Liquor. The former is
removed by the internal and external use of Astringents, such as we prescribed
in the foregoing Article. The second by the use of Opium, which stays the
Spirits, and prevents their early flight. Upon which account it is much in use
among the Indians and Turks, whose Women are most delighted with deliberat and
prolonged Embraces. But it ought to be mixed with Amber-grise; as if Opium were
added in the Preparation of the Essence of Amber-grise; in order to prevent any
succeeding Stupidity.

Henricus ab Here mentions a quick Ejaculation of Seed, caused by the
irritation of an Ulcer in the Intestinum Rectum.

ART. III. Of the overslow Ejaculation of the Seminal Matter.
OFttimes when the Blood inflames the Yard to an Erectien, the Spirits are
deficient in quickening the Seed; or the Muscles of the Yard are languid, or
the Seminal Vesicles flaccid and unable to counterpoize the force of the
Prostratae and neighboring Parts, which in the venereal Fit swell up, hear in
upon 'em, and contract their Passages; insomuch that they cannot eject the Seed
in due time, but it often slips out when the Yard is down, and the Turgescence
of the Parts gone.

Castor and sharp aromatic Cephalic Medicines are proper to be given inwardly.
Externally let the Root of the Yard be anointed with expressed Oil of Nutmegs,
or distilled Oil of Mace, or of Cloves, mixed with Civet or Mosch, or the Oil
or Spirit of Ants.

ART. IV. Of Caruncles in the Yard, hindering the Ejection of Seed.
THE fourth and last Head relating to this Chapter, is, when the Seed is not
ejected at all, by reason of a fleshy Excrescence in the Yard stopping its
passage. The Cause for the most part is a virulent Clap; in which the Urethra
is corroded, and the Nourishment naturally repairing to the corroded part
settles into a fleshy wartlike Substance.

Sometimes instead of Seed Blood is voided, sometimes Wind. In the former case
Astringents; in the latter Evacuating and Carminative Medicines are proper.

SECT. II. Of the Disorders relating to the Erection of the Yard.
THERE are two main Qualifications requisite for performing the Office of a
Husband; one is the due Erection and stiffness of the Yard; the other the
regular Ejaculation of the Seed through the Yard thus prepared. This was the
Subject of the preceding Section: The former lies now before us. In order to
set it in a clear light, we must distinguish the Turgescence and Distention of
the Yard from a due Erection. The former proceeds from the influx of arterial
Blood into the two nervous Bodies; but this Distention is continued and wrought
into a State of Rigidity and Erection by the Contraction of the two pairs of
Muscles seated at the Root of the Yard, which compress the Vein that runs along
its Back, and so hinder the reflux of the Blood. When their Contraction ceases,
the Blood that distended the Yard is discharged by this Vein, and leaves it in
a drooping condition. So this Contraction of the Muscles is the Cause of
Erection, and is in good measure promoted by the spirituous and provoking
quality of the Seed in the Seminal Vesicles.

What is needful to be said of the faults of Erection will fall under the Heads
of its Deficiency, Excess or Depravation.

CHAP. I. Of Impotency, or the Defect of Erection of the Yard.
IT proceeds either from the Relaxation of the two Pairs of Muscles and
inactivity of the Spirits, or the flatness of the Seminal Liquor.

The Muscles may be relaxated by a Palsy, Excessive Riding, a Fall or Blow upon
the Os Sacrum, or Wound of the Head affecting the respective Nerves, mercurial
Inunctions, external Cold, etc. The Spirits are faulty when they are
universally weak and languid, as in old Age and Sickness; when they are
disordered by Passions of the Mind, such as Bashfulness and Fear (of which we
have several Instances in new married Youngsters, that fancy themselves
bewitched) or diverted by dwelling upon other Objects, or balked by
hypochondriac Despondency.

The Genital Juice is faulty, when it is not duly prepared, or falls short of
its spirituous stimulating quality. This may be occasioned by old Age, defects
in the Stones, or any Disorder of the Genital Parts; or by the continued use of
Nitre or Camphyr.

This Disease is manifest of it self. All the use of Signs is to distinguish
the Causes. If the Muscles are paralytic, they are equally unmovable by all
other Objects. If the Animal Spirits are deficient, an universal Feebleness
seizes the whole Body. If hypocondriac Fancies, melancoly Thoughts or Passions
of the Mind occasion it, the Circumstances of the Patient will discover 'em.

The Cure consists in recovering the force and spirituality of the Seed, and
the regular Influx of the Spirits into the Muscles. The internal Medicines
answering these Indications are largely accounted for in the preceding Section.
In England Ambergrise and Laudanum Opiatum are mightily extolled. Cantharides
mixed with aromatic Pouders are of noted efficacy.

Take of preserved Roots of Satyrium and of Eryngo, Pine-nuts, of each two
Ounces; candy'd Ginger, Nutmegs candy'd, of each an Ounce; Confection Alchermes
half an Ounce; Rocket-seeds, Seeds of Cresses, of each two Drams; white Pepper
and Cloves, of each a Dram: With Syrup of Cinnamom make an Electuary.

Externally, Cephalic Baths, Fomentations, and rubbing the Parts before the
Fire are proper. Let the Decoction of Cubebs in Wine be applied to the
Testicles and adjacent parts; or anoint the Perinaeum, Cod, etc. with
Mynsicht's Venereal Balsam mixed with Oil of Ants.

Take of the Juice of Parsneps, Oil of Mustard, of each two Drams; large Eggs
of Emmets a Dram. Pound the Eggs, and set 'em in the Sun for a day or two; then
mix all in the form of a Liniment; with which anoint the Nut of the Yard
immediately before the Engagement. If the Erection continue after Enjoyment,
wash the Yard with warm Water.

The Spirit or Juice of Ants with Civet and Oil of Pepper or Castor, the Root
of black Hellebor or of Pellitory of Spain, powdered and mixed with the Fat of
a Quail; And Wine in which Euphorbium and Pellitory of Spain have been boiled;
are all recommended for the same use.

Take of Civet eight Grains; Ambergrise six Grains; Mosch five Grains;
distilled Oil of Cinnamom eight Drops; distilled Oil of Nutmegs four Drops;
Balsam of Peru as much as suffices for a due Consistence. Mix and anoint the
Perinaeum and Nut of the Yard.

CHAP. II. Of the immoderat Erection of the Yard.
THIS proceeds from the Contraction of the Muscles at the Root of the Yard,
hindering the Recess of the Blood, which may be occasioned two ways; 1. When the
Redundancy and Turgescence of the seminal Liquor irritats to a perpetual
Erection, and desire of Venery, which for the most part ceases after repeated
Enjoyment. 2. When the Muscles are seized with Convulsions, and the Erection is
attended with Pain, exasperated by venereal Embraces, and free of any
Inclination that way.

As for the first, viz. the Heat, Sharpness and Turgescence of the Seminal
Liquor, it is occasioned by a sedentary Life, high Feeding, use of Spices, or
venereal Incentives, wanton Thoughts and Conversation, volatile sharp Purges,
etc.

It prognosticats fast Living, an universal Weakness, and a short Life. It Is
cured by frequent Blood-letting, employing the Mind, exercising the Body,
fasting, watching; the continued use of Nitre and Spirit of Vitriol; or of
Camphyr, or of Sugar of Lead. Hempseed is a proper Specific. Purslain, Lettuce,
Water Lillies, Vervain, Mint, Willow-Twigs and Leaves, etc. are generally
approved.

Take of Hemp Seed, Melon-seeds, of each two Drams; the four cold Seeds, of
each a Dram; Lettuce-water, Sorrelwater, and Water of the Flowers of
Water Lillies, of each three Ounces: make an Emulsion, and sweeten it with
Syrup of white Poppies.

Take of the Waters of Vine-leaves and of Willowleaves, of each an Ounce and a
half; dulcified Spirit of Vitriol half a Dram. Mix and sweeten with pearled
Sugar.

Take of the Phlegm of Vitriol two Drams; Tincture of Dazies, Tincture of
Rose-flowers, of each half a Dram. Mix, etc.

Take of the Powder of the Seeds of Chaste Lamb, depurated Nire, of each two
Drams; Camphyr half a Scruple; Laudanum Opiatum six Grains. Make a Powder.

Let the Juices of Plantain, Nightshade, Hemlock, Henbane and Comfrey, be mixed
with distilled Vinegar and Sugar of Lead, and applied to the Cod and Sharebone.
Or, make Cataplasms of the same Ingredients with Vinegar. Let the Juice of
Comfrey or of Lettuce, in which Nitre is dissolved, be applied to the Stones,
Loins, and all round the Genital Parts.

As touching the Second, viz. The Convulsion of the Muscles causing a
Priapismus, hindering the Reflux of the Blood, and imparting somewhat
convulsive to the Yard; it is occasioned by the iritation of the Animal Spirits,
whether by an internal or external Cause. Cantharides or other venereal
Incentives, unseasonably and immoderatly used, frequently produce it.

If it be attended by violent Pain, it portends an Inflammation or Impostume in
the Part, or the Convulsions of other Parts.

As for the Method of Cure. Vomits are more proper than Purgatives, by reason
that the latter frequently prove Incentives to Venery. After Vomiting let
vitriolic and nitrous Acids be exhibited. The Decoction of Lentils with the
Seed of the Chaste Tree, is applauded by Lindanus. Opium and Camphyr, with the
Juice of Citrons; Diaphoretic Gold, Rue, Mint, etc. are much in use. If it
proceed from the use of Cantharides, Milk is not improper.

Let the Perinaeum be anointed with Oil of Rue, or of Mint, or fomented with
Wine, in which Rue and Cuminseeds have been boiled; or apply Cataplasms of
Mint, Rue, Flowers of Water Lillies, Vinegar and Water: Or, anoint with Camphyr
dissolved in Oil of Sweet Almonds, or in Vinegar. Vitriolic and nitrous Liquors
are proper for the same use.

CHAP. III. Of the Depravation of the Erection of the Yard.
THE Erection of the Yard is depraved when it stands awry, or departs from the
natural Posture. If the Bridle be short, it stands crooked; but that is cured
by cutting the Bridle. If the Depravation proceed from the Inflammation of the
Yard, it is cured by emollient Cataplasms, such as we prescribed for the
Inflammation of the Testicles. Sometimes Erection is hindered by a Pain in the
Yard, caused by frequent Venery; which is cured by thrusting into the Passage
Balsam of Peru, or the Leaves of Hemlock bruised. If the Pain be caused by a
Stone in the Bladder, there is nothing better than to put the Yard into the
Water of the Whites of Eggs with Woman's Milk and Camphyr.

The remaining Causes which disturb the Erection of the Yard are those relating
to the Foreskin. They are of two sorts; 1. When the Prepuce imprisons and
straitens the Nut, and cannot be drawn back. This is called Phimosis. 2. When
the Prepuce being drawn off, cannot be brought to cover the Nut again. This is
called Paraphimosis.

As for the first, if the Prepuce be naturally so strait, it ought to be cut,
but so as to avoid the Vein that runs along its side. If it proceed from the
accidental Corrugation of the Prepuce, let the Cream of Quicklime be beaten up
with fresh Butter, and applied to it. If it proceed from an Inflammation
occasioned by the Embraces of a foul Woman, foment the Prepuce and Nut with the
following ^^ixture.

Take of the Mucilages of Fleawort-seeds, of Quince-seeds; of Fenugrec-seeds,
extracted with Plantain-water, of each an Ounce; the Yelk of one Egg; and three
Ounces of Cows Milk. Mix, etc. Or,

Foment with the Water or Decoction or Quicklime, warm; if you please you may
add to it Sugar of Lead, or sweet Mercury.

Take of Chamomile and Elder-flowers, of each a handful; Henbane-flowers,
Aniseeds, and Fennel-seeds, of each half a handful; Bay Berries half an Ounce.
Cut, bruise, and boil them in Limewater; and apply the hot strained Liquor to
the Part. Or make a Cataplasm of the Meal of Beans with Limewater for the same
use.

As for a Paraphimosis, it is occasioned for the most part by the first Venereal
Encounter; and is ofttimes accompanied by a swelling of the Prepuce. Upon which
account softning and discussing Ingredients ought to be joined together.

Take of the Leaves of Marshmallows, common Mallows, and Pellitory of the Wall,
of each a handful; Marshmallowroots and white Lilly-roots, of each an Ounce;
Flowers of red Roses, and Flowers of Chamomil, of each two little handfuls.
Boil them in Milk to the Consistence of a Pultise, and apply to the part.
Flowers of Chamomil, or of Elder, or of Henbane, may be boiled in Milk or
Limewater, for a Fomentation. Or apply a Cataplasm of white Bread, Yelks of
Eggs, Oil of Roses and Saffron. If the Pain be violent, Saffron ought always to
be added.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF ETMULLERUS HIS Practice of PHYSIC, etc.
BOOK IV. Of Diseases peculiar to Women,
SECT. I. Of the Disorders of the Menstrual Flux.
THE most notable Alteration which happens to Women when they are ripe for
Men's Embraces, is the monthly Evacuation of Blood by the secret Parts,
beginning ordinarily in the fourteenth year of Age, and ending in the forty
ninth; tho sometimes it anticipates the former, and outlives the latter Date.

This Flux is called the Terms or Courses, and returns duly once a Month, in
some a few days sooner, and in others so much later; only Childbearing Women,
and sometimes such as give suck are not liable to it.

It is caused by an extraordinary Fermentation and Rarefaction of the Mass of
Blood, occasioned by a peculiar fermentative Power of the Glands of the Womb;
whence being incapable to be contained within its ordinary bounds, it breaks
forth at the Arteries of the Vagina, till by lessening the quantity, the
Fermentation ceases, in the space of three or four days, till the next period.

This monthly Purgation is disordered in the way of desiciency, increase, or
depravation.

CHAP. I. Of the Deficiency of the Terms.
THis is commonly but improperly called a Suppression of the Terms, and is
occasioned either by a Default of the Blood, or of the Womb and Vessels through
which it flows. The Default of the Blood is its grosness, toughness and fixed
acidity, proceeding from the Disorder of the Stomac, whereby it becomes unfit
for a due fermentative Expansion.

Sometimes the Vessels of the Vagina are obstructed by a viscid Phlegm; and
sometimes the sides of the Vagina being exulcerated, or otherwise hurt, grow
together, in which cases the wonted Flux is deficient.

The remoter Causes, are Cold, whereby the Blood is coagulated, Food of
difficult Digestion, use of Acids; and finally, such Affections of the Mind as
naturally cool and thicken the Blood, such as sudden Frights, Sadness, Grief,
and the like.

If this Disease is from the Blood, the stretching Pains of the Loins, beating
of the Arteries of the Loins, and of these about the Os sacrum, the ordinary
Forerunners of this Flux, are not found; the Urine is crude, the Belly Costive,
hypochondiac Symptoms prevail, and in time no stated periodical Alteration of
Body is to be perceived.

But if from the Womb, and its obstructed Vessels, the Symptoms absent in the
former case are present here, and that in a higher degree; with weariness of
the Joints, pricking Pains of the Loins, Blood issuing from other parts of the
Body, and that at such times as the Courses used to flow.

But the greatest Difficulty is to distinguish this preternatural State, from
the natural Suppression of the Terms by impregnation, which are accompanied
with almost the same Symptoms.

However, we may conclude, that the Suppression is preternatural, if the
Patient grows still worse and worse with an universal Paleness covering the
whole Body, and decay of Appetite continuing beyond the third Month; if there
are continued Pains of the head, unusual beatings of the Arteries, especially
in the Loins, frequent Vicissitudes of heat and cold all over the Body,
difficulty of breathing, especially on every slight Motion of the Body, a
frequent unequal obscure Pulse; and finally if the Urine is either thinner,
Paler, or higher colored than ordinary.

If this Suppression happens in the very time of the Flux, the Cure is easy, if
timely and speedy; but if the Suppression be of an earlier date, it is more
slowly and difficultly cured, and oftentimes brings on diverse other Diseases,
such as Cachexies, Dropsies, various Ulcers of the Parts, Asthmas, Disorders of
the Stomac, Melancoly, etc. and at length Death it self. Black Urine in this
Disease is a good sign.

In the cure of this Distemper we must endeavor, 1. To rectify the
Chylification of the Ventricle, by Vomits and aromatic volatile Medicines. 2. To
amend the Crudity of the Blood by Chaly beat Medicines, and volatile oily
Aromatics. 3. To remove that viscidity of the Humors which obstructs the
Vessels of the Womb, with Gums, and in particular, Gum Ammoniac, as also
Mercurials, and chiefly Mercurius Dulcis; and above all, such Specifics as are
known to excite the monthly Fermentation of the Blood.

But to be more particular; 1. Specifics are never to be given, when the
Distemper is confirmed, before the Universal Evacuations.

2. Before we provoke the Courses, we ought to consider whether it be
expedient; for in such as are emaciated, newly recovered from sickness, or who
have never had them, it is not to be attempted.

3. At such time only the Terms are to be moved, as otherwise naturally they
would have flowed of their own accord.

4. Of universal Remedies, the chief are such as evacuate, whether upward or
downward, and next opening a Vein. Vomits, whether prepared from Antimony or
Asarabecca given in the beginning of the Cure, yea sometimes repeated, are of
excellent Virtue; but Digestives must be premised. As,

Take of Mynsicht's Arcanum Duplicatum half a Dram, Chachectic Crocus of Steel
two Scruples, with half a Scruple of Salt of Tartar. Mix 'em, and make a Powder
to be divided into two equal parts.

In the next place strong Purgatives may be given, such as Coloquintida and
black Hellebor, of which, together with Alteratives, diverse Compositions may be
made up. As,

Take Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar and thickened, Extract of back
Hellebor, of each fifteen Grains; of Castor and Extract of Saffron, of each
three Grains; Troches Alhandal two or three Grains. Make Pills with Oil of
Turpentine or Amber. Or,

Take of the Mass of Pills of Hiera with Agaric, and Mercurius dulcis rightly
prepared, of each fifteen Grains; of the Extract of Troches Alhandal two or
three Grains; and make Pills with Essence of Castor.

Of these, and such like, let the Patient take a Dose every four or five days;
and in the Intervals, let Bags of Alterative Aromatics be infused in Wine. As,

Take Roots of Angelica and Lovage, or Spignel, of each an Ounce; of Galangal
half an Ounce; Leaves of Rosemary, Fever-few, Savin, of each a handful;
Bay Berries or fresh Juniper Berries an Ounce and a half; Cinnamom three Drams;
Mace a Dram; Saffron as much; Salt of Tartar three Drams: cut, bruise, and tie
them in a Bag to be infused in Wine, of which take a draught in the Morning
fasting, and two hours before Supper. Or,

Take Leaves of Mugwort, Pennyroyal and Rosemary, of each a handful; Roots of
Angelica six Drams; Cinnamon two Drams; Saffron a Dram: Cut, bruise and tie
them in a Bag to be infused in two Measures of Rhenish Wine, wherein red hot
Steel has been several times quenched.

5. The Body being thus prepared, Bleeding will be very, expedient, unless the
Patient have never yet had her Courses, in which Case Bathings will suffice. If
the Terms do already flow but sparingly, you may open the Saphaena in the Leg;
as also if there is reason to fear they will not come at their wonted time; but
if the Flux is at hand, and you desire to facilitate it, then you may open a
Vein in the Arm. These Universals being premised, we must proceed to correct
the complexion of the Blood; to which purpose Steel and Chalybeat Medicines are
of great force, such as all cachectic Pouders, Earths, Infusions and Extracts
prepared from Steel, yea crude Filings of Steel, if the Stomach be strong. Or,

Take Filings of Steel two Ounces; with one Ounce of Cinnamom, infuse them in
Wine, whereof take a good draught Morning and Evening before Meals.

Spaw-waters drunk, are very profitable.

Together with these you must use the volatile bitter Aromatics, especially such
as are also specific Movers of the Terms, as well internal as external, such as
Rosemary, Calamint, Chervil, Lovage, Fever-few, Lesser Centory, Horehound,
Savine, Wall-flowers, Flowers of Marygold, and Lavender Seeds abounding with a
volatile Salt, or of a sharp Aromatic Taste; as those of Rocket, Cresses,
Fennel, Anise, etc. Juniper and Bay-beries, Roots of Angelica, Fennel,
Sea-holly, Briony, Madder, round-rooted Birthwort, Gentian, Elecampane, etc.
Also Mugwort, Baum, Gentian, Cinnamom, Cassia Lignea, Galangal, Nutmegs,
Cardamoms, Myrrh, and its Essence, Elixir Proprietatis, compound Tincture of
Tartar, all Preparations of Myrrh, Gums, Coloquintida, Castor, Saffron, Milt of
an Ox, Borace, alcalin Salts, rather volatile than fixed: Also Mynsicht's
Arcanum Duplicatum, etc. Of which almost an infinity of Prescriptions may be
made. We shall single out only a few for example sake. As,

Take four Ounces of Nutmegs, and mix 'em well with twelve Ounces of fine
Sugar, and take the bigness of a Walnut Morning and Evening. Or,

Take two Drams of Castor, volatile Salt of Amber and Hartshorn, of each a Dram;
infuse them in a sufficient quantity of Spirit of Wine, diluted with
Cinnamom-water, in a warm place, in a close Vessel till the Tincture is drawn;
of which give a Dram.

Take Zwelfer's Tincture of Vitriol of Steel, or its Solution with Spirit of
Wine, two Drams; Essence of Castor and Saffron, of each a Dram. Dose, from
forty to sixty Drops twice or thrice a day in some hot Liquor: But withal, let
the Patient moderatly exercise her self.

Take Solution of Steel with Juice of Apples, compound Essence of an Ox's Milt,
and that of Savine, of each two Drams. Or,

Take Essence of Castor two Drams; Quintessence of Rosemary, Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac with Amber, of each one Dram. Or,

Take Borace a Dram, Myrrh half a Dram; Saffron fifteen Grains. Make a Powder
for three Doses. Or,

Take Mynsicht's Arcanum Duplicatum four Scruples; Castor half a Dram; Myrrh a
Scruple; Saffron half a Scruple. Make a Powder for four Doses.

For a Vehicle to such Pouders, take a Spoonful of this Mixture.

Take Mugwort-water two Ounces; Cinnamom-water one Ounce; Essence of an Ox's
Milt three Drams; Essence of Castor a Dram; Syrup of Canel six Drams.

If the Suppression of the Terms be from the default of the Womb, the
obstructed Vessels are to be opened by volatile penetrating Medicines mixed with
Sudorifics. Sometimes manual Operation is required.

If by a sudden Cold, or other such Cause, the flowing Courses are stopped, let
Blood at the Saphaena; and then let volatile oily Aromatics be given, which with
a soft breathing Sweat will restore the natural Motion of the Blood; such are
Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, and the volatile oily Salts. Sperma Ceti may be given to
a Dram with Castor, in hot Ale; also some fixed Salt, as that of Wormwood or
Savine. If a grievous Pain molest the Womb, the Decoction of Chamomile, with
the other forementioned Ingredients, may be given inwardly; and what remains
after straining, may be applied to the Groin in form of a Cataplasm.

But if from a sudden Fear, Anger or such like, the Flux is restrained; first
open a Vein in the Foot, then give the Spirit of Sal Ammoniac twice or thrice a
day. Or,

Take of the Decoction of Chamomile-flowers three Ounces; to which add of
simple Oxymel one or two Ounces.

To these internal Remedies, externals may be added, such as Fomentations,
Baths, Tumigations, etc. They are used after opening a Vein in the Arm, at what
time the Courses are expected. They are prepared of common emollient, or proper
Aromatic Ingredients, such as Savine, Feverfew, Mugwort, etc. As,

Take Leaves of Mugwort, Pennvroal, Wild-time, of each two handfuls; Savine,
Flowers of Chamomile, white Lillies, of each a handful; Roots of Marshmallows,
round-rooted Birthwort, Madder, of each two Ounces; Roots of Angelica an Ounce;
Juniper and Bayberries, of each six Drams; Salt of Tartar six Ounces. Mix them
for a Bath. Or,

Take Leaves of Savine half a handful; Myrrh two Drams; Wood of Aloes a Dram;
Troches Alhandal a Dram: Make a gross Powder, to be thrown on burning Coals,
that the Smoke may be received by the Womb.

The Ancients also gave Pessaries, among which that made of the Gall of a Bull
mixed with the Juice of Mercury, wherein Coloquintida has been boiled, is not
unprofitable; Garlic also, and its heads beaten with the Oil of Spike, may be
used to this purpose.

If the Evil is very stubborn, we are sometimes forced to use Cantharides both
inwardly and outwardly.

CHAP. II. Of the immoderat Flux of the Terms.
IF the Courses flow oftener, or in greater quantities than they ought naturally
to do, it is called an immoderat Flux of the Terms.

In those who labor of this Distemper, we may observe three things; 1. The
strength of the Stomach is impaired with dejection of Appetite. 2. They feel
for the most part a stretching and tearing pain in the Back about the Loins. 3.
Those who are scorbutic, abounding with a volatile Acid, are for the most part
subject to it.

The Causes respect either the Womb or Blood. Sometimes the former loses its
due firmness or tone, and dos not sufficiently strengthen and extend its
Vessels; sometimes the Orifices of these Vessels are over-dilated or broke open
by force; as by over-straining ones self in taking up great Weights, hard
Labor, Sneezing, Vomiting, etc.

But most frequently the Cause is in the Blood, either when it is too waterish;
or when its Serum dos too much abound with a saltish Acidity, or Acrimony; or
finally, when it is too much moved and heated by venereal Rage, Exercise, Joy,
Anger, use of strong Liquors, Aromatics, or too hot a Season, etc.

If the evacuated Blood is thin, of a florid and brisk Color, or if, when
received on a Linen Cloth, it discovers a pale Circle, the Serosity of the
Blood is the Cause; but if the Patient perceives a gnawing, biting, itching
Pain, twitching as it were the Genitals, with a desire of Evacuation; then the
Acrimony of the Serum offends: But if the voided Blood easily clots, is of the
natural Color, being somewhat obscure; and if withal, the Cheeks are ruddy,
Veins swollen, the Pulse great, quick and frequent, then the fault lies in the
over-heating, or fermentative irritation of the Blood.

This Evil is dangerous if of long continuance; inferring Weakness,
Indigestion, Cachexy, swelling of the Feet, Dropsy, the Whites: and if the
Patient is in years, it is for the most part incurable.

In the Cure we must endeavor three things; 1. Either to diminish the Blood by
Fasting, Labor, or Blood-letting, or to alter it with Wormwood, Rhubarb, etc.
or allay its Fervor and Fermentation, by Plantain, Purslain, and mild Acids.
2. To check its Fluidity with things that thicken and allay its sharp Serosity
with Chalybeat and absorbent Medicines. 3. To strengthen the Womb and its
Vessels, with Astringent and chiefly Martial Remedies.

Now with regard to these Indications, we must observe, 1. That a Flux of any
considerable standing must not be stopped of a sudden.

2. The Diet must be well ordered, the Patient must be kept warm, with rest of
Body and Mind; her Drink must be warm, and she ought to abstain from Wine.

3. Mild Purgatives, and such as leave some astriction behind them, may be used
before the Flux, when a superfluous Serosity abounds; as a Dram of Rhubarb
mixed with Conserve of Roses, or Syrup of Quinces; also Myrobalans. Or,

Take Powder of choice Rhubarb a Dram; Marmalad of Quinces half an Ounce;
Plantain-water an Ounce; Mix for a draught.

4. Bleeding increases the Disorder, and ought not to be used: but instead of
it, if the Blood is waterish, you may have recourse to Sudorifics and Diuretics.

5. Opiats are of singular use in preventing and curing the Paroxism: but
special regard must be had to the Patient's Strength.

Remedies therefore in this Disease are either absorbent, or allaying, in
regard of the Blood, or astringent with respect to the Womb. The Oil and Spirit
of Vitriol, given in Plantane-water, does notably allay the ardour of the
Blood; also prepared Nitre, Lapis prunellae, and mild acid Astringents.

As for Astringents which thicken the Blood, and correct its fluidity: These
are Plantane, Purslain, Shepherds Purse, Nettles, white flowered Yarrow, and
chiefly their Juices; the Moss of the wild Plum-tree, and that of the Oak,
(given to a Dram twice or thrice in a potch'd Egg) Loostrife with a purple
Flower, the greater Comfrey and its Root, the Root of Bistort, Nutmegs, Rinds
of bitter Oranges, and their Decoction; the Bark of the Root of the
Mulberry-tree, Rinds of Pomegranates, and their Flowers; Poppv and
Henbane-seeds, Pears, Services, Quinces, Medlars, Mastic, and Wood of the
Mastic-tree; Misletoe of the Oak, Steel and Chalybeat Remedies, Coral and its
Preparations, Alum, Bole-Armenic, sealed Earth, Amber, Dragons Blood, the Dung
of an Ass, Goose, or Dog, the Yelk of an Egg, burnt Hartshorn, etc. Of these,
and such like, many forms may be prescribed. As,

Take red Coral prepared, yellow Amber, Bole-Armenic, Dragons Blood, of each
two Drams; Plantain-seed, calcined Borace, of each a Dram; Laudanum Opiatum six
Grains; Hartman's Extract of Saffron a Scruple. Make a Powder, which is of
excellent use when the Disease proceeds from watery Blood.

Take Conserve of Roses vitriolated an Ounce; burnt Hartshorn prepared,
Boodstone prepared, of each a Dram; Alum prepared with Sugar, twelve Grains;
Laudanum Opiatum two Grains. Make an Electuary with the Syrup of acid
Pomgranates, which is excellent in all bleedings of the Womb. Or,

Take Water of Frogs Spawn, and of Oak-leaves, of each six Drams; prepared
Bloodstone two Scruples; Moses of human Scull a Scruple; Syrup of Myrtles three
Drams. But it is in vain to multiply Prescriptions, which any one may vary at
his Pleasure.

Externals may likewise be used. Some hang a Jasper about the Neck: Some a Toad
killed and dried: A Pessary may be made of Asses and Hogs Dung with Juice of
Plantane, and the Mucilage of Quince-seed. Injections for the Womb may be made
of the Decoctions of simple Astringents, or their Juices, with addition of
Alum.

If a grievous Pain and sense of burning molest the Vagina, Henbane and
Poppy-seeds may be added to Astringents.

Some order a Woman to put on a Shift that has been for eight days worn by a
Man, and add, that by so doing, she runs the risque of never having her Terms
again.

Some commend Cataplasms. As,

Take Carpenters Ruddle, Bloodstone, and dulcified Earth of Vitriol, with red
Bole, of each equal parts: Mix them into a Cataplasm with Whites of Eggs and
Vinegar, to be applied to the Belly, and particularly the Region of the Groin.

Natural hot Baths are excellent, if the Evil is inveterat.

Some also have found much good by fomenting the Region of the Groin with a
Sponge dipped in the Decoction of Alum, either alone or with the addition of
Knotgrass, Roots of Bistort, and the like.

CHAP. III. Of the Depravation of the Menstrual Flux.
WE shall cast into this Head several Accidents and Defaults of this Flux, of
which we treat in the following Articles.

ART. I. Of the difficulty of the Terms.
TO Women of an impure and Cacochymic Body, it often happens that a day or two
before their Courses are upon them, and sometimes when they begin to flow, they
are afflicted with Headaches, pricking and grievous Pains of the Stomac,
beating and shooting Pains of the Loins, reaching sometimes to the Groin; also
Pains in the Belly, Palpitations of Heart, difficulty of Breathing; which
Symptoms either cease, or at least diminish, when the Terms come; till these
being over, those also vanish.

These Pains proceed from the Vessels of the outer Neck of the Womb, which
either being too small, or stopped up by the foregoing Flux, hinder the
discharge of the fermenting Blood. Moreover, in those of an ill habit of Body,
Wind coming from the vitiated Bile, and pancreatic Juice, and passing from the
Guts to the Mesentery, occasions Spasms and Contractions of the Nerves and
Membranes, whence ensue the racking pains resembling those of the Cholic.

This Distemper, if not timely prevented, ends in a total Suppression of the
Terms; sometimes dismal hysteric, and other bad Symptoms ensue.

In order to adjust the Cure, we must endeavor to rectify the vitiated Crasis
of the Blood by Chalybeat and aromatic volatile Remedies, with the addition of
gentle Laxatives.

In the Paroxysm the Fermentation of the Blood should be promoted by volatile
Aromatics, the Effervescence of the Bile and pancreatic Juice should be
restrained by Chalybeat Medicines, and fixed Acids.

In the Paroxysm let gentle loosening Clysters with Turpentine be injected;
then exhibit the compound Essence of an Ox's Milt, either alone or with the
liquid Essence of Steel; to which may be added, Essence of Saffron: also Elixir
proprietatis, compound Tincture of Tartar, distilled Oil of Aniseed, or that of
Amber. Or,

Take Penyroyal-water two Ounces; Water of Mugwort half an Ounce; Essence of
Castor a Dram and a half; Spirit of Sal Ammoniac half a Dram; distilled Oil of
Aniseed three Drops; Syrup of Mugwort six Drams. Mix and make a Potion.

If eight days before the flowing of the Terms, an Alterative and laxative Bag
be given in Wine, the following hysteric Pills will effect the Cure.

Take of Aloe three Drams; best Myrrh a Scruple; Extracts of Calamus
Aromaticus, and Carduus Benedictus, of each half a Scruple; of Saffron three
Grains; of Roots of Gentian, round-rooted Birthwort and Dittany, of each five
Grains. With Essence of Myrrh make Pills, to be given during the time of the
Flux, from half a Dram to a whole one, for some days.

Sweet things ought to be avoided; but the following Potion to be taken by
Spoonfuls, is of singular efficacy.

Take Water of Swallows with Castor, an Ounce and a half; Carminative-water an
Ounce; Water of Pennyroyal half an Ounce; Spcrima Ceti a Dram; Crab's-eyes
prepared a Scruple; Diaphoretic Antimony half a Scruple; volatile Salt of Amber
eight Grains; Syrup of Cinnamom six Drams. Mix them.

If the Symptoms are grievous, we must have recourse to Laudanum Opiatum; but
always remember to mix it with such Ingredients as provoke the Courses.

If the Courses are at hand, or begin to flow, a Vein may be opened in the
foot: if they are not looked for, till after some days, Blood may be taken from
the Arm.

Externally such things as are prescribed in the convulsive Cholic and hysteric
Passion, may be used: Also this Fomentation.

Take of Bay Leaves, Wormwood, of each two handfuls; Pennyroyal a handful;
Flowers of Roman Chamomil and Flder, of each half a handful; Roots of Angelica
and Lovage, of each two Ounces; Bay Berries an Ounce; Juniper Berries half an
Ounce; the four greater cold Seeds, of each two Drams; cut, bruise, and boil
them with a sufficient quantity of Wine in a close stopped Vessel.

ART. II. Of the lesser quantity of the monthly Flux.
SOmetimes the viscous toughness of the Blood proceeding from a default in
Chylification, is such, that the Terms flow too sparingly; upon which insues a
Palpitation of the Heart, difficulty of Breathing, and a beating Pain about the
Loins.

In curing this we must strive to provoke the Courses by all such specific
Remedies as were ordered for the cure of their Suppression; such as half a Dram
of Venetian Borace, with some drops of Essence of Saffron, given in Pennyroyal
or Cinamon-water; also the Decoction of Savine, its Extract and Oil, Myrrh,
Castor, volatile Salt of Amber, and such like.

Blood may be drawn forth from the Foot; Cupping-glasses, with Scarification,
may be applied to the Legs or Thighs; Fomentations of emollient Ingredients
mixed with such as provoke the Terms, may be used if need be.

ART. III. Of the Flux of the Terms by drops.
IF there is an Acrimony in the Blood with toughness and thickness, or if the
Passages and Vessels be narrow, there follows a dropping Flux of the Terms,
which is either continual, or lasts every Period much longer than it ought,
ending sometimes in an exulceration of the Womb. If the Blood is gross and
thick, it is a stubborn Evil.

This is cured in like manner as the immoderat Flux.

Steel and Chalybeat Medicines are the top Medicines for compassing the Cure;
also loosning and alterative Bags, with hysteric Ingredients, may be used with
good success.

If the Vagina is excoriated, vulnerary Injections will be convenient.

ART. IV. Of several other defaults of the Courses.
SOmetimes the Courses have not their due Color, but are either
watry-colour'd, whitish, livid, yellowish, black, or tinged with diverse ugly
Colors; all which proceed from the ill Disposition of the Blood and Chyle; to
cure which after a Vomit, let Chalybeat Remedies, Aloe, Myrrh and Saffron, or
compound Tincture of Tartar be given.

If the smell of the Menstrual Blood offend by reason of the Putrefaction begun
in the Womb-Vessels, occasioned by its sluggish Motion there: We must endeavor
to restore its usual swiftness. Myrrh, Saffron, Elixir Proprietatis, compound
Tincture of Tartar, Essence of Myrrh, Amber, and its Essence, Balsam of Sulphur
with Turpentine, Preparations of Aloe with Mercurius dulcis, do notably answer
this Design.

If the Courses come sooner or later than ordinary, or observe no certain
period, the default is in the Crasis of the Blood perverted, and the Genitals
notably infeebled.

This Distemper is ever a Forerunner of a Cachexy, and ends either in a total
suppression, or a Dropsy.

Steel and Coral, and the noble Medicines prepared from them, accomplish the
Cure. But we must continue for some time in the use of them; joining such
things as either promote or retard the Flux, as occasion shall require. Of
Steel we have its Crocus's and Essences, artificial Spaws, artificial Vitriol
of Mars, Poterius's Pills, etc. From Coral we have its Sublimation with Sal
Ammoniac, and its Precipitat and Tincture: To all which we may and sometimes
stimulating Aromatics, as Cinnamom, Myrrh, Saffron, etc. sometimes retarding
Opiats; and sometimes Purifyers of the Blood, such as Fumitory, Germander,
Monks Rhubarb, lesser Centory, black Hellebor, and such like.

If the hypogastric Vessels terminating in the outer Neck of the Womb, be
naturally misshapen, or misplaced, or depraved, by any supervening Obstruction,
and accordingly deny egress to the fermenting boiling Blood, it forces its
Passage through other parts of the Body; such as the Eyes, Mouth, Nose, Breast,
Navel, etc. and that either with or without order of time.

In curing this Dilsorder, regard being had to the sound or cachectic
Disposition of Body, we must endeavor not to suppress the Flux, but bring it
to the natural place.

Internals are of little use in the Paroxysm, but out of it volatile Aromatics
may be used to open the obstructed Vessels.

When the Flux is at hand, the Saphaena may be opened; also Cupping-glassies
may be applied to the Groin, to the Calves of the Legs, and insides of the
Thighs, sometimes with and sometimes without Scarification, in order to turn
the force of the Blood to the lower Parts: bathing of the Feet is also useful.

To open the Vessels of the Womb, external Fomentations may be applied to it;
Fumigations of Coloquintida, Pessaries with Hellebor, Aloe, and such like, may
be used: sharp Clysters are likewise not to be omitted: Or the Decoction of
Pennyroyal, Camomil, Savine, with Coloquintida, may be injected into the Womb.

And thus much shall suffice for the Disorders of the Terms.

CHAP. II. Of the white Flux in Women.
THIS Disease being allied to the former, shall have place in this Chapter.

The external Neck, or Vagina of the Womb, is a glandulous Membran, whose
confused Glandules every where open into its Cavity, especially two glandulous
Prominences encompassing the Urinary Passage, which in time of Coition emit a
whitish Liquor somewhat thick and glutinous.

If the matter of this genital Liquor is too copious, spirituous, or sharp, or
if the foresaid Orifices are somewhat loose and flaccid, there ensues a Flux of
that seminal Liquor, that disappears and returns by intervals.

This Flux is sometimes inoffensive to the Patient, as being but little and
seldom; but if it continue long, it must be cured by diminishing or tempering
the seminal Liquor, or by straitning the over-loose parts. Two or three Ounces
of the Juice of Citrons or Lemmons, may be taken every Morning for a long time,
to moderat the heat and acrimony of the matter; also Turpentine taken in an
Egg, or with the Yelk of an Egg mixed with Willow-flower-water; but especially
the Decoction and Extract of the Flowers of the white flowered dead Nettle, or
the Infusion of Clary in Ale. Externally we use astringent Baths and
Fomentations.

But if through default of the Blood and Chyle, the Liquor separated and
collected by these Glandules becomes too sharp, and either simply Salt, or
tinctured with acidity; and if withal the Texture of this glandulous Membran is
by frequent runnings rendered loose and flaccid; in this Case, I say, there
follows a continual and much more copious Flux of a serous Liquor of various
Colors, as yellow, black or green, and sometimes of a noisome smell.

This Flux is accompanied with Cachexies, loss of Appetite, swelling of the
Feet, Belchings, Weakness, dullness of the venereal Appetite, etc. and ofttimes
occasions Barrenness.

If it is of long continuance, the Cure is hard, especially in old Women; if
the matter is sharp, it causes Itchings, Burning, Exulcerations of the
Genitals, Gangreens, and at length Death.

In curing this Distemper we must first retrieve the Chylification of the
Stomach, by vomiting and stomachical Medicines. 2. Correct the cachectic
Crudity of the Blood, partly by Steel, and partly by volatile Salts and
Aromatics. 3. In particular we must resist the Disease with Specifics. And 4.
Repair the injury done to the solid parts with astringent and nervous Remedies.

Two Scruples of the Powder of Asarum-root, given after the use of Digestives,
is the choicest Vomit. Purgatives are of no use, but Sudorifics, as Guaiacum,
Sassafras, Juniperwood, etc. and Diuretics, as Turpentin, etc. may fitly supply
their room.

Take Turpentin washed in Rose Water half an Ounce; Pouders of red Coral and
Bole Armenic, of each half a Dram. Mix, and take it twice a week fasting: it is
an excellent Diuretic.

Rosemary is of noted efficacy, to which some add leaves of Mint and Baum: also
the Roots of Galangal, Cyperus, Avens, Marjoram, Clove Gilly-flowers, and their
distilled Oils; also vulnerary Herbs, as Ladies Mantle, Agrimony, etc.

Of Steel Medicines, the chief are Liquor Martis Solaris, Tincture of Steel
with Tartar, its Solution in Juice of Quinces, etc.

Internal Specifics for this Flux are such as allay the saltish Acid, dry up
watery Humors, and leave some astriction behind; such are Misletoe of the Oak
in Substance and Decoction; (the Decoction of the Pine-nut, with the Wood of
this Misletoe is an admirable Remedy) drop Fern, Tormentil, Solomon's Seal,
Angelica, and the like; Garden and wild Clary, used any way, for internal or
external Use, dead Nettle with the white Flower, its Water, Conserve or
Decoction, Walnut-shells, white flowered Millfoil, Fernroot, Melilot with the
white Flower, Plantane, Horse-tail, white Daisy, Woods of Mastic, Guaiacum and
Sassafras, Chalybeat Milk mixed with Bole Armenic, shells of hatched Eggs
either crude or calcined given to half a Dram, the Bone of the Cuttle-fish,
Jaw Bone of a Pike, River-Crabs, Capons head powdered, burnt Cork given to a
Dram, Amber and its Preparations, prepared Crystal, Pumice-stone crude or
calcined, Diaphoretic Antimony, feathered Alum, Osteocolla, the Pizzle of a
Heart or Whale. Of these Ingredients various Receipts may be prescribed. As,

Take Ostoocolla prepared half an Ounce; prepared Crystal and Jaw of a Pike, of
each a Dram; with the Conserve of Rosemary-flowers make an Electuary to be
taken twice or thrice a day.

Take Walnut-shells two Drams; Aniseed a Dram. Mix, and make a Powder for four
or five Doses.

Among external Remedies, the Ointment of Clary is famous, viz. Take Clary and
beat it up with Butter, let it stand sometime to putrify, then boil and strain
it; with this anoint from the Navel to the Groin, using it also by way of a
Pessary. Natural Baths are useful, as also artificial ones made with
Quicklime, Alum, Sage, Clary, Mugwort, Feverfew, etc. or Injections of the
Ashes of Walnut-kernels with Wine. Some use Fumigations with Mastic,
Frankincense, Nutmeg, Amber, etc. Or convey the Smoke of Sage by a Pipe. Issues
in the Thighs, Legs, and Shoulders, are of use to divert the Humors.

SECT. II. Of the Disorders of Women relating to the venereal Appetite.
CHAP. I. Of the loss of Virginity.
IN the outer Neck of the Womb behind the Urinary Passage, there is a
transverse Membrane placed, which if the Lips of the Privity be drawn aside,
resembles a Crescent with a hole in the upper side; but when the Lips fall
together, it has the appearance of three small fleshy Prominences like
Myrtle-berries.

In the Integrity of this Membrane, together with the straitness of the Vagina,
does Virgin-Innocence consist; and Virginity is said to be lost, when by the
admission of the human Yard the former is violently broken, or loosened and
distended, and the latter widened; tho yet in the mean while it may be violated
by other means.

Tho Virginity once lost can never be properly restored, yet an artificial one,
aping the true, may be obtained by straitning the Genitals, and retrieving
their natural Tone: which is effected by Baths and Fomentations prepared of
Astringents, such as the Root of the greater Comfrey, Plantane, Ladies Mantle,
Rob of Acacia, etc. to which Alum must still be added. As,

Take of Oak and Plantane-leaves, of each a handful; Root of the greater
Comfrey three Ounces; Galls an Ounce; Alum half an Ounce; boil them in water.
This Decoction may be injected by a Syringe, or applied externally with a
Sponge.

Moreover, if we frequently foment the great, soft, and flagging Breasts of
Women that have conceived, with the distilled water of green Pine, and wash
them with the same at night, letting them dry of themselves, they will become
little, round, and hard. Ladies Mantle, Feaverfew and Clary, are also of use
for this purpose.

That which provokes Virgins to forfeit their Title to the Angelical Character
is Lust, which they begin to entertain about the age of fourteen, when the
menstrual Flux commences.

CHAP. II. Of the Depravation of the venereal Appetite.
THE venereal Appetite or Lust is nothing else but a tender sense and tickling
of the extended Clitoris, caused by the influence of seminal matter abounding
in the two gland^ous Prominences, and other Glandules of the Vagina.

This according to nature ought to be moderat; however it is sometimes
deficient, and sometimes it exceeds.

The languishing of the venereal Appetite is frequently occasioned by the
paucity of Genital Liquor, and its want of Spirits, proceeding sometimes from
another Disease, as the Scurvy, Whites, etc. But if this Appetite is altogether
wanting, I am of opinion it is a default in the Structure or Conformation of
the parts, and admits of no cure.

As to the former, it is an Evil of little danger, save that it is ordinarily
accompanied with barrenness.

The want of Genital Liquor may be supplied by the use of juicy Food and
volatile Aromatics, such as Musk, Civet, and Amber. But if it is only the effect
of other Causes, it is cured by their removal.

Externally foment with the Infusion of Ants, together with their Nest; and
anoint the Groin and Privities with the Oil of Ants, or with Aromatic Oils or
Apoplectic Balsam mixed with Civet and Musk.

If the seminal humor contained in the glandulous Substance of the Vagina,
either by too long retention, or otherwise, become sharp, saltish, or somewhat
acid, it excites sometimes in the places through which it passes, such an
itching as disturbs Sleep; it is sometimes accompanied with a desire of
Copulation, but oftener not.

In curing this, we must begin, if need be, with mild Laxatives and Sudorifics,
and, if needful, allay the Acrimony of the Humor, and finish what remains by
external Applications. The Internals are the Infusions and Decoctions of
Fumitory, Succory, Scabious, Baum, Pennyroyal, Roots of Bryony, Black
Hellebor, Polypody, etc. Mercurius dulcis, and Troches Alhandal answer the
purgative end, as the Essences of Elder, the Tincture of Coral, and the Spirit
of Woods perform the alterative and diaphoretic Office.

Of Externals, the Preparations of Lead and Mercury are the best: such as
Vinegar wherein calcined Lead is dissolved. If the Evil proves stubborn, anoint
the Lips of the Privities with an Ointment made up of one part of Oil of
Tobacco, and two of the Ointment of Tutty; or apply Blistering-plaisters; or
cut Issues in the Thighs.

Sometimes the acid Humor retained corrodes the Lips of the Privities, and
occasions Wheals, Pushes, and in fine Scabs, which are of a mild Character, but
very itching; but there are others called Epinictides, yet different from those
little painful ones that spring from foul Embraces. However both the one and
the other are catching, and difficultly cured.

For cure we must begin with such Universals as are used against the Scab or
Itch; especially laxative Bags of the Root of Briony and Spurge: and if they
are of the malignant kind, we must use Mercurial, and other Specifics for the
Pox.

Externally you may apply Oil of Roses mixed with Yelks of Eggs, and discolored
by beating in a leaden Mortar. Or,

Take of the Decoction of Quick-line one pound; Sugar of Lead a Dram. Inject
one half, and foment with the other. If you suspect Infection, instead of
Saccharum Saturni take a Dram of Mercurius dulcis. Or,

Take of Aloe and Myrrh, of each the bigness of a small Pease; Verdigrice half
as much; of white Wine, Rose and Plantane-water, of each an Ounce: Mix for
Injection and external Washing.

You may also use Vnguentum Album Camphoratum, or de Lithargyrio mixed with Oil
of Tartar per Deliquium in the mild sort, and with Mercurius dulcis in the
malignant ones.

If the venereal Appetit is exalted to the pitch of a Delirium, it is then
ca^'d furor Vterinus, a Disorder incident as well to Virgins, as married Women
and Widows. Such Persons are talkative and peevish; they ramble through the
Streets, and solicit whoever they meet to Venery, and receive a denial with the
highest Indignation; sometimes wantonly uncover themselves before Men, and
interlard their incoherent Discourses with Smut and Bawdry.

This Distemper at first is easily cured, but if neglected, ends in absolute
Madness: Wherefore in the beginning it is proper to exhibit a strong Emetic,
enjoin a spare Diet, and drain the Genital Liquor, by extinguishing Specifics,
such as are the Root of white Water-Lilly, Agnus Castus, chiefly its Seed;
Lettuce, Rue, Purslain, Hemlock, principally its Seed; Willow-leaves, the
Liquor running from its smaller Branches lopt off in the Spring, Hemp and
Poppyseed, etc. Or,

Take Hemp Seed two Ounces; Seeds of Lettuce and Purslain, of each two Drams:
Make an Emulsion with Purslain-water, to be sweetened with Syrup of
Water-Lilly. If Camphyr or an Opiat be added, 'twill be more effectual.

The Effervescence of the Blood, and by consequence the Turgescence of the
Seminal Liquor, must likewise be repressed by frequent Bleeding and absorbent
Acids, such as the Juice of Citrons, Lemons and Pomegranats; Nitre, Sugar of
Lead, Coral, etc. and also by mild Sudorifics: and besides, in order to put a
stop to the Fury and impetuous Motion of the Animal Spirits, it is convenient to
add Poppy-seed, Opium and Camphyr.

Externally we use Cataplasms, Baths and Fomentations of Mandrake, Nightshade,
Purslain, Rue, Hemlock, Poppy, and such like.

SECT. III. Of the Disorders of the whole Body, which are supposed to proceed
from the Womb.
CHAP. I. Of the Green Sickness.
AS the first arrival of seminal Liquor occasions several notable Alterations
in Women; so if it is too long retained, and consequently corrupted and
altered, it ferments the Mass of Blood, Juices and Spirits, introducing an Evil
disposition of the whole Body, called the Green Sickness, or white Virgin
Fever; in which the Color of the Skin is pale, or somewhat livid and ugly,
attended by a bluish Circle under the Eyes, Anxiety and Sadness, without
manifest Cause; a slow, obscure, and disorderly Fever; an unequal and
inconstant Pulse; Vomitings in the day time, etc. It only invades Virgins and
Widows, or Women retired from Men; and is heedfully to be distinguished from
the Cachexy or evil Disposition of Body that is common to both Sexes.

It is difficult to be known: however, if no error in Diet, or the use of the
six Nonnaturals; no Obstruction of the Courses, or other manifest Cause have
preceded; or if the Patient of a forward brisk Maid is become sad and anxious,
or is a forlorn Widow, who formerly was a healthy Wife; we may in such cases
conclude this to be the Disease, which the older it is has the worst Symptoms
following it.

In curing of it we must endeavor to correct the default of Genital Liquor,
and remove the vicious Crasis of the Blood, and by proper Remedies cure the
incident Symptoms.

For the former Intentions, Camphyr is a notable Remedy; it not only diminishes
the quantity of seminal Liquor, and amends its virulency, but has a peculiar
Virtue of fortifying the Blood and Spirits. Amber also, Myrrh and its Essence
prepared with Nitre, Castor, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, and all Remedies prepared
from them, Preparations of Lead, and moderat Acids, are all proper. As,

Take of the Conserve of Baum an Ounce and a half; Conserve of Citron Pulp, and
of Quinces, of each six Drams; Essence of Myrrh half an Ounce; prepared Amber
two Drams; Crystal Mineral of Lead, Powder of Castor, of each a Dram; Cloves,
Mace, Zedoary, of each a Scruple; Camphyr half a Scruple: Make an Electuary
with Syrup of Pomegranats.

With these, such things as extinguish the Seed may be m^x'd, as Agnus Castus,
Willow, Hemp; and possibly Turpentine may not be amiss. Opiats allay the
severity of Symptoms, and may be mixed with other Specifics. Bleeding, and that
often repeated, is not improper.

CHAP. II. Of a Cachexy in Women.
ANother Fountain of Diseases commonly termed hysteric, is the suppression of
the Terms, from which a numerous train of Evils proceed, especially if it
happens on a sudde^; by reason both of the quantity and depraved quality of the
stagnating Blood: for when there is too great a quantity of Blood, its due
Circulation, and fermentative Turgescence being restrained, it becomes less
spirituous and volatile, yea gross and viscid, and as it were, flat and useless.
And as touching its quality, we ought to remember that tho all the Mass of
Blood is originally of the same condition and nature, yet that which by the
monthly Fermentation is measured out to be expelled, undergoes a singular
Change in the Vessels of the Womb, where it waits for Passage, and acquires a
certain corrosive Acrimony, or aluminous Tincture.

Now from these Causes spring innumerable Mischiefs, such as Pleurisies,
Quinsies, Inflammations of the Womb, Epilepsies, unusual Longings, Melancoly,
Tumors and hard Swellings of the Womb and Spleen, stubborn Headaches,
Palpitations and Beatings, as well of the Heart as in the Back and Loins and
under the Shortribs; till at length the digestive Ferment of the Stomach, the
Bile and pancreatic Juice being spoiled, evil Dispositions of Body, Jaundice,
Dropsies, and Consumptions, and finally Death, creep in.

Now to obviat these Evils we must jointly carry on two Designs. 1. We must
correct the vicious Crasis of the Blood and other Juices, particularly its
austere Acidity: And, 2. Revive the monthly Fermentation of the Blood, that the
Terms may flow as they ought. These in general we may compass by Steel, and
aromatic volatile Medicines. But we must first of all give a Vomit, and repeat
it, if occasion require: for this end we use Preparations of Antimony, which
are best, Asarum, Hellebor, etc. as for example; two Drams of Oxymel
Helleboratum Gesneri for a Dose. It is likewise convenient to purge with
Quercetanus's Pills of Tartar and Gum Ammoniac; or those of Hiera with Agaric;
or by adding to alterative Bags the Roots of Bryony, black Hellebor, and
Colocynth.

As for Calybeats we may use Zwelfer's Tincture of Vitriol of Mars, Tincture of
Steel prepared with Spirit of Sal Ammoniac and Spirit of Wine, Aperitive
Crocus's of Mars prepared with fixed Salts, and such like: also Wine or
Decoctions of Rosemary impregnated with Steel, Quercet^^us's Cachectic Powder,
etc.

To these we join Aromatics and aperient Ingredients, especially Sassafras,
Galangal, the greater hot Seeds, Juniper and Bay Berries: also the volatile
Spirit of Tartar, and Elixir Proprietatis prepared without an Acid. The
Specifics must be calculated according to the variety of Symptoms: An Epilepsy
and convulsive Motions require Remedies from Cinnabar, Castor and Amber.

The Headache calls for the volatile Salts and Antiscorbutics, as volatile Salt of
Amber both internally and externally.

For Palpitations of the Heart we choose Remedies from Coral, chiefly its
Tincture; or the Powder of Zedoary mixed with prepared red Coral.

If a stopping of the Terms is followed by a melancoly Delirium, let Antimonial
Emetics be repeated, and the Spirit and Powder of a human Secundine, added to
the incident Prescriptions.

CHAP. III. Of the Hysteric Passion.
THO this Disease is accounted peculiar to Women, and to proceed from the Womb,
yet it is found by experience to be common also to Men, and to be of the same
Nature with their hypocondriac and scorbutical Distempers: Its Symptoms are as
follows.

The Paroxysm is ushered in with noise and murmurings in the Belly, and
sometimes the apprehension: as it were of a Ball violently moved and tossed
hither and thither, and rising up gradually. It is always attended by a
stretching or tearing Pain under the short Ribs; a plentiful breaking of Wind
upwards or downwards; frequent Yaunings and Stretchings; various and violent
Pains in the Belly, either fixed or floating; prostration of Appetite and
Costiveness; a Vomiting sometimes of a greenish or yellowish matter, of an acid
or strange Taste; Palpitation of the Heart, with a small, weak, and sometimes
intermitting Pulse; Swooning, difficulty of Breathing, and danger of
Suffocation; giddiness of the Head, dimness of the Eyes; sometimes frequent
Laughter, various kinds of Deliriums, Convulsions, strange Motions of the
Joints and whole Body; sometimes a total Cessation of all the Senses internal
and external: for the most part the beginning and increase of the Fit is
accompanied with coldness, succeeded in the declension with heat, ending in a
large Sweat.

This Disease proceeds from a vicious Effervescence in the Guts of a
preternatural Acid, bred in the Stomach, Pancrea^, or other Glandules, with the
bilious Juice; whence the mesenteric Nerves being irritated, give rise to the
various Symptoms of the Abdomen. And the vicious Acid being carried into the
Blood, occasions also its Coagulation and Stagnation. To which we may join a
disorderly and disturbed Motion of the animal Spirits, especially in the
intercostal Nerve, and those of the Par vagum, which spread the Disorder all
over the Body.

The Paroxysms of this Disease are revived sometimes by violent Passions of the
Mind, as Anger, a Fright, Grief; sometimes by strong Smells, whether from sweet
smelling things, as Musk, Civet, Amber, Roses, etc. as it frequently happens,
or from fetid things, according to the peculiar temperament of the Patient. To
which we may add, as a confirming Circumstance, the use of sweet things, which
easily turn acid.

When the hysteric Woman lies destitute of Sense and Motion, you may know if
there is life, by using a Lookingglass, or Feathers, or blowing Snush up the
Nose.

This Disease is seldom mortal in Maids, but disappears for the most part in
time of Childbearing; or if it seize Women with Child it is dangerous; in old
Women it is seldom cured.

In delivering the Cure of this Disease, we shall order what is to be done in
the Fit, and what out of it. The Violence and Fury of Hysteric Paroxysms suffer
us not to stand idle Spectators, but require a speedy help, both with external
and internal Remedies.

As for Externals, first we must apply to the Nostrils such things as yield a
strong and stinking Smell, regarding still the temperament of the Patient:
Above all, I esteem volatile penetrating Salts; as Spirit of Sal Ammoniac,
Spirit of Hartshorn, or any other urinous volatile Spirit. In great Swoonings,
Castor infused in strong Wine, and the Smoke of things burnt may be useful, as
that of Amber, Nutmegs, Feathers and Quills of Birds, chiefly of Partridges,
Hairs and Horns of Beasts, Lignum Aloes, etc.

In the mean while, to allay the Contraction of the Intestines, apply to the
Region of the Navel and Pit of the Stomac aromatic Oils, such as that of Rue,
Anise, Laurel, Castor, Amber, fetid Oil of Tartar, Guajacum, Spike, etc. or an
Ointment made of Clary boiled in Butter, or Camphyr dissolved in Oil of Sweet
Almonds. Or,

Take distilled Oils of Amber, Spike, of each half a Dram; of Cumin half a
Scruple; of Mace nine Drops. Mix and anoint the Backbone, Region of the Navel,
and Pit of the Stomac. Some apply beaten Garlic.

After anointing it will be fit to apply a Plaster of Galbanum, to which some
add Tacamahac, Castor, Pitch, etc. A girdle strongly tied about the short Ribs
is helpful; as also sweet smelling things applied to the Genitals, as a Pessary
anointed with Peruvian Balsam, or Oil of Nutmeg, wherein some Civet is
dissolved, etc. It will likewise be proper to inject Clysters of Carminative,
Aromatic, and penetrating Ingredients, to which volatile Salts sometimes may be
added. As,

Take Chamomil with the Flowers, Leaves of Sage and Fever-few, of each a
handful; Roots of Angelica and Lovage, of each six Drams; the four lesser hot
Seeds, Salt of Tartar, of each a Dram: boil them in a sufficient quantity of
common Water; to nine Ounces of the strained Decoction, add Electuary of
Bay Berries an Ounce; distilled Oil of Amber, volatile Salt of Hartshorn or
Urine, of each a Scruple; the Yelk of one Egg: Mix them, and make a Clyster.

To such Decoctions you may also add Electuary of Hiera Picra, Castor,
distilled Oils of Cumin, Caraways, Amber, Juniper Berries, Turpentine, etc. Or,
instead of distilled Oils, volatile Salts, from a Scruple to half a Dram; as
that of Urine, Hartshorn, Amber, etc. Clysters of the Smoke of Tobacco are also
approved.

If the Patient is plethorick, a Vein may be opened, but with due caution.

Internally in the time of the Fit, volatile and oily Salts are to be used, and
in particular such as readily cause sweat, to which Opiats may be added: Bitter
things therefore are in common use, such as Set-wall, Southernwood, Wormwood,
Lovage, Angelica, Gentian-root, Mint, Galangal, Pennyroyal, Fever-few, Clary,
its Decoction and Spirit, Roman and common Chamomil, Orange Peel, wild
Carrot-seed, Juniper Berries, Garlic taken in Wine, its Electuary, Saffron,
Rosemary, Myrrh, Elder and dwarf Elder-berries, etc. all which by virtue of an
oily volatile Salt destroy the vicious Acid. To these we may add Castor, Assa
foetida, the volatile Salts themselves; as Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, Hartshorn,
volatile Salt of Amber (given from five Grains to twelve in Swallow-water with
Castor) distilled Oil of Amber; volatile Salt of Soot, the Tincture of Tartar,
Tincture of the Dross of the Regulus of Antimony, Tincture of Castor prepared
with Spirit of Wine or otherwise; all the several Preparations of the
forementioned Simples; Crollius's Elixir for the Womb; Camphyr, the Spirit of
human Secundine, chiefly that of the first Child; the Juice of Courser's Dung,
expressed with Wine or Ale, or its Decoction: to all which we join Opium,
Hysteric Laudanum, Mithridate and Triacle; of which innumerable Prescriptions
might be made up. As,

Take of the Waters of Mint, Elder-flowers, and Fever-few, of each an Ounce;
Essence of Castor three Drams; volatile Salt of Hartshorn twelve Grains; that of
Amber eight Grains; Hysteric Laudanum nine Grains; Syrup of Orange Peel six
Drams. Mix, and make a Potion. Or,

Take prepared Amber, prepared Pearls, or Crab's-eyes, Castor, of each a
Scruple; distilled Oils of Rue and Amber, of each five Drops. Mix, and make a
Powder.

It Is to be noted that Preparations with Castor, and such like fat volatile
Salts, yielding a strong smell, agree not with some Patients, for whom meagre
Salts are more proper; as dulcified Salt of Nitre, etc. If sweet Smells or
Tastes be offensive, we choose Medicines of contrary qualities.

After the Fit is over, if a Relapse is feared, it may be prevented by the use
of Medicines partaking of Steel. As,

Take Antiscorbutic and Hyssop-water, of each an Ounce and a half; Solution of
Steel in Juice of Apples three Drams; Spirit of Scurvy Grass a Dram and a half;
fermented Laudanum two Grains; Syrup for the Scurvy three Drams. Mix, and make
a Potion.

But if what is above prescribed prove ineffectual, we may try a strong Snuff,
and if that has no effect, give a Vomit; yea Blood-letting has been found
sometimes to avail in desperate Cases.

Hitherto we have prescribed what is to be done during the Paroxysm; when it is
over, we first give Digestives, then Vomits, and afterward Anti-hypocondriac
and Antiscorbutic Remedies: for Digestives, I refer you to the hypocondriac and
scorbutic Diseases. Or,

Take red Coral prepared, or Mother of Pearl, or Crab's-eyes prepared, half a
Dram; Arcanum Duplicatum a Scruple; Salt of Wormwood half a Scruple. Mix for
three Doses.

For a Vomit, take Arcanum Duplicatum, or Tachenius's vitriolated Tartar, nine
Grains; Mynsicht's Emetic Tartar two or three Grains. Mix, and make a Powder.

Next to these, Aromatics mixed with mild Laxatives are to be used; and these
almost the same as the internal Specifics prescribed in the Fit. In short, the
Method of Cure is the same with that of hypocondriac and scorbutic Disorders:
So that alterative Bags of carminative Ingredients, such as are friendly to the
Nerves and Womb, infused in Wine, are of very good use. Or, whatever partakes
of a volatile Alcali, or a volatile oily aromatic Salt more or less bitter, which
destroys Acids, or has an anodine Quality; as the Roots of Angelica,
Butter-burr, Set-wall, Lovage, Gentian, and the like; also Orange-peel, and all
Aromatics, especially Clary, and its Decoction; also Baum, Rosemary, Mugwort,
Sage, etc. the Carminative Seeds, or those called hot; to which wild Laxatives,
such as black Hellebor and Briony, may be added: As for example,

Take of the Leaves of Baum, Fever-few, Pennyroyal, of each a handful; Leaves
of Senna, Roots of Gentian and black Hellebor, of each a Dram; prepared Spurge,
and true aromatic Costus, of each three Drams; Set-wall, Salt of Tartar, of
each half an Ounce: Cut, bruise, and tie them in a Bag to be infused in Wine.

Medicines of Steel are wonderfully helpful; as also succinated Spirit of Salt
Ammoniac given to thirty Drops at night, and mild Laxatives mixed with Opiats.

Take Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar half a Scruple; Vitriol of Mars five
Grains; Extract of Castor three or four Grains; Extract of Troches Alhandal a
Grain; or of the Troches themselves three Grains. Make Pills with the distilled
Oil of Amber.

SECT. IV. Of the Disorders of Women denying admission to Men.
CHAP. I. Of the down-falling of the Womb.
SOmetimes the outer Neck of the Womb, especially its internal wrinkled
Membrane, either by hard Labor, or the unskilful hand of a Midwife, or by an
immoderate red or white Flux, is so relaxated and extended, that it hangs out
in form of a Ball, having a hole in the middle, two Fingers breadth without the
Privity; and sometimes some part of the internal Membrane is relaxated, and
hangs out like a blind round Ball by a small Neck. In this Case both the
Ancients and some of the Moderns fancy that the Womb falls down: Whereas that
Symptom never happens but when an unskilful Midwife pulls it down by force, and
so kills the Patient outright.

This Distemper is ushered in by a stretching Pain of the Parts to which the
Womb is fastened; sometimes a Fever and Convulsions supervene, and sometimes
the prominent Substance becomes the Seat of an Ulcer or Gangrene, and must be
cut out by the hand of the Surgeon.

All that Art can do is, 1. To restore the Part fallen down to its natural
Place. 2. To confirm it there either truly by Astringents, or palliatively by
other means. 3. If that cannot be compassed, Amputation is the only relief.

The Patient being conveniently placed on her Back, let the part be gently put
up with ones Fingers covered with a soft Cloth wet with the Decoction of mild
discussive Aromatics; such as Rosemary, Sage, Wormwood, etc. boiled in equal
parts of Wine and common Water, or Water from the Forge.

This done, Decoctions prepared of vulnerary Astringents are to be used
internally; such as those of Rupture-wort, Mousear, Knot-grass, Comfrey-root,
Cyprus-Nuts, Betony, Tormentil, etc. to which Anise and Fennel-seeds, and the
four greater hot-seeds may be added.

Externally also Astringents must be used; the place may be fumigated with
their Smoke, or their Decoction injected, or the Privity fomented therewith, or
a Pessary of carded Wool may be dipped in it and applied. Such Astringents are
Galls, Oak-leaves, and those of the Myrtle, Sloe-tree, Horse-tail,
Ladies-Mantle, Milfoil, Pomegranat-rind, Sumac, and the like, which may be
boiled in Forge-water, adding Alum, if the Parts be not excoriated or
exulcerat. The Moss of the Oak-tree also, and Nettles and Sunflower are
commended.

For a Palliative Cure you may use Wax or Cork, white Wax, or the Mass of a
Plaster made of Wax, Colophon, Gum Elemi, and the like, shaped into a round,
oblong, or pearlike Form, according as there is occasion, with a hole in the
middle, and a thread fastened to 'em: their bigness must exactly answer that of
the Vagina.

But if it is only an Excrescence, or one or two wrinkles of the Vagina, or if
the Vagina it self being fallen down is altered by the Air, or corrupted or
ulcerated, it must be cut off by the Root, a Ligature being first made with a
Thread; and then it must be cured as an Ulcer.

CHAP. II. Of the Inflammation of the Womb.
THIS is caused by Blood stagnating in the Pores of the Womb, which is
occasioned either by too frequent Coition, or cold caught after Labor or the
Terms, or by hard labor.

The Signs are a Swelling, Heat, stretching Pain of the Genitals, Groin, and
Navel, which, if the Finger is put up into the Genitals, is exasperated,
extending to the Lips, Backbone and Shoulders; the Vagina is red with swollen
Veins, the Terms suppressed, with a burning continual Fever, Thirst, dryness of
the Tongue, Headache, Delirium and Convulsions.

It is dangerous enough, and is easily converted into a Gangrene: Discussion is
safer than Suppuration; sometimes it degenerates into a Schirrus, and is
accompanied by a Dropsy.

The Patient must in the beginning be let Blood at the Arm, and, a Clyster
being given, next day at the Ancle: afterward you may use temperat, emollient,
and resolving Clysters of the Decoction of Lettuce, Mallows, Violet-leaves,
Flowers of Chamomil, etc. boiled in Limewater, mixed with Lenitive Electuary,
solutive Syrup of Roses, and Nitre. To loosen the Belly, give Decoction of
Tamarinds, wherein Senna with Cream of Tartar has been infused.

Externally we foment the Groin, or apply Cataplasms of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Pennyroyal, Mugwort, Melilot, etc. boiled in common or Limewater or Wine.

CHAP. III. Of Ulcers of the Womb and Vagina.
THE Causes are either internal, as retention of the Loches, suppurated
Inflammations, Corruption of the Foetus or Mola, a virulent Clap, the Whites,
etc. or external, as frequent and excessive Venery, fretting of the Vagina,
hard Labor, etc. The naked Eye, or a Womb-glass discovers 'em; or if they lie
deep in the Womb it self, the troublesome biting Pain of these Parts when
tickled in Coition, or by sharp Injections, reveals the Mystery. They
degenerate frequently into Fistulas, or end in a Dropsy; and tho they be
cicatriz'd, infer Barrenness.

If they proceed from an external Cause, they must be cured by consolidating
Remedies; if from the sharpness of Humors, they must be corrected and
evacuated: but first of all the Pain must be mitigated.

Internally cleansing vulnerary Decoctions are useful, such as those of the
tops of St. John's-wort, ground Ivy, Plantane, Sawicle, Shavings of Hartshorn,
etc. Externally the same Decoctions may be injected. Or,

Take of Chalybeat Milk one pound, Turpentin dissolved in the Yelk of an Egg
half an Ounce; Honey of Roses an Ounce; to be often injected for cleasing and
consolidating the Ulcer.

SECT. V. Of the Disorders of Conception.
COnception is nothing else but the Impregnation of one of the little Eggs
contained in the female Testes, by a certain Air or Spirit exhaled from the
seminal Liquor of the Male received into the Womb. The Egg thus influenced,
falls off into one of the Womb-Trumpets, which at that time embrace the Testes,
and thence passes unto the Womb. Being received there, it straight begins to
increase, and then one little point begins to distinguish it self by its
tremulous and leaping Motion, being surrounded with subtle red Threads, the
Rudiments of the Blood Vessels, round which some small time after is to be seen
something more gross and white, like a little Cloud distinguished into two
parts; whose greater part consisting of four little Bags, represents a rude
Draught of the Brain, Cerebellum, and two Eyes; and the lesser part being
strech'd out below like a Ship's Keel, is the Rudiment of the Backbone, from
which the Limbs gradually extend themselves, while the Bowels successively
shoot out from the Blood Vessels, till the perfect Foetus is formed.

The matter of which it is formed is partly a clear Liquor resembling the white
of an Egg, conveyed thither by the Arteries, and squeezed through the
glandulous Substance of the Womb into its Cavity; and partly Blood elaborat
from the foresaid Chyle or nutritious Juice; so that the Parts are rightly
distinguished into sanguine and spermatic.

There are scarce any infallible Signs of Conception; however ordinarily if a
Woman has conceived, the internal Orifice of the Womb is close shut up, the
Terms are stopped; In the first days after Coition, a certain shivering or
wandering Sense of Cold spreads it self over the Body or its extreme parts; the
Appetite is impaired; she vomits every Morning, and is troubled with longings,
and loathing such Meats as formerly were grateful. If the Woman is
cacochymical, and scorbutic, she is troubled with hysteric Affections, tho
unacquainted with 'em before; a gradual Swelling invades the Belly, and points
upwards. In the third, fourth, or fifth Month the Child is felt to move in the
Belly; first more obscurely, and afterward more distinctly: finally, the first
Months oftentimes discover a heavyness and giddiness of the Head, and sometimes
the Toothach; from which Signs concurring we may conclude the Woman is with
Child.

With reference to. Conceptions, we shall treat of false Conceptions,
Barrenness, and vicious Conceptions.

Conception is counterfeited by an Inflation or Swelling of the Belly, caused
by external Air received unto the Womb after Childbearing, or Abortion, or
Bathing, or in the time of, or after the Menstrual Flux, attended sometimes
with cruel pains girding the whole Belly.

This is distinguished from a true Conception by these Symptoms. 1. The Belly
is not always equally distended, 2. There is no motion, or at least none but
what may easily be distinguished from that of a Child. 3. The Swelling is
greater, and less weighty, not pressing so much upon the Pubes.

This Distemper is seldom dangerous, tho sometimes when the Flux of the Terms
or Lochia is stopped, it is attended by grievous Pains in the Womb. In which case
let the Vein Saphaena be opened; let the Digestion of the Stomach be promoted,
and consequently Wind prevented, by stomachic and Carminative Medicines.

Let the Decoction of Sassafras, with Anise and Fennelseeds, be used for a
Diet-drink; and the Essence of Zedoary be taken every night going to Bed.
Castor, Chamomil-flowers, Rosemary, Fever-few, Pennyroal, Sage, Flowers of
Marigold and Groundsel, Roots of Elecampane, Zedoary and Gentian, the four
greater Hot-seeds, Galangal, Ginger, etc. their Decoctions, Essences, or
distilled Oils are of good use both inwardly and outwardly: to which we may
add, the Species of Hiera, or the Mass of Pills of Hiera, with Agaric, or the
Extract of Elaterium.

Sometimes it is necessary to open the internal Orifice of the Womb to give vent
to the Wind, by fomenting with the abovementioned Decoctions; or applying to
the Belly and Pubes Bags of Millet-seed, dried Salt, Chamomil Flowers, and
Carminative-seeds boiled in Wine and Water; or anointing with Oil of Chamomil,
Oil of Bays and Castor; or applying a Cataplasm of Goats-Dung and
Carminative-seeds boiled in Wine, or a Plaster of Tacamahac with Balsam of
Peru.

Sometimes a false Conception is feigned by a Dropsy or Collection of clear or
yellowish Water in the Womb. And sometimes this Dropsy of the Womb joins it
self to a true Conception, as taking its rise from the Redundancy of the
nutritive Liquor, mixed with much Water; from the Suppression of the Terms, or
Lochia, or whatever obstructs the Reflux of the Lymph from the Womb. This
Swelling covers the whole Belly equally, and does not rise to a top in the
middle, as that of a true Conception, and is distinguished from a Dropsy of the
Belly, by the fresh Color of the Face and absence of Thirst. If the Swelling
is caused by Water, it is not so dangerous as when it flows from a corrupt
Liquor.

If the Patient is with Child, little or nothing can be attempted; but if
otherwise, we may boldly use convenient Methods to conquer the Disease: and in
the first place for a Purgative use this Pill. Take Extract of Elaterium twelve
Grains; Mercurius dulcis fifteen Grains; Troches Alhandal three Grains: Make
Pills with Essence of Rosemary. The Infusion or Extract of Spurge-root, or the
Infusion or Syrup of Briony-root given to half an Ounce, are also proper:
Vomits are approved by all, by reason of their squeezing Effects. Such things
also are to be used, as provoke the Womb to Excretion, or discuss insensibly;
such as Decoction of Calamint, Pennyroyal, Sage, and white Onyon with Sugar;
also Castor, Myrrh, Saffron, all Aromatics; Elixir Proprietatis, and the
Decoction of the Woods.

Externally we use purgative Pessaries of Elaterium and dry Figs, or of
Coloquintida and Extract of Black Hellebor. Sometimes we inject into the Womb
the Decoction of the Leaves of Pennyroyal, Savine, Calamint, etc. in Water or
human Urine, mixed with Electuary of Hiera; but all will be rendered more
effectual, by premising Baths and Fomentations of emollient and expelling
Ingredients. And if one or both the Lips of the Privity are hydropic, there is
nothing better than to foment with Limewater.

The second Disorder relating to Conception, is that of Barrenness, occasioned
by the Indisposition of the Ovarium, the narrowness of the Trumpets, the defect
of the nutritious Juice of the Egg, the Laxity of the Womb, Disorders of the
external Parts, and other occult Causes. And if the Womb be ulcerated, it is
incurable.

As for the Cure; after the universal Evacuations, aromatic Ingredients are
proper for strengthening the Womb, and the Ovarium; such are Rosemary, Sage,
Lavender, Marjoram, Baum, Pennyroyal, Roots of Burnet, Setwal, and Galangal,
Cassia Lignea, Cardamoms, Nutmegs, and Myrrh. To which, in Cachectic and
Scorbutical Cases, we add Guajacum and Sassafras, with other Sudorifics.

With these we join the specific Ingredients, and such as gently provoke
Venery, viz. Satyrion, Eryngo, Rocket and Mustard-seeds, Mosch, Amber, flesh of
Vipers; the Stones of a Heart or Boar; the Matrix of a Sow, Hare, or Hind,
pulverized; the Spirit of Ants; the Powder of a human Secundine, etc.

Externally natural Baths are profitable; or artificial ones of the Decoction
of aromatic Ingredients, and that of Ants with their Nests. Some commend Baths
made of Hemlock; or Fumigations with sweet smelling aromatic Rosins; such as
Gum of Juniper, Juniper Berries, Amber, Frankincense, Storax, Mastic, etc. and
Pessaries prepared of the bruised Leaves of Fever-few, and sprinkled with a
little Oil of Spike.

After Barrenness we come in order to vicious or depraved Conceptions. They are
said to be such when the Subject of Conception departs from a human form, and
assumes that of other Animals, intitling it to the Character of a Monster, or
continues a shapeless Lump void of Form, and christened a Mola.

The immediate Cause of a Mola is the Confusion or Mixture of the nutritious
Humor contained in the Chorion, with that of the Egg; upon which the Tracts of
the Foetus delineated in the latter are effaced by the former.

If this Confusion be very early, it generats a watery vesicular Mola: If its
date be as late as the forming of the Vessels, and their repletion with Blood,
it leaves a fleshy Lump; which, if the fibrous Threads are already spun out, and
enriched with Spirits, is endowed with a principal Motion.

This vicious Mixture is oftentimes occasioned by violent Motion, Passion or
Heat.

It Is a difficult thing to distinguish a Mola from a true Conception,
especially if a Child accompanies it in the Womb; in which case it either kills
the Child or causes Abortion. However if we carefully observe, we may discern a
Mola by its much greater weight; and by the measure of its motion, which is
either none at all, or such as by its sluggishness is easily distinguished from
the brisk Motion of a living Child. If it possess the Womb alone, it generally
putrifies, and entails the like mischief to the Womb.

First of all we ought to observe carefully whether the Mola is joined with a
Child; and if so, we must endeavor to prevent Abortion, and expect the
exclusion of the Child with which the Mola is ordinarily expelled. But if the
Mola is alone, we must endeavor with all convenient speed to procure its
ejection: for which purpose we must use first preparative, and then expelling
Medicines.

Preparatives are Baths, Fomentations, Inunctions, Clysters both for the Belly
and Womb, etc. of emollient and laxative Ingredients: Womb-Clysters must be of
Oil, those for the Belly of Milk.

In the next place, a Vein must be opened, first in the Arm, and then in the
Foot; after which we may use strong Vomits either from Steel or Vitriol; and
powerful Purgatives, such as the Faetid Pills, those of Hiera with Colocynth,
or the Decoction of Senna, Pennyroyal and Savin in Whey, taken for three days
successively.

To these we subjoin such Medicines as bring down the Terms, and are entitled
to an expulsive Faculty, viz. Rue, Mug-wort, Penny-roal, Savin, Briony,
Gentian, Asarabacca, Dill, Juniper Berries; the Essence and Oil of Cloves, the
Decoction and distilled Oil of Savin; or a Powder made of equal Parts, of
Borace, Myrrh, Castor and volatile Salt of Amber, given to half a Dram in
Cinnamom-water twice or thrice a Day for some time: the Powder also and Spirit
of an Afterbirth is much commended.

Externally also, we must use Clysters for irritating the Vagina and internal
Orifice of the Womb, and moving them to convulsive Motions; such are the
Decoctions of Pennyroal, Fever-few, Savine, and Pulp of Coloquintida tied in a
Bag. Pessaries and Fumigations from the same Ingredients are also proper; but
withal let the Patient use some violent Exercise; such as leaping, jumping,
etc. to promote the Operation of the Remedies.

If all these Prescriptions prove successless, we must have recourse to a
skilful Surgeon, who with a Speculum Vterinum must dilate the Vagina and
internal Orifice of the Womb, and by his Hand or Instruments draw out the whole
Mola. And if after the Extraction, excessive Bleedings and Pains of the Womb
ensue, exhibit the following Electuary.

Take Conserve of Roses an Ounce; Conserve of Quinces without the Species half
an Ounce; Troches of Amber, sealed Earth, and Spodium, of each half a Dram;
Sorrel-seed, and burnt Hartshorn prepared, of each a Scruple: With Syrup of
Quinces and that of Mint make an Electuary.

SECT. VI. Of the Conduct of Big-belly'd Women.
WHILE Women are with Child, they ought to be very cautious of the use of the
six Non-natural things, for fear of incurring the dangers that the suppression
of their Terms exposes 'em to, and provoking the Child to an untimely Egress.

In their Diet let Custom be their Rule, since things unwonted, tho of
themselves proper, are offensive, and e^contra. Summer-fruits, violent
Aromatics, and strong Smells, whether sweet or foetid, are pernicious. Much
Wine and acid Liquors are apt to cause Abortion. Violent Motion is also
dangerous, especially during the first Months, tho in the latter Months if it
be moderate it is not inconvenient. Venery, long Watchings, Fear, Anger, and
suchlike Passions, ought to be avoided. Costiveness ought to be removed by the
Pulp of Tamarinds, or Oil of sweet Almonds; Cream and Salt of Tartar or
Rhubarb, mixed with Carminative-seeds. Sometimes potch'd Eggs and Sugar are
sufficient. Proper Purgatives or strong Clysters are very dangerous. Sometimes
it will not be amiss to strengthen the Child by a moderat Draught of sweet Wine
after eating, by exhibiting Cinnamom-water impregnated with Borrage and
Quinces; or the Juice, Syrup and Marmalade of Quinces mixed with Cloves, Mace
and Nutmegs; or at Bedtime to apply to the Belly a Bag quilted with Mint, Baum,
Ginger, Cloves, Galangal, etc. sprinkled with the Oil of Citrons, or that of
Orange Peel.

If a Big-belly'd young and plethoric Woman be seized with an acute Disease,
Blooding is not improper; but it is better to blood frequently than draw forth
much at one time. If her Stomach be disordered, mild Vomits are allowable
during the first four Months: but Purgatives, at least such as in violence
surpass the Laxatives abovementioned, are always suspected. Narcotics in
general threaten the Relaxation of the Fibers of the Womb: But in some Cases
when the Animal Spirits are much irritated, and such other Circumstances seem
to demand it, we may venture to allow a moderat Dose of Opium.

All the peculiar Symptoms of Big-belly'd Women are occasioned by the Influence
of the seminal Liquor, the Suppression of the Terms, and the Sympathy of the
Stomac with the distended Womb. The first is Vomiting, which in the first
Months ought not to be stopped, for it facilitats Delivery. In the last months
it is dangerous, and ought to be curbed betimes. Toward the middle of their
Reckoning, Blood-letting removes it; unless they be Cacochymical, in which
Cases the absorbent Pouders and stomachical Ingredients are required: But Steel
is hurtful. Externally stomachical Plasters are likewise useful. To this
Symptom we may add a Pica, loathing of Meat, griping of the Guts, which we
accounted for in the first Book.

A Looseness in the first Months is dangerous. Toward the latter end it is of
less consequence, unless it exceed bounds; upon which account we ought to be
very cautious in stopping it. If it be accompanied by a prostration of
Strength, or signs of Malignity, and threaten Miscarriage, let astringent Acids
and Venice Triacle, or Diascordium dissolved in acid Vehicles be exhibited, and
proper Plasters applied externally; but all Purgation is pernicious. The Pains
of the Loins, Hip-bones and Pubes, caused by the various distention of the
Ligaments of the Womb and the annexed Membrans, according as the Child is
seated, forwards or backwards, are removed by anointing with the Oil of
Earthworms mixed with distilled Oil of Juniper; or applying the Spirit of
Earthworms mixed with Aqua Articularis. The Toothach in Women with Child yields
to the common Cure. A Palpitation of the Heart happening to a lusty Woman,
about the middle of her Reckoning, is cured by Blood-letting, or else by the
ordinary Method. If a Cough molest a Woman with Child, we must vary the Cure
according to its nature, as in the first Book.

Childbearing Women are frequently subject to bleedings. If the Blood flow
from the Vagina of the Womb, it runs gradually, at set times without Pain; and
ought not to be stopped. If it proceed from within the Womb, it runs
continually, causing Pains in the Loins, and if the Woman or Child be not weak,
may be gently moderated by Blooding, and the common Specifics: But if the Child
move weakly, and the Woman's Appetite and Strength be dejected, it is necessary
to promote Miscarriage by external Assistance. If the Blood break forth only at
other parts of the Body, it argues a scorbutic Disposition of the Blood, which
is cured by Chalybeats.

A suppression of Urine is caused by the low Situation of the Child, and its
bearing down upon the Bladder, and is cured by emollient Ingredients used both
inwardly and outwardly, and by heaving up the Belly upon occasion of making
water. Proper Diuretics are scarce safe. A Strangury is cured by Laxatives;
such as the Syrup of Peach-flowers, and Emulsions, and Decoctions of
Marshmallows with Raisins, or of Jujubes and Peach-stones. The Cramps that
Childbearing Women are subject to, are cured after the ordinary Method,
especially by external Inunction and Fomentation. The Pain and Chops that
molest the skin of the Belly, as being caused by its distention, are removed by
applying emollient Oils and Mucilages. If the Waters break forth from the Womb,
especially from within the Amnios, before the time of Delivery, it is a
dangerous Case, and their loss ought to be repaired by anointing the Passage
with emollient Oils and Ointments. But if the Flux of Water proceed only from
the outer Neck of the Womb, and is not followed by the true Pains of
Childbirth, it is of no great consequence.

Sometimes Cacochymical Big-belly'd Women are troubled with swellings of the
Feet, which disappear upon Childbirth, as being removed by the Flux of the
Loches. If these Swellings be very troublesome, anoint the Legs and Feet with
the Oils of Dill and St. John's-wort, and apply a Cataplasm of
Chamomil-flowers; or foment 'em with Quicklime water. If hydropic Tumors
invade the external Privity, foment it with Quicklime Water, and apply a
Carminative Cataplasm. Or if these prove successless, apply Leeches, or scarify
the Part. If the Veins of the Legs are much swelled, so as to threaten a
Rupture, anoint 'em with the Ointment of Bay Berries, and tie 'em round with a
broad Swathe dipped into some aftringent Decoction. If the Hemorrhoids swell,
anoint with the Oil of the Balsam-Apple, or apply a Cataplasm of the Pulp of
boiled Apples and Oil of Hoglice.

SECT. VII. Of Disorders relating to Childbirth.
THE regular Season of Delivery happens about nine solar Months after
Conception; or after ten periodical Revolutions of the usual Interval of the
Fluxes of the Terms. If this time be anticipated, it is called miscarrying,
supposing still that the Child is formed: for if the Egg be evacuated before it
be formed, it is called Expulsion. The Cause of miscarrying is either the
Irritation and Contraction of the Womb, occasioned by irregular Passions,
violent Motion, drinking Wine, especially in the first Months, ungrateful
strong Smells, external cold, acid Food, the weakness or preternatural
Situation of the Child, the Disorders of the Kidneys, Intestines, and adjacent
Membrans, the Redundancy and Exaltation of the Mass of Blood; or the Relaxation
and Flaggyness of the Womb, arising from excessive Bleeding, want of Spirits,
immoderat use of Opium, sudden Grief or Fear, a Chronical white Flux, etc.

The Signs of imminent Abortion are a heavyness about the Loins and Hips, and
wandering shooting Pains moving downwards from the Navel. To which we may add a
Lazyness, Inappetency, the Womb's gathering it self into the form of a Globe
incumbent upon the Share-bone, Shiverings, Tremblings, Palpitations of the
Heart, the Efflux of Matter from the Womb, and an involuntary bearing
downwards. Hippocrates looked upon the flagginess and Extenuation of the
Breasts, or their voiding of Milk or Blood, as a sign of miscarrying. It
prognosticats Barrenness, Bleedings of the Womb, etc.

As for the Cure of Abortion; if the Foetus be already separated, we ought to
assist Nature in the Expulsion; and on the contrary, if Abortion be only
threatened, we ought to prevent it by Blood-letting, if the Women be plethoric;
or otherwise by exhibiting the Decoction or Water of Vervain, the Powder or
Tincture of Chermes-berries, the Powder or Juice of River-Crabs, or the
Tincture of Coral. If the Spirits be much iritated, Opium is allowable. If the
Womb be flaggy, let a Cataplasm of Bdellium and Mastic dissolved in Vinegar, or
a Plaster of Galbanum and Tacamahac be applied to the Pubes; or bathe the
Parts with an Infusion of Alum in the first Months; or let the Woman make use
of the natural Hot-baths before Impregnation. A Cataplasm of Yest (or Bread
baked with Pepper) Cloves, Cinnamom, Mace and Wine, applied to the Pubes, is of
good use against all sorts of Abortions. If Abortion be caused by the Passions
of the Mind or acid sharp Food, use absorbent Pouders mixed with Aromatics;
Opium cautiously used, and Fomentations with astringent Decoctions are very
proper. If it proceed from external Cold, Aqua Vitae and spirituous Liquors are
required. If Swoonings usher it in, the Tincture of Coral prepared with Spirit
of Stag's Heart, and the Confection of Hyacinth, are useful. A serous Cachexy
is accounted for by the Decoction of Guajacum; and the white Flux removed by
cutting Issues in the Legs.

If Abortion cannot be prevented, let the Woman after Miscarrying beware of the
least degree of Cold; and let the Afterbirth be cautiously drawn forth by the
Midwife, without giving any internal Medicines for that purpose, for fear of
occasioning a Flux of Blood, which in this Condition Women are very liable to.
So much for Abortion.

If the Woman is come to her full time, the first thing to be considered is, if
the Child presents in a right Posture, viz. the Head first; if not, the Midwife
must endeavor to set it right, or else to pull it out by the Feet. If the
Posture be regular, the next Task is to distinguish between the true and
spurious Pains of Childbirth; the spurious Pains are either Colic, hysteric or
nephritic, which assume the form of the true ones, and impose upon the Midwives
under that cover. They are cured by exhibiting the Spirit of Zedoary or
Decoction of Cumin-seeds in Ale, and rubbing the Belly and Back with hot
Napkins, or fomenting 'em with the Decoction of Carminative and Anodyn
Ingredients; whereas the true ones are rather irritated by that Method, and
besides are attended by these Signs, viz. the down-falling of the Belly toward
the Pubes, the Progress of the Pains from the Loins downwards, the opening of
the internal Orifice of the Womb, and the distention of the Membrans enwrapping
the Child. Now it is highly pernicious for a Woman to bear down or endeavor the
Expulsion of the Child before the appearance of these Signs.

Supposing then that the true Pains are come upon her, we must endeavor to
facilitat her Labor. Now the Causes of hard Labor are the weakness and
sickliness of the Mother, her Spirits being exhausted by sweating or spurious
Pains either antecedent or concomitant; her being liable to the Passions of
Fear, Shame, or whatever cramps her due Efforts, or interrupts or inverts the
Motion of her Pains; the weakness of the Child, its being intangl'd in the
Navel-string, or disturbed by a fellow Twin; the hardness and thickness of the
Membrans enwrapping it; the straitness or dryness of the Passages (the former
incident to stale Maids converted into Wives, the latter following the untimely
Efflux of the Waters) the stiffness and resistance of the Share-bone, and that
of the Back called Coccyx; the repletion of the Bladder and Intestins;
Excrescences in the Womb or neighboring parts; extreme Laxity of the Neck of
the Womb, disabling it for Contraction and Expulsion; and a hydropic Tumor in
the Child's Head, or its leaning on the Share-bone. In which last Case the Head
ought to be put back by the Midwives hand; otherwise all expelling Medicines do
but augment the Evil.

Now in order to prevent such Inconveniences, a few days before the hour of
Delivery, let the Woman bathe in the Decoction of Marshmallows, Melilot,
Chamomil, Pennyroyal Mug-wort, Wild Thyme, Baum, Fever-few, Seeds of Lint,
Fenugrec and Dill; or apply Bags of the same Ingredients to her Belly;
anointing afterward her Back, Belly and privy Passages with an Ointment of
Mucilages and emollient Oils. When her Pains are just at hand, 'twill not be
improper to inject a softning Carminative Clyster, or exhibit Oil of Olives
inwardly, and anoint the Parts frequently. If the Pains are discontinu'd, the
Woman must not be forced to bear down. She ought rather to walk a little about;
and when the Orifice of the Womb is open, and the Waters broke, then let her be
placed on the Stool, and encouraged to a speedy Delivery. If the Mother or
Child be weak, let her take a Glass of Cinnamom, Baum, Pennyroyal, or the
Compound hysteric Water mixed with the Syrup of Orange-peel, or of Mugwort, etc.

When the Pains relent, if the Child presents naturally, and the Waters are
broke, and the Orifice of the Womb opened, we may exhibit aromatic and
expelling Medicines, but not otherwise. The Aromatics are Dittany of Candy,
Sage, Mugwort, Saffron, and especially Cinnamom, which ought never to be
omitted. The expelling Specifics are a Draught of the Husband's Urine, or of
the Juice of Horse Dung mixed with Wine; Castor, Oil of Amber given from ten to
thirty drops in Pennyroyal Water with a few drops of the Oil of Cinnamom, the
volatile Salt of Amber given to fifteen Grains; The Oil of Hazelwood given from
fifteen to twenty five drops; Troches of Myrrh or Pilulae Foetidae given to a
Dram; Borace given to a Dram; the Powder of the Liver of an Eel dried together
with the Gallbladder, given to a Dram; the Powder of the Livers of Vipers, or
of Horses Stones, given to a Dram; Crude Mercury, Fulminatory Gold, and above
all the Powder of a dried human Afterbirth given to a Dram, or its Spirit
drawn from it when it has stood for a Month in a close Vessel in a Balneum
Mariae given to forty Drops: in the room of which we sometimes make use of the
Spirit of Soot. If the Pains recur frequently and the Woman be much fatigued,
we may add Laudanum Opiatum.

Take of the Pouders of an Eel's Liver, and a human Afterbirth, of each a
Dram; Myrrh or Borace two Scruples. Make a Powder for three Doses.

Take of the Water of white Lillies two Ounces; Cinnamom Water half an Ounce;
Baum and Pennyroal Waters, of each an Ounce; Powder of Horse Stones four
Scruples; Borace two Scruples; Essence of Castor, and that of Amber, of each
twenty Drops; distilled Oil of Nutmegs six Drops; white Sugar two Drams. Mix,
and give a Spoonful now and then.

Externally apply a Girdle of Snakes Cast-Coats, or anoint the Belly with an
Ointment made of them with Earthworms, and the Juice of River-Crabs, and the
fat of a Fox or Hare. Or, Take of the Oil of Wall-flowers six Drams; distilled
Oil of Amber a Dram. Make an Ointment for the same purpose. Or, Take of the fat
of Vipers six Drams; Oil of the Balsam-Apple three Drams; distilled Oil of
Spike a Dram. Mix and anoint the Belly, but be sure to wipe it off after
Delivery. Or, Take of Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar an Ounce; Myrrh two Drams;
Saffron half a Dram; with Oil of Orris make a Pessary. Some choose to apply a
Cataplasm of the Decoction of Coloquintida, Rue, Myrrh, and Meal of Barley.

If all these means prove succesless, we must have recourse to sneezing
Medicines made of Hellebor, Marjoram, Tobacco, Pepper, Castor, etc. and if
these be ineffectual, to Mercurius Vitae for a Vomit. Sometimes Lusty Women
accustomed to drink Wine, or that live in hot Climats, are relieved by
Blood-letting. If the Mother be seized by Convulsions or bleeding from within
the Womb, she ought to be immediately laid by a skilful hand. If the Mother be
dead, and the Child alive in the Womb, it ought to be cut out.

Ofttimes Childbirth is rendered difficult by the Death of the Child in the
Womb; in which case the same expelling Medicines are to be used, but in larger
Doses. Besides the external Applications already enjoined, some recommend a
Fumigation of the Womb with the Smoke of rotten Berries thrown into boiling
Water, or with the Smoke of Troches made of Myrrh, Castor, Snakes Cast-Coats,
Pigeon's Dung, Madder-roots, and Ox Gall thrown upon burning Coals. If all the
means abovementioned fall short of expelling the dead Child, it must be pulled
out either all in one piece by hooks, or cut into several Pieces.

This Symptom of a dead Child ought to be carefully minded, not only about the
time of Delivery, but during the whole Course of the Woman's being with Child,
for fear of Mistakes in giving Astringents to prevent miscarrying, when it is
actually dead; or of endeavoring its Expulsion as being dead, while it is yet
alive. Now to prevent such Mistakes, the following Signs will be of use. When
the Child is quite dead, neither the Mother nor Midwife are sensible of the
least Motion: The Mother's Share-bone, Lips, Face and extreme Parts are cold;
her Breasts that were turgid, are now become flaccid, and their Milk serous;
she is seized with a violent Shivering and Yauning, Swooning, and sometimes a
Fever, pain of the Head and Stomac, and dismal Convulsions; her pains intermit
of a sudden; the Membran of the Child's Head is flaccid, and ofttimes the
Excrements come forth before the Child. In process of time her Breath becomes
fetid, and Water or corrupt Matter drops from the Womb. If the Child be alive,
it will move when the Womb is fomented with volatile Liquors, when the Mother
holds her hand in hot Water for some time, when a green Leaf of Marjoram
bruised, or ones hand wet with cold Water, or Bread soaked in Spanish Wine, is
applied to the Belly, and a Vein opened in the Leg. If it do not, you may
conclude that it is dead.

SECT. VIII. Of the Management of Women in Childbed.
AFTER the Woman is laid, let her be wrapped up with a Swathe of Linen about the
Ribs, and carefully armed against Cold, Anger, Fear, and strong Smells. Let her
abstain from sleep for some hours, and take a Glass of warm Wine with a Toste
for strengthening, quenching Thirst, and preventing the Symptoms that ofttimes
ensue. After some hours, she may take a potch'd Egg, with Cinnamom or Zedoary;
or some Drops of the Tincture of Coral prepared with the Spirit of a Stag's
Heart. After three or four days, if she be very Costive, her Belly may be
opened with Balls of Civet, or Clysters, or Elixir Proprietatis, taken inwardly.

The most material Circumstance relating to a Woman in Childbed, is the
separation of the Secundine; for if any part of it remain, it putrifies and
produces tragical Effects. The Causes of its retention are the Influence of
cold Air; the Tumor and straitness of the internal Neck of the Womb; the
Corruption or breaking of the Navel-string, by which it is generally pulled out;
and the firm adhesion of the Secundine to the Womb. Sometimes indeed if it be
united with the Womb, and receive nourishment directly from it without the
Foetus, it may remain unputrify'd in the Body. But for the most part its
Nutrition is received from the Foetus, and its Adhesion is occasioned by the
early Egress of the Child, or want of due Motion in the Mother, or by external
Violence. The Symptoms that attend it are an acute Fever, Pain and swelling of
the Belly, Gripings about the Region of the Womb, a stinking Breath, difficult
Respiration, and voiding of corrupt matter or Blood from the Womb. If it
continue long, it may occasion Ulcers and Gangrens.

In order to prevent this Inconvenience, the Midwife ought to tie the
Navel-string to the Woman's Thigh, till she be ready to draw forth the
Afterbirth: And then the Mother ought to be encouraged to promote its Egress,
by Sneezing, Coughing, and in Case of Extremity, Vomiting. If all prove
ineffectual, let the expelling Medicines abovementioned be administered;
especially the Spirit and Powder of a human Secundine, Myrrh, Saffron, Amber,
Castor, and Borace. If the Afterbirth be already corrupted in the Womb,
exhibit Elixir Proprietatis, extracted with the Spirit of Venice Triacle
camphoris'd. In the interim, let sharp irritating Clysters be injected; and
Pessaries of expelling Ingredients put up into the Womb. Glauberus orders a
Mixture of Sal Ammoniac and Salt of Tartar to be put into a Glass with a long
Neck thrust into the Womb. Some anoint the parts with the Oils of Coloquintida,
Wall-flowers, Savine, Amber, etc. and order Fumigations of Myrrh, Cinnamom,
Galbanum, Castor, Opoponax, and Black Hellebor formed into Troches with Cow's
Gall. If these Prescriptions are still successless, the Midwife must put her
hand into the Womb, and draw it out; or if that cannot be done, its
Putrification must be promoted by injecting emollient Decoctions of
Marshmallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Chamomil, etc. mixed with Aloes, Myrrh,
Oil of Roses, and Vinegar of Wine; to which we may add Limewater, Vnguentum
Basilicon, and a small quantity of that called Aegyptiacum.

After the Expulsion of the Afterbirth, the next step is to regulate the Flux
of the Lochia, or the Childbed Purgation. If they are deficient, we ought to
consider if they are not voided some other way, as by the Nostrils, Stool, etc.
In which Case we ought not to disturb Nature, unless grievous Symptoms oblige
us. Besides, if the Woman was wont to void but a small quantity of her monthly
Courses, or if she suckle the Child, we are not to expect so large an
Evacuation as otherwise. The natural Method of this Flux is such, that Blood is
voided four days after Delivery; from thence a watery Liquor like the washing of
Flesh till the seventh day; after that a viscous and serous Humor, untainted
with Blood, continues to flow till the fourteenth or twentieth day. Now the
Causes of the Suppression of this Flux are external Cold, drinking cold
Liquors, Anger, Fear, Grief, Shame; and the Collection of clotted Blood or
viscid Humors in the Womb. The Symptoms of a Suppression, are the Distention,
Hardness, and Pain of the Belly, a beating Heat about the Loins and Groin, a
shivering Fever, Headache, difficult Respiration, Swooning, cold Sweats,
Doting, and frequently Death. If the Womb be inflamed; if a Pleurisy, Dropsy,
or spitting of Blood ensue, it is a dangerous Case.

As for the Cure of a Suppression of the Lochia, if the Blood and Fever boil
high; if Headachs, difficult Respiration, and such like Symptoms of the upper
Region molest the Person, let a Vein be opened in the Arm; and after the use of
some internal Expellent, open the Saphaena; or apply Leeches to the Vagina, or
scarifying Cupping-glasses to the inside of the Thighs. The internal Medicines
are those of an expelling Virtue, recommended above; especially Myrrh, Saffron,
Borace, Amber, Zedoary, and Elixir Proprietatis. If the Blood be clotted,
Castor and Sperma Caeti, with Crab's-eyes and Wine, are proper; to which we may
add some Grains of Laudanum Opiatum in case of violent Headachs and other
Pains. Externally let the Abdomen be fomented with the Decoctions of Chamomil,
Savine, and wild Thyme; and anointed with a Mixture of the Oil of Wall-flowers,
and the distilled Oils of Cumin, Juniper Berries and Amber; applying afterward
a hot Brick, or a Bag (either dry or boiled in Wine) of Wormwood, Chamomil,
Fever-few, Angelica-roots, the four great hot Seeds, and Juniper Berries. If
the Urine be also stopped, apply to the lower Belly a Cataplasm of Chervil,
Pellitory of the Wall, and Oil of Scorpions. In the mean while it will not be
improper to inject Clysters of the Decoctions of Specifics for the Womb, and
stimulating Ingredients; and to order Fumigations from Coloquintida, the Dross
of the Regulus of Antimony, Troches of Myrrh, Bdellium, etc. Some put into the
Vagina a little Bag of black Hellebor. In a word, this Symptom and that of a
Suppression of the Terms require the same Cure.

Instead of a Suppression of the Lochia, sometimes we meet with an immoderat
Flux of Blood, attended by a Prostration of Strength, dimness of Sight,
tingling of the Ears, and Swooning. If the Blood be of an obscure and blackish
Color, it proceeds from the Veins; if its Color be florid, and a yellowish
scarlet, it comes from the Arteries, and portends Danger. The Causes are, 1.
The Redundancy and watery thinness of the Blood. 2. Its Turgescence and
accelerated Motion occasioned by the abuse of spirituous Liquors in time of
Labor, or the administration of expelling Medicines. 3. The Wounds of the Womb
caused by the violent pulling of the Afterbirth in case of miscarrying, or of
its firm Adhesion to the Womb. 4. The Irritation of the Womb occasioned by a
Mola, or Clots of Blood, or pieces of the Afterbirth remaining.

The Cure is varied according to the respective Cause: If the Blood be thin,
Sudorifics and Incrassating Ingredients are proper. If it be overturgid,
Purslain, Plantane, Tormentil, Loostrife and Acids take place. If the Womb be
wounded, the Decoctions of Chervil and vulnerary Ingredients are recommended.
If a Mola or Pieces of the Afterbirth remaining cause an immoderat Flux, we
must be cautious of using strong Expellents, because they promote the Flux: But
Aromatic Ingredients mixed with Astringents, may be safely administered. Such
are Tormentil, Bistort, Marjoram, Pennyroyal, Mugwort, Troches of Amber, etc.

In general all Preparations from Quinces; the Powder of Seahorse Teeth (given
to a Dram) the Preparations of Steel, Boodstone, sealed Earth, burnt
Hartshorn, the solar Tincture of Steel given to fifteen Drops, and the Tincture
of the Sulphur of Vitriol given to thirty, Conserve of Roses and that of
Comfry-roots, with Laudanum Opiatum; and in case of extremity, Alum given to
half a Dram: These, I say, are generally approved in all Cases. Externally
apply Cupping-glasses under the Breasts, or foment the Breasts and Genitals,
with a cold Mixture of Vinegar, Juice of Housleek, Nitre, and Water of Frogs
Spawn; or apply a Cataplasm of Soot, Vinegar of Roses, and the Whites of Eggs,
to the Loins. Some order Decoctions of astringent Ingredients and Hogs Dung in
Smith's Water, to be injected into the Womb. Others recommend a Girdle of black
Hellebor-leaves tied round the Body. The Redundancy and Turgescence of the
Blood admits of bleeding in the Arm, but no other Cause.

With reference to the Extraction of the Afterbirth, and Regulation of the
Childbed Flux, we ought to take notice of the After-pains, that ofttimes
succeed to Delivery. These After-pains are called genuin, when they are seated in
the Womb, as being only a Continuation of its Contraction and expulsive
Endeavors, occasioned by the irritation of the Womb from cold, Wind, clotted
Blood, the Remainders of the Afterbirth, etc. or its being wounded by sharp
humors, or a violent tearing of the Secundine. They are styled spurious when
they are lodged in the Guts, and assume the form of Colic Pains. The genuin ones
are confined to the lower Belly, and move downward; whereas the others are more
floating, and direct their Course upward, especially toward the left
Hypochondrium.

If these Pains proceed from Cold, we order a Fumigation of the Womb with
Nutmegs; if from clotted Blood, we administer the Decoction of Chervil and
Sperma Caeti inwardly. If they occasion a Suppression of the Lochia, ^^ro the
Irritation and Constriction of the Neck of the Womb, let the Tincture of
Tartar, and Essence of Myrrh be exhibited. If the Excoriation of the Womb gave
root to 'em, the Oil of Sweet Almonds, and vulnerary Decoctions mixed with
Chalybeats give relief.

In general the Decoction, Spirit and distilled Oil of Chamomil is universally
approved as an admirable Specific against all after-Pains: To which we add
ofttimes Elixir Proprietatis. Zedoary, Mug-wort, Castor, the Powder of a human
Afterbirth, and the Carminative-seeds are likewise proper Ingredients. In the
last Extremity we are obliged to have recourse to Laudanum Opiatum. Externally
we foment the Womb with the Decoction of Mugwort; and anoint it with the Oils
of Chamomil, Wall-flowers, Cumin, Dill, Earthworms, etc. and apply the
Plaster of Galbanum called Matricale, or carminative Cataplasms. As for
spurious Pains, we treat 'em as Colics.

Sometimes Women in Childbed are seized with a Drousyness, Swooning and
Anxiety about the Stomac and Hypocondria, which in effect are the Symptoms of a
hysteric Passion, and are removed by volatile Salts, as Castor, Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac, etc. and Antihysteric Clysters. But if these Symptoms are attended by
a Difficulty of Breathing, they threaten an acute Fever, which forbids
Clysters, and requires a much different Cure; of which more anon. The
Convulsions of Women in Childbed are generally retainers to this hysteric
Passion, or the Suppression of the Lochia, and are cured by Myrrh and Castor,
joined to succinat Spirit of Hartshorn, and absorbent Pouders.

Sometimes hard Labor causes Excoriations, Tumors, or Rents on the Privity.
The first and last are cured by applying a Liniment of the Oil of St.
John's-wort, Balsam of Peru, and Yelks of Eggs; the second by fomenting with
the Decoction of Chamomil and Elder-flowers in Wine and Water, and applying a
warm Cataplasm of fresh Brook-lime and Chamomil-flowers beaten together. If the
Capacity of the Vulva be so enlarged that the Rent passes through the
Perinaeum, let the Woman avoid all motion of coughing, and apply the following
Glue to the Lips of the Wound.

Take of Comfry-roots two Drams; Bole Armenic, Mastic, Dragon's Blood,
Sarcocol, fine Flower and Pompholix, of each a Dram. With Rosin of the
Pine Tree and the Whites of Eggs make a gluy Substance. If the Lips of the
Wound are already covered with Scars, we treat it the same way as a Hair Lip.
If it be inflamed and tend to a Gangrene, we cut off the corrupt part, wash the
sound Flesh with Limewater, and cover it with the Balsam of Sulphur.

If the Woman in Childbed be Costive, or troubled with the dry Piles, exhibit
a very gentle Laxative, and foment the Anus with emollient Decoctions. If a
Looseness seize her while the Lochia are suppressed, it ought not to be stopped
any other way than by administering Specifics for retrieving the Flux of the
Lochia: But if their Flux continues, or if an acute Fever attend the Looseness,
it ought to be curbed betimes, by exhibiting Sudorifics and proper Specifics
against Loosnesses, and applying to the Navel or Stomac the Oil of Amber mixed
with the distilled Oil of Mace. If the Sphincter of the Bladder be so relaxated
by the distention of Childbirth, or the roughness of the Midwife's Hands, that
the Woman cannot retain her Urine, she must foment the Parts with aromatic and
astringent Decoctions, and hang the Powder of Toads in a Bag over her Breast,
or have recourse to the natural Hot-baths. If Clots of Blood collected in the
Passage for Urine, occasion its Suppression, let the Pubes be anointed with Oil
of Scorpions; and the Decoction of Chervil, Chamomil and Sperma Ceti be used
both inwardly and outwardly. If hard Labor occasion wrinkles in the Belly, let
it be anointed with a Liniment of the Oil of Nutmegs, Sperma Ceti, Saffron and
Wax.

The remaining Disorders incident to Women in Childbed, are the Milk-feaver and
acute Diseases. The occasion of the former is this. The nutritious Juice that
was wont to be measured out for the Child in the Womb, stagnats in the Blood
after Delivery, and about the fourth day raises a feverish Thirst and
Fermentation; by virtue of which it is precipitated into the Breasts, and
converted into Milk, while the remaining Recrements are voided by a natural
Sweat about the seventh day. If this Fever be troublesome, it is alleviated by
promoting the Flux of the Lochia, especially if the Woman do not design to
suckle her Child; as the fixed Salts with Diaphoretic Antimony and Myrrh, or
gentle Sudorifics, will answer those who make account to suckle. In general
there is nothing more friendly to Women in Childbed, than continued breathing
Sweats. If anxiety and difficulty of breathing attend this Fever, we must have
recourse to the expelling Emulsions of the Seeds of Turnips, Columbines, etc.

If the Breasts be hard and molested with pain, foment 'em with the Spirit of
Sal Ammoniac and the Essence of Saffron; and apply a Plaster of Saffron and
Galbanum.

The acute Diseases of Women in Childbed are for the most part malignant, and
ushered in by malign Symptoms. If a Fever is occasioned by a Suppression of
the Lochia, we must endeavor to recover their Flux. If the Lochia continue to
run, we must be cautious of exhibiting strong Sudorifics against the Fever,
for fear of occasioning an untimely Suppression. But withal remember to keep it
within bounds, and restrain it if there be occasion, lest the Malignity should
gain force by the excessive loss of Blood. In general, the Cure is performed by
avoiding the least degree of cold, and taking Sudorifics, such as Mineral
Bezoar, Di^phoretic Antimony, Cinnabar of Antimony, the ^olatil Salt of
Hartshorn, and the fixed Salts mixed with Myrrh and Amber in case of a
Supprestion of the Lochia; or with Astringents when they exceed measure,
exhibited in the Water of Swallows with Castor for a Vehicle. Purging,
Clysters, Blooding and sweet Syrups are generally noxious; especially if the
Fever be very malignant, attended by a tingling of the Ears, heavyness of the
Head, difficulty of Breathing, etc. Tho the Person be molested with Thirst,
Acids ought to be cautiously used, by reason that they may provoke the Womb, or
stop the Childbed Flux. The Gelly of Hartshorn and Juice of Citrons, or the
Tincture of Columbine and Blewbottle-flowers, and such like temperat Acids are
the best. If the Person be frequently seized with slight Shiverings, and little
pricking Pains in the Back, it is a sign of miliar Eruptions, which if they be
white are dangerous. Before their Eruption, absorbent Diaphoretics are proper;
after their appearance, Emulsions of the expulsive Seeds, the antiscorbutic
Tincture of Coral, and the Essence of Myrrh, ought to be added.

SECT. IX. Of the Disorders relating to Suckling.
THE nutritious Juice that was wont to be measured out for the Child in the
Womb, stagnats in the Blood when the Womb is emptied and contracted. This
Stagnation is followed by a Fermentation, or Milk-feaver, and that by a
Precipitation of Serum, which being strained through the Glandules of the Breasts,
and thickened by their acid Ferment, is converted into Milk, and fitted for the
Nourishment of newborn Infants. The Accidents which thwart Nature in this its
Design, are such as either impair or over-mul^iply the quantity of Milk, or
else deprave it.

Those which impair the quantity of Milk, are the artificial Compression, or
preternatural Obstruction of the Glandules and Passages in the Breasts; the
meagre dry Constitution of the Woman's Body; much sweating, or voiding large
quantities of white Serum in the Childbed Flux; drinking of acid Liquors, or
austere Wine; Grief, Fear, Anger and Childbed acute Diseases; to which we may
add the want of a sucking Force in a weak Child. Now in order to supply Milk,
we order juicy Food, and the Decoction of Elder-flowers in Milk, or that of
Earthworms and Fennelseeds, for drink. The Seeds of Anis, Caraways and Dill,
or their distilled Oils, are also very proper. Prepared Crystal and Marle from
Rocks, indirectly promote the increase of Milk, by subduing the Acid that
thwarts it. Externally we order the Breasts to be rubbed with a rough Cloth
after eating, and fomented with the Decoction of Fennelseeds, Marshmallows,
Mint, and Elder-flowers in Milk; or anointed with the Oil of Worms, mixed with
a few Drops of the distilled Oil of Anis; and covered with a Cataplasm of the
Meal of Barley, Marshmallows and Yest.

Contrary to this Symptom is the Redundancy of Milk caused by the Laxity of the
Glandules in the Breasts, or the over-acting of a volatile Acid which promotes
the Precipitation. It is followed by a distention of the Breasts, pain in the
Back, swelling of the Glandules under the Armpits, and sometimes a Corruption
of the Breasts, if it stagnate there; or by an universal Weakness, if it be
evacuated. If it coagulat and distend the Breasts, we endeavor to promote its
Egress by sucking, and applying the Plaster of Sperma Ceti, and above that,
hot Bags quilted with Milletseeds, Rice and Barley. If the Milk be free from
Coagulation in the Breasts, we foment 'em with the Decoction of Mint, Hemlock,
Cumin-seeds, and Alum in Water and Vinegar; or apply Cataplasms of the Powder
of Mint, Bread, Vinegar and Salt. Some commend the Juice of Plantane, and the
Plaster of Hemlock. Internally we exhibit the cold Antivenereal Specifics.

Besides the Deficiency and Redundancy of Milk, there remains yet another
Disorder relating to the same Class, viz. its Corruption or Curdling,
occasioned either suddenly by the quick Retreat and Perturbation of the Animal
Spirits through Grief and Fear, or gradually by its mixing with acid Lymph in
the Glandules of the Breasts, and lingering beyond its due time. The Symptoms of
curdled Milk are the unequal Swellings of the Glandules of the Breasts, at
first free of pain, but afterward followed by a violent Heat, Redness,
pinching Pain, and Inflammation that perhaps degenerats into Imposthums,
Fistula's, Schirrus's or Cancers. The Cure, which ought to commence betimes,
consists in discussing the Swellings, and dissolving the curdled Milk, or else
promoting its Suppuration. The Discussion is obtained by giving inwardly Sperma
Ceti to a Dram; or Crab's-eyes and Myrrh, with Diaphoretic Antimony and fixed
Salts; or the Powder of Woodlice to a Dram; or the Spirit of Sal Ammoniac to a
Dram; in order to sweat. After sweating we apply a large quantity of the
Plaster of Sperma Ceti, and cover it above with hot Bags of Rice, Millet-seeds
and Barley; or if that Plaster be ineffectual, that of Galbanum with Saffron
covered in like manner, the Breast being bathed twice a day with a Mixture of
the Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, Essence of Saffron and ordinary Spirit of Wine.

If the Breasts be much inflamed or seized with St. Antony's Fire, the Woman is
molested with feverish Shiverings, and a beating Pain in the middle of the
Swelling. In this case let the Milk be forcibly sucked; let the Decoctions of
Mint and Chervil, with the abovementioned Sudorifics, be administered; and Honey
spread upon gray or blew Paper be applied to the Breasts. The Phlegm of Vitriol
stripped of Acidity, the Water of Frogs Spawn, and especially that of
Quicklime, are very useful for external Fomentation. Some order River-Crabs
bruised to be applied to the Breasts: But above all, a Cataplasm of the Meal of
Beans, Lentils and Lupins, boiled in Vinegar and Water, and mixed with the
Whites of Eggs, is most effectual. For St. Antony's Fire, let the Syrup of
Elder spread upon a Linen Cloth be applied to the Breasts, and renewed every
hour.

If Discussives prove successless, we must endeavor to ripen the Swelling, by
bathing it twice a day with Essence of Saffron and Spirit of Sal Ammoniac
mixed; and applying Mynsichtius's Plaster of Galbanum with Saffron mixed with
Diachylon. It Is usual to apply Cataplasms of the Juice of Smallage, Juice of
Sheeps-dung, etc. But they generally create pain. Perhaps the following
Cataplasm may not be amiss.

Take of the Roots of Orris, roasted Onyons, of each three Ounces; Yest two
Ounces; Yelks of Eggs in number three; fresh Hogs Tallow half an Ounce; Oil of
Roses, Meal of Beans and Linseed, of each two Ounces. Make a Cataplasm.

When the Swelling becomes soft, it ought to be opened with a Lance, because
tho the Glandule and Fat be easily dissolved by the purulent matter, yet it is
not able to break through the Skin without insufferable pains. After it is open,
apply Tents covered with Balsam of Peru, or Oil of the Balsamin Apple, Oil of
St. John's-wort, or the common Digestive of Turpentine, Honey and Yelks of Eggs;
or above all, the Oil of Man's Ordure. In case of a Fistula, wash it with the
Decoction of Agrimony, Alum, and Myrrh, and apply the following Ointment.

Take of the Juice of Agrimony an Ounce; Aloes, Myrrh, Sarcocol, and plumous
Alum, of each a Dram. With Honey make an Ointment.

Ofttimes these Swellings elude the Operation both of discussing and
suppurating Medicines, and become hard painless Scrofles or Schirrus's; the
former arising from curdled Milk, the latter from clotted Blood fixed by a
powerful Acid, after the Inflammation. In this Case Gum Ammoniac, Galbanum, the
Plaster of Hemloc, and a Liniment of the Juice of Nightshade with Lytharge are
proper for external Application. If we are apprehensive of their Degeneracy
into a Cancer, a Cataplasm of the Juice of Earthworms, Pulp of rotten Apples,
Turnips, Figgs and Saffron, will not be improper. But if the Swellings begin to
shoot and cause pain, they are not to be meddled with; as being near akin to
Cancers.

Cancers in the Breast generally take their Rise from hard Swellings, and are
much encouraged by the Suppression of the Terms. When the Swelling shoots and
pricks without a tendency to Suppuration; when it becomes hot and livid, and
the Veins are swollen, we may reasonably conclude upon a Cancer. Sometimes, but
very rarely, it comes without any visible precedent Cause, and appears first in
the form of a little red Knot, about the bigness of a Chiche, which by derees
increases, becomes livid and black, and the surrounding Veins swell up like so
many Crabs-feet.

If a Cancer lies hid within its own Verge, and dos not yet corrode the Skin
and Substance of the Breasts, it ought not to be tampered with. For a
palliative Cure we apply Liniments which partake of Ceruss and the Sugar of
Lead, or a Plate of Lead to the Breasts. The Juice of the prick Thistle called
Onopordon, or of the Herb Robert, and the Juice or Water of rotten Apples, are
also proper for external Applications. Note, all Compositions against a Cancer
ought to be beaten and mixed in a Leaden Mortar.

If a Cancer be ulcerated, and void corrupt matter dispersing its Venom round
all the neighboring Parts, it ought to be rooted out with a Knife, and the
bleeding stopped with a fired Iron. Allioth pretended to cure it with Alcali's
mixed with Sulphur. But the former Method is most universally received. Some
apply a living Crab which dies upon the Breast while the Virulency remains; and
if it live, signifies the temperance of the Ferment. This Application they
repeat till the Crab be able to live upon the Breast. Soot and Limewater are
also recommended for washing the Ulcers, as likewise the following Ointment.
Take of the Juices of Golden Rod, Nightshade, and Sow-thistle, of each an
Ounce; Oil of Violets, and that of Roses, of each an Ounce and a half. With
Quicklime make an Ointment in a Leaden Mortar.

The last Disorder relating to Suckling shall be that of the Nipples; when they
are small and not open, or chopped and ^lcerated. The former Inconvenience is
amended by applying a Cupping glass or a glass Instrument fit for the purpose,
and suckling a toothless Puppy. The latter is prevented by fitting an excavated
Nutmeg to the Nipple, or anointing it with Hogs Tallow mixed with common Bole,
some time before Delivery. Its actual Cure is compassed by anointing with
Balsam of Peru, or Oil of Balsamin Apple mixed with the Oil of Eggs. The Oil of
Sugar, the fat of Cockles, the Juice of the Herb Robert, and above all, the
Juice of Wood-lice expressed in Wine, are approved for the same purpose. Some
apply stoned Raisins, or the Leather of ones Shoe: But when the Chops are
large, they ought to be washed frequently with warm Water to take off the
stagnating Milk and Serum that corrupts and galls the Nipples; and then
fomented with Plantain-water, in which Sugar of Lead is dissolved; and
afterward covered up with a leaf of Ground Ivy. If they be ulcerated, wash
them with Quicklime-water; and anoint 'em with a mixture of Litharge, Alum,
Myrrh, and Oil of Roses.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF ETMULLERUS HIS Practice of PHYSIC, etc.
BOOK V. Of the Diseases of Children.
IN the foregoing Sections we conducted the Child from the first minute of
Conception, to the hour of Birth. It remains now to view its Circumstances,
when just launched into the World, and provide suitable Relief. The first
Alteration it undergoes, is occasioned by the free Air which rarifies and
quickens the Blood and Spirits, and by consequence provokes the Stomac, Guts,
and Bladder to expulsive Contractions. Now in imitation of Natures Efforts,
it is the Duty of Art to promote these Evacuations by exhibiting small
quantities of a Mixture of solutive Syrup of Roses, Syrup of Cichory with
Rubarb, and Sala's Emetic Syrup; and feeding it with the Beestings projected by
Nature for that purpose: For the Excrements lodged in the first Passages, are
the curdled, acid, nutritious Juice barred from Evacuation 'till Childbirth;
hence the voiding of 'em before Delivery is looked upon as a Sign of a dead
Child: And their undue stay after the Birth taints the nourishment with a
preternatural Acidity, and is in good measure the Cause of all the tragical
Symptoms that pursue our Infancy; upon which account we ought to be diligent in
endeavoring their early removal.

Nor is the insensible Transpiration or Evacuation by the Pores of the skin to
be neglected, as being so essential to Life. Now the slimy Crust fastened upon
the Skin by the Liquor in the Amnios, deprives the Infants of this Benefit, and
by imprisoning the Steams under the Skin exposes 'em to cuticular Eruptions. To
remove this inconvenience the Nurse ought to bathe the Child very frequently in
warm Water, in which Soap or common Lie is dissolved; and with a soft Cloth
wipe off the impurities of the Womb.

As the undue Retention of Excrements is frequently the Cause of Childrens
Diseases, so the Assumption of irregular Food is justly charged with the same
Crime. The most of their Food is Milk from the Breasts, which is rendered
disorderly several ways. As,

1. When it is not the Mother's own Milk. The nutritious Juice which the Child
was acquainted with in the Womb, being converted into Milk, would be the most
natural and easy nourishment; since Customary Food is always most easy of
Digestion. But forasmuch as the temperament of every Woman varies the Milk;
that of a strange Woman must needs disagree with the nutritious Juice of the
Mother, which the Child was wont to digest, and consequently causes several
notable Alterations in its Body; especially considering that our Hackney Nurses
are generally poor and inured to coarse Food, whereas the Mothers that hire 'em
are entitled to a contrary Character.

2. The Milk of a sickly Woman, whether Mother or Nurse, is improper.

3. Fat thick Milk at first, is pernicious to the Child, and apt to curdle into
an acid Crudity. Nature has wisely provided against this Consequence by the
thin purgative Beestings that prepare the Child's Stomac, and by degrees enable
it to digest the thick elaborate Milk.

4. Nothing is more apt to disorder the Child than suckling it too often; since
large quantities of Milk stagnating in the Stomac, must needs corrupt and
occasion Crudities, especially if fresh Milk be poured in before the preceding
be digested.

5. The Nurse's irregular Conduct dos frequently vitiat the Milk. The least
Error in Diet, tho inoffensive to her, may taint the Milk and hurt the Child.
Upon which account she ought to eat roasted Meat, and that moderatly, and not
over-charge her Stomac, as many are wont to do, when they are transplanted from
their own hungry Habitations to a fat Pasture. In particular she ought to avoid
Acids, Sweetmeats, Cheese, Wine, Summer-fruits, or whatever is apt to curdle
and clot the Milk. And as her Diet ought to be clean and regular, so she ought
to preserve a calm dispassionat temper of Mind; since Fear, Anger, and Grief,
clot the Milk by diverting and withdrawing the Spirits that should keep up its
equal temperature: Nay the influence of Fear and other Passions is visible in
the natural Marks that are entailed to Children in the Mother's Womb, by the
violent Motion of the Mother's Spirits determined upon one part; and (by the
way) these Marks are cured by applying frequently a hot bloody Secundine, or
Clouts dipped in Menstrual Blood, and the touch of a dead Child's hand. Some
apply Clouts dipped in the Blood of Toads, or Fernelius's Aqua Divina, or in
case of extremity cut 'em off.

If Fear or Passion actually prevail and cause the Coagulation of Milk, let the
depraved Milk be first sucked out by a Puppy, and the Medicines recommended
against the same Symptoms in the foregoing Book, be exhibited before the Child
be admitted to suck. In general the curdling of the Milk is best prevented by
eating Anise and Fennel-seeds after Meals, and abstaining from cold drink, or
avoiding any external Cold; especially by diverting the menstrual Purgation,
and shunning the Emotions of Venery, which by curdling the Milk in the Child's
Stomac frequently entail to it an Antipathy against Cheese, as being a natural
resemblance of the curdled Milk that was wont to annoy it.

After the Child has sucked about a year it ought to be weaned, especially a
little after the Equinoxes, during the increase of the Moon. The chief
Inconvenience Children are liable to, is drinking in the Nighttime, which
swells up their Belly, and occasions Loosenesses and many other bad Symptoms.
To prevent this, let the Essence of Wormwood be mixed with their drink; or if
these Evils prevail already, exhibit a little Spanish Wine, and apply Aromatic
Bags to the Belly. Besides, as for the other Food of young Children it ought to
consist of white Bread dried and beaten small, Yelks of Eggs and Aniseed boiled
in Milk or Water to the Consistence of a thin Pulp. That which is commonly made
of Flower and Milk or Water is fitter for Paste than any thing else; for it
lies heavy in the Child's Stomac, and degenerats into a viscous tough Crudity;
whereas the Bread being already fermented, is sooner and more easily digested.
It Is customary among Nurses to attenuate the Child's Food in their own Mouths
before they give it; and indeed it is true that a healthy Nurses Spittle is of
use for promoting the quick Digestion: But if scorbutic Salts be lodged in her
Gums, or if a Cacochymy prevail in her Body, it is too apt a Vehicle for
conveying a morbifical Tincture into the Child's Body.

These premises, if duly weighed, will furnish us with a distinct Idea of the
Causes of Childrens Diseases. The Excrements retained and vicious Milk or Pap
received into the Stomac, degenerat into an acid Crudity; which if imprisoned
in a viscid Vehicle, displays its force within, and if diluted with a thinner
Serum, breaks out upon the Skin in various Eruptions. From this Source it were
easy to derive all the particular Diseases of Children, their violent Gripings,
and voiding of discolor'd Excrements; the generation of Wind and distention of
the Belly; Vomiting and Inappetency; Hiccough, Watchings, Convulsions; and the
numberless Train of cuticular Eruptions, or aches on the Skin, occasioned
partly by the Efflux of a ferous acid, and partly by a want of due
transpiration which obliges it to stagnat in the out parts.

Now forasmuch as all these Diseases of Children are derived from one Cause,
and consequently demand the same Method of Cure, 'twill be needless to trace
every distinct Symptom apart; and therefore we shall content our selves with a
general Account of the Method of Cure. And indeed if the foregoing Hypothesis
be duly considered and understood, 'twill be an obvious Consequence that the
Basis of the Cure falls upon Alcalies, or such Medicines as discuss a viscid
Crudity, and imbibe an acid.

These are; first, the volatile Alkalies, especially the Spirit of Sal Ammoniac
succinat, which tho dreaded by some, is recommended by experience as an
incomparable Medicine for Children. It Is given in the Mother's Milk, or in Mint
or Fennel-water. To this Class we may join oily Aromatics, as Aniseed given in
Powder to half a Dram; Castor, Myrrh, and Elixir Proprietatis prepared without
Acids. In the second Rank we place the fixed absorbent Alcalies, viz. Coral,
Crab's-eyes, Pearl, Sea Horse-teeth, Ivory, Bezoar-stone. To which we may add
the Tincture of Tartar, or that of the Dross of the Regulus of Antimony; and
Venice Triacle or Mithridate given to two Grains; (stronger Narcotics and more
generous Medicines being improper.) As for example,

Take of prepared Crab's-eyes half a Dram; Hartshorn prepared without fire, half
a Dram; prepared red Coral half a Scruple; choice Myrrh, six or nine Grains;
Venice Triacle three or four Grains; distilled Oil of Anise three or six Drops.
Make a Powder. Or,

Take of Hartshorn prepared without Fire a Scruple; Crab's-eyes and red Coral,
of each half a Scruple; volatile Salt of Hartshorn six Grains; Venice Triacle
four Grains; choice Myrrh three Grains. Make a Powder, of which give a
convenient quantity in Milk or Pap.

Take of Elder-flower-water two Ounces; Spirit of Sal Ammoniac fifteen Drops;
Hartshorn prepared without Fire, the Jaw Bone of a Pike, and prepared Unicorn,
of each half a Scruple; Syrup of Poppies two Drams. Make a Potion to be given
by little Spoonfuls.

Now the acid Crudity being thus subdued and prepared, it remains only to make
Provision for its Evacuation, first by Clysters of the Decoction of
Chamomil-flowers, mixed with Salt of Tartar, Honey of Rue, and Oil of Anise; or
those of Milk with Turpentin dissolved by the Yelk of an Egg; or in a difficult
Case, thus,

Take of the Decoction of Carminative Ingredients with Salt of Tartar two
Ounces; Sala's Emetic Syrup two Drams; Honey of Roses two Drams: Make a Clyster.

If a viscid Slime stuff the Breast, we may exhibit for a Potion three Drams of
Hyssop Water, half a Dram of the Syrup of Tobacco, and a Scruple of Sala's
Emetic Syrup mixed; or half an Ounce of Mint-water, with half a Dram of the
Emetic Syrup. As for Purgatives take what follows,

Take of the Solutive Syrup of Roses two Drams; prepared Crab's-eyes half a
Dram; prepared red Coral twelve Grains: With a few Drops of the Spirit of Anis
make a Mixture. Or,

Take of the Powder of Jalap six Grains; Tartar vitriolat half a Scruple. Make
a Powder.

Manna given to two or four Drams in Breast-milk or Pap, is also a good
Laxative. But above all, sweet Mercury is the most effectual Correcter and
Evacuater of acid viscous Humors, especially upon the approach of the Small
Pox or Measles. It Is given at the rate of a Grain for every year of the Child's
Age. As,

Take of the Pulp of Raisins half a Dram; sweet Mercury a Grain and a half;
Powder of Jalap three Grains. Make a Bolus.

If Mercury be insufficient, Fulminatory Gold given to a Grain with Ivory and
Powder of Sea-horse-teeth, is a notable Medicine; especially if the first
Passages be stuffed. It operats more fiercely in weaned Children than those
that suck, by reason that the Milk tempers it.

These Medicines, if discreetly managed, will answer all Diseases in Children,
particularly the gripings they are so liable to, which are attended by
prodigious unquietness, and voiding of clotted or green Excrements, or at least
such as are first yellow, and afterward become green by reason of the freer
Effervescence of the curdl'd Acid with the Bile. These we cure by the
abovementioned Clysters, (or those of Milk when the yellow Excrements are thin
and sharp) and Mixtures of aromatic Waters, volatile Salts and fixed Alkalies;
and when all prove ineffectual, by exhibiting a Grain or two of Aurum Fulminans
in black Cherry-water. Externally we anoint the Belly with distilled Oils of
Mace and Anise mixed with the expressed Oil of Nutmegs; or if the matter be
very viscous, with an Ointment made of Gum Ammoniac, Turpentin, Aloes, Hogs
Tallow, fresh Butter, and distilled Oil of Anise. If the Belly be distended by
Wind, we exhibit the Powder or distilled Oil of Angelica-roots, Aniseed, red
Coral, and the Water of the Oak of Jerusalem, and anoint the Belly with Oil of
Chamomil, and distilled Oil of Anise. If the Child vomit often, it is a Sign of
a strong Stomac, and ought not to be stopped, especially if it proceed only from
a Redundancy of Milk; but if the Milk be corrupted and the matter discolored,
we exhibit a Powder made of Nutmegs, Coral, and Cloves; or Cinnamom-water, and
distilled Oil of Cloves. Externally we inject Clysters, and anoint the Belly
and Stomac as above. Against the Hiccough vomiting is proper; as also Aniseeds,
Venice Triacle, and distilled Oil of Cloves; or Joel's Powder of burnt
Hartshorn and red Coral. For Costiveness which frequently causes the Distention
of the Belly, difficult Respiration, and many other bad Symptoms, we order 'em
Mouse-dung dissolved in Milk, or in case of extremity Sweet Mercury and Aurum
fulminans. Externally we inject Clysters of Rape and Linseed Oils sharpened
with Extract of black Hellebor or Suppositories of Venice Soap; or apply to the
Belly rotten Apples with Goose Fat, and Oil of Coloquintida; or in case of
Extremity the Ointment of Sow-Bread mixed with Bull's Gall, and Oil of
Coloquintida. Ofttimes the stagnation of sharp Sweat, or the neglect of
shifting of the Child, galls the tender Skin under the Armpits or about the
Genitals; then we order the part to be first washed with warm Water, and then
sprinkled with the Precipitat of the Vitriol of Steel, mixed with Chalk,
Ceruse, and Sugar of Lead. Sometimes much crying or coughing will force the
Caul or one of the Intestines into the Navel-string, and so distend the Navel,
and relax at the Peritonaeum; against which Inconvenience we exhibit Aniseed
inwardly, and anoint the Navel with Oil of Eggs, or Bear's Fat mixed with the
Seed of Thorowteasel; and with a Roller fasten upon it a round Ball of Mastic
and red Wax, or Turpentin. If the Navel be inflamed, we anoint with Oil of
Roses mixed with Ceruse and Sugar of Lead and apply the Plaster of Sperma
Ceti. Sometimes crying, coughing, or much Wind in the Belly occasions a
Rupture, which we cure by applying a Plaster of the Skins of pickled Eels
boiled to a Consistence in Lie, and bathing with astringent vulnerary
Decoctions. Sometimes a watery Tumor distends the Scrotum, and feigns a
Rupture; this is cured by fomenting with the Juice of Goat's Dung, and applying
the Dung it self as a Cataplasm. A Tenesmus or Down-falling of the Anus is
cured by Fumigations of Pine-tree-Rosin, Sarcocolla, Bay Berries and
Fennel-seeds, and applying Bags quilted with Mulleinflowers, Bran,
Cummin-seeds, and Bay Berries. A Suppression of Urine caused by a pituitous
Humor in the Passage, is cured first by cleansing the Body with Mechoacan and
solutive Syrup of Roses, and then exhibiting the Decoction of Vetches and
Fennel-tops with some Drops of the Spirit of Turpentine, and Emulsions of
Violet-seeds with the Water of Elder-flowers, or of Restharrow; and anointing
the Pubes and Perinaeum with Oil of Scorpions and that of Wax, or applying
Cataplasms of Chamomil, roasted Onyons, and Oil of Scorpions. An Incontinence of
Urine is removed by fomenting the Sphincter of the Bladder with astringent
Decoctions, and giving inwardly Castor, Myrrh, and Oxymel.

The Thrush or Wheals that frequently beset Childrens Tongues, Throat and
Stomac (and sometimes the Guts, as appears by scaly Excrements) are cured by
washing 'em with Speedwel-water, and Juice of Turnips; or applying a Liniment
of the Mucilage of Quinces extracted with the Water of Frogs Spawn, mixed with
Juice of Houseleek and Alum; or Honey of Roses mixed with Spirit of Salt. If
the Gums be putrified, gargle the Mouth with the Decoction of Chervil and Sage
in Water mixed with Honey and a little Vinegar.

Stubborn Watchings are frequently the Harbingers of an Epilepsy, and therefore
ought to be obviated betimes by exhibiting gentle Laxatives, and Emulsions of
Sweet Almonds with absorbent Pouders. Perhaps Venice Triacle or Mithridate, and
the Rinds of Poppy-heads boiled in Milk are not amiss; but the Preparations
from Poppies are to be cautiously used if the Children be very young.
Externally we bathe the Temples with the Nurse's Milk mixed with Saffron; and
anoint the Breast and Pit of the Neck with an Ointment of expressed Oil of
Nutmegs, and the distilled Oils of Rue and Amber. An Epilepsy is also ushered
in by a starting and frights in sleep, occasioned by the violent Excursion of
the Spirits, which requires the same Cure as an Epilepsy. Now an Epilepsy for
the most part seems to proceed from a provoking Acid in the Guts, and is cured
by Alkalin Absorbent Pouders; such as Cinnabar of Antimony, Unicorn's Horn,
Crystal, Sea-horse-tooth, and especially Amber and Misletoe of Hazel-wood, and
the Powder of the Moss called Wood Claw. If these be insufficent, we add to
them the volatile Salt of Amber, or which is yet better, the Spirit of Hartshorn
impregnated with Amber. But above all, the Sulphur of Antimony or Fulminatory
Gold (each of 'em given to a Grain) are the most effectual Medicines.

Convulsions are frequently caused by the breeding of Teeth, especially the
sharp Eye-teeth; whose original soft Pulp, being hardened about the sixth or
seventh Month, begins to force its Passage through the Gums, and consequently
irritates the nervous System, contracts the salivating Glandules, and occasions
that observable Heat and Efflux of Serum to the Mouth, and the Inflammation of
the adjacent Parts. This Symptom is cured by keeping the Belly open, and
applying to the Gums the Mucilages of Fleawort and Quince-seeds, extracted with
the Water of Frogs Spawn, mixed with Oil of Sweet Almonds and that of Poppies;
or the Brains of a Hare boiled to the Consistence of a Liniment with Honey. Some
recommend the Blood of a Cock's Comb for the same use. Externally we anoint the
Cheeks with emollient and discussive Oils. If the swelling of the Gums begin to
appear white in the middle, it may be cut with a Knife, to make way for the
Tooth. Sometimes Children are troubled with Swellings upon the Gums, that are
not caused by Teeth, and then they cry, if the Region of their Ears be touched.
This Symptom is allayed by anointing the Swellings with the Oil of Sweet
Almonds, and the Region of the Ears with the fat of Hares.

A Looseness is frequently caused by the defect of Saliva following the
breeding of Teeth, as also by the thinness or watryness of the Nurse's Milk. It
ought not to be stopped at first; but if it last above six days, or if the
Excrements be sharp, green, or black, and the Appetit dejected, a speedy Cure
must be endeavored by absorbent Pouders, and the common Specifics against a
Looseness.

Worms in the Guts are frequently the Authors of the Epilepsy, Fever,
Unquietness, etc. that molest Children. They are discovered by these Symptoms.
The Child's Mouth is always full of Saliva, especially in a Morning, while the
Stomac is empty; it rubs its Nose and gnashes with its Teeth while asleep. Its
appetite is uncertain, sometimes voracious, tho followed by leanness; and
sometimes very low; the Belly sometimes sinks, and sometimes is much enlarged.
The Face is liable to frequent Flushings, and Alterations of Color; the Belly
is for the most part open and much gripped. The Seeds of these Worms are
conveyed into the Body in the Child's Food, especially in Corn or Bread. Sweet
Mercury and the Conserve of Peach-flowers, interlac'd with the bitter
Specifics, absorbent Pouders and volatile Alkalies compass the Cure. Sometimes a
Worm settles its self within the Navel-string, and causes a paleness of the
Lips, wasting of the Body, and unquietness; it is killed by applying to the
Belly the inner Shell of a Walnut filled with the Powder of Venice Glass, and
that of Saffron; and then it ought to be purged out.

Children are frequently troubled with a Cough which proceeds for the most part
from the Stomac. If it be a wet Cough, Vomits are absolutely necessary. If dry,
the Spirit of Hartshorn succinat, the Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, Sperma Ceti, the
Mucilage of Linseed, Figgs soaked in Spirit of Wine, the Juice of Rapes, and
Pulp of Raisins joined to gentle Anodynes are noted Specifics. If the Cough be
convulsive, we exhibit the Castor and Spirit of Amber. If the matter be very
thick, the Juice of Horse-Radishes, or of Fennel, the Syrup of Hyssop or that
of Tobacco, and Sala's Emetic Syrup are very proper. Externally in a dry Cough
we wash the Child's Feet in hot Ale, and anoint 'em with the Goats Tallow. If a
plentiful defluction attend the Cough, we cover the Head with Cotton fumigated
with Amber, Frankincense, and the Gum of the Juniper-tree. If the Child's Nose
is stopped, put into it a Clout wet with Marjoram and black Cherry-water
impregnated with white Vitriol, and anoint the Nostrils with the Oil of sweet
Almonds mixed with a few drops of the Oil of Marjoram.

The Acidity of the Lymph, caused by the Crudities in the Stomac, frequently
occasions an Obstruction and swelling of the Glandules about the Ears, Neck and
Head; and a milky Crust or scaly Eruption in the Head and Face, which in
process of time, if the Acid be very sharp, degenerats into Ulcers voiding
corrupt matter. If this Eruption be unseasonably suppressed, it occasions a
Cough, Looseness, Convulsions, and many other bad Symptoms. For Cure;
internally we exhibit Purgatives, especially sweet Mercury; and absorbent
Pouders, together with volatile Spirits. Externally we anoint the crusty
Eruptions with Oil of Tartar per Deliquium and Camphyr, and bathe 'em with the
Decoction of Dock-roots, Marshmallows, Soap-wort and Celandine in small Beer or
Child's Urine; and cover the running Ulcers with the Powder of the Precipitat
from Vitriol of Steel, mixed with Calaminar Stone, Chalk, Ceruss, Salt of
Tartar and Myrrh; and apply discussive Plasters to the swelled Glandules. When
the Evil is inveterat, and the Ulcers are become fetid, it is customary to wash
'em with the Decoction of Tobacco, and mix Quicksilver with the Ointments, or
order a Girdle of Quicksilver killed with Hog's Fat: But these Applications
are not always safe. Panarollus's Ointment of Sulphur, Juice of Lemons and
Hog's Fat; or that of the Yelks of Eggs boiled hard with Myrrh, black Hellebor,
Cuckou-pint, and Snake-weed-roots, are preferable. If the Skull be corroded by
the Ulcers, we apply Honey of Roses mixed with Spirit of Wine; and the Powder of
Birthwort mixed with Balsam of Peru. If the Child's Head be lousy, apply the
Oil of Spike and Powder of Stavesacre over night, or the Juice of Wormwood
mixed with Quicksilver; or, which is yet safer, the precipitat of Mercury
prepared with Spirit of Nitre; washing it next Morning with a Lee of the
Decoction of Lavender and Spike.

This Acidity of the Lymph, proceeding from curdled Milk in the Stomac, is also
the Cause of the small Pox and Measles. They are ushered in by a dry Cough, a
watriness and swelling of the Eyes, and itching of the Nose. So soon as we can
discover their approach, we exhibit sweet Mercury with a Grain of the Powder of
Jalap; or if the strength be much impaired, and the Heat be violent, the
Sulphur of Antimony precipitated from the Dross of the Regulus. If the Belly be
swollen and infested with Noise, we inject gentle Clysters. After the Ebullition
is over, we administer the Emulsions of the out-striking Seeds with Castor,
Myrrh, Diaphoretic Antimony, Cinnabar of Antimony, fixed Salts, absorbent
Pouders; and the Juice of Horse-Dung. If the Malignity of the Humors cause
Convulsions, we add the volatile Salt of Amber, and the succinat Spirit of
Hartshorn. If the Child be very restless, we may venture to give a small
quantity of the Syrup of Poppies. If a Vomiting attend the beginning of the
Disease, we ought not to stop it, unless it prove excessive, and then we give
Venice Triacle and Laudanum Opiatum; or rather the Spirit of Hartshorn
Succinat. To prevent a Looseness, which in this case is fatal, let the Nurse
and Child both drink the Decoction of Vipergrass with the Gelly of Hartshorn.
As for the other Symptoms that generally accompany this Disease, see the first
Book.

Ofttimes the Child is emaciated, and does not thrive, and that chiefly upon
three accounts. 1. When the Nurse's Milk is stale and sharp. In this Case we
change the Nurse, and bathe the Child in Goats Milk, and exhibit the Water
distilled from Ivy, or that from Fern. 2. When Worms exhaust the nutritious
Juice. Besides those in the Guts treated of already, there are others like
little Hairs that not only exhaust the nourishment, but continually gall and
gnaw the skin. They are cured thus: Bathe the Child in warm Water or Lee, in
which Chickens Dung is boiled, and rub the Body over with Honey to tempt the
Worms to come out in the form of black Hairs. Then scrape 'em off with a Crust
of Bread made sharp like the Edg of a Knife. After this has been practiced
three or four times, bathe 'em in Wormwood-water in which Aloe is dissolved, or
in the Decoction of Quicksilver. Inwardly the Tinctures of Antimony, Essence of
Myrrh, and Salt of Vipers are proper. 3. When the Glandules of the Mesentery,
or milky Vessels, are stuffed with viscid Crudities, and deny passage to the
Chyle. This we discover by the hardness and distention of the Belly, the
viscidity and whiteness of Excrements; and cure it by the abovementioned
volatile attenuating Ingredients. To which we may add the Tinctures of Steel,
the Tincture and Salt of Tartar, and after the Child is weaned, Arcanum
Duplicatum. Externally we anoint the Belly with the Ointment of Soubread, and
that of Marshmallows, Gum Ammoniac and Oil of Chamomil.

The Fevers that Children are liable to, are also owing to the corrupt
Crudities in the first Passages, which defile the Blood. Their Cure is
performed by answering the various Indications according as the infirmity of
Children will admit, and the nature of the Fever requires. In general,
Laxatives and absorbent Pouders accomplish the Design.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF ETMULLERUS HIS Practice of PHYSIC, etc.
BOOK VI. Of Surgery.
SURGERY is that part of Physic which affords manual relief to the external
Disorders of the Body. But it is not necessary for a Physician to be nicely
acquainted with all the particular Directions for the Hand, that being a
Province peculiar to Surgeons: So that our present business amounts no further
than to account for a Physician's Duty in regulating the Method of external
Applications and inward Administrations. This we project to do under five
Heads, viz. those of Swellings, Wounds, Ulcers, Dislocations, and Fractures.

But before we launch into Particulars, 'twill not be improper to take notice
of the Distinction of the parts of the Body into those that are hard, and
others that are soft. The former are frequently injured by applying oily fat
things which enjoy a latent Acidity prejudicial to the Bones. The latter are
either sanguine or spermatic. The sanguine are originally nourished with Blood,
and all Tumors, Wounds, Ulcers, or Amputations relating to them, are neither
so painful, nor so easily provoked and irritated by sharp Medicines, nor so
difficult to cure; as those of the spermatic or nervous parts which are
nourished from the beginning with Chyle and nutritious Juice.

Now when any of these parts suffers external Injury, we must endeavor to
allay the Pain and Symptoms that attend it, to preserve the natural Course of
the Blood and Humors, and remove the putrefying acid Ferment that annoys the
Part.

CHAP. I. Of Swellings.
A Swelling is the Enlargement of the Dimensions of any part. It may be caused
by Dislocation or Wind; but for the most it owes its being to Humors; as, if
the Blood or Serum stagnate; the former Causes Inflammations, the latter soft
white Swellings: If the thinner Humors force their Passage, while thick
viscous Excrements stick by the way, they gather into a Body by degrees, and so
cause Tumors, such as the critical Swellings that succeed to Fevers, to the
Plague, and French Pox, and the hard Tumors of Glandules. If the nutritious
Humor of any part is corrupted by a vicious Ferment residing in it, or
otherwise occasionally altered, it degenerats into Imposthumes, Ulcers, Callous
Tumors and Excrescences. And if the nutritive Juice be too plentifully
received into any part, it produces the like effects.

The remote Causes are the straitness of the Passages occasioned by
Constriction, Compression, or painful Contractions of the Fibers; the viscidity
and thickness of the Humor; the disproportion of its Particles; the Influence
of an acid Ferment; the extraordinary distention of the Pores giving entrance
to large Quantities of nutritious Juice, etc.

The Swellings are cured by retrieving the natural Motion of the stagnating
Humors; or by Discussion, Suppuration, or artificial opening. Discussion is
proper for sanguine Tumors, and is accomplished by applying volatile
attenuating Ingredients, which temper the congealing Acid, and dissipat or
exhale the Humor. Suppuration is the Effect of a mutual Effervescence betwixt
the alkalin oily parts, and the Acid which precipitats 'em into a white Pus;
but if the Acid be predominant, the Tumor either degenerats into a Schirrus,
or breaks the Skin without Suppuration. Upon which account all ripening
Ingredients ought to be juicy and balm^, for tempering the Acid, and unbending
the Fibers of the part. Hence volatile Remedies which dissipate the thin and so
condensate the thick Humors, and those of an acid quality, are improper.
Indeed if nature be inactive, and the Humor be very thick, 'twill sometimes be
useful to join some sharper Ingredients to the ordinary Medicines. If the
Swelling cannot be forced to Suppuration, it ought to be opened by a ^aunce, or
by a potential Caustic of the Lee of Soap, or of the Butter of Antimony, or of
^^^nes Arsenicalis, which if well managed is an admirable Caustic, and causes
no pain.

The Medicines which unlock and set at liberty the stagnating Humor, are 1.
Emollient, such as Marsh-mall^ws, Pellitory of the Wall, Melilot, Fenugrec,
Linseed, white Lillies, Figs, recent fat of female Animals, Mucilages, ^ils,
etc. 2. Attenuating as well as well as Softening. Such are Smallage,
Elecampane, roasted Onyons, St. John's-wort, Saffron, Chamomil and
Elder-flowers, Turpentin, liquid Storax, Goose Fat, Goats Tallow, Gum
Tacamahac, Sperm^ Ceti, Oil of Dill, Oxymel of Squills, etc. 3. Discussive and
in some measure Diaphoretic; such are Briony, wild Cucumbers, crude Onyons
(Note, the rosting strips 'em of their volatile Salt) Swallow-wort, Sowbread,
Tobacco, Squills, Savin, Mustard-seeds, Gum Ammoniac, a Swallow's Nest, the
Urine and Dung of Animals, Spirit of Urin, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, Yest, Oil of
Scorpions, Oil of Bricks, Oil of Turpentin, Oil of Worms, the Plaster
Oxycroceum, or of Ammoniac, or of Hemlock, a Plate of Lead covered with
Mercury, the Ointment called Martiatum, etc. These Ingredients yield us Liquors
for Fomentation, Cataplasms, Ointments and Plasters. As,

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows, and white Lillies, of each an Ounce and a
half; the Leaves and Flowers of Mallows, and Melilot, and Elder-flowers, of
each a handful; fat Figs, in number six. Boil them in Whey or Goats Milk. And
to a Pound and a half of the strained Decoction, add of the recent Juice of
Onyons, or Oil of Chamomil three Ounces. Mix and foment the part.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows three Ounces; Roots of the Flower-de-luce,
an Ounce; Gole-wort, Mallows, and Wormwood-leaves, of each a handful; Chamomil
and Melilot-flowers, of each half a handful; Linseed an Ounce and a half:
Bruise them, and boil them in whey or Milk. Then beat the Pulp through a Sieve,
and add to it of Horse-dung three Ounces; Oil of Chamomil an Ounce and a half;
roasted Onyons two Ounces. Make a Cataplasm. Common Soap dissolved in hot Milk
is also very proper.

Take of the Mucilages of Marshmallow and Fenugrecseeds extracted with the
Decoction of Figs, of each an Ounce; Goose Fat six Drams; Oil of Chamomil and
Oil of white Lillies, of each half an Ounce. Mix, and add of the distilled Oil
of Turpentin a Dram; stinking Oil of Tartar a Scruple. Make a Liniment.

Take of the Plaster of Henbane two Ounces; Gum Ammoniac, dissolved with a
gentle Heat, an Ounce. Mix, and make a Plaster.

The discussive Ingredients are endowed with volatile subtle hot parts, for
subduing the Acid, melting down the thickened Humor, and opening the Pores.
Such are the Roots of Fennel, Elecampane, Flower-de-luce, Birth-wort, Pellitory
of Spain and Ginger; the Leaves of Dill, Chervil, Rosemary, Marjoram, Calamint,
wild Marjoram, Lavender and Hyssop; the Flowers of Roman Chamomil, Lavender,
Rosemary and Saffron; Juniper and Bay Berries; the Seeds of Cumin, Anise, and
Caraways; all the Spices, Castor, Storax, the Spirit of Wine camphoris'd, the
Essences of Aromatic Plants, their distilled Oils, etc. The Decoctions of such
Ingredients are used both for Fomentation and Fumigation; Cataplasms,
Liniments, and Plasters are likewise in use, but Care is to be taken that no
oily Ingredient stop the Pores of the Skin.

The ripening Ingredients ought to be, 1. Moist and juicy, for dissolving the
two combatant Salts that promote Suppuration. 2. Oily and temperate; and 3.
Endowed in some measure with a penetrating Virtue in opposition to the fixed
Acid. Such are Marshmallow-roots, white Lillies, roasted Onyons and Garlic; the
Emollient Seeds, Flowers, Oils, Ointments, Plasters, etc.

The general Doctrine of Tumors being thus premised, we proceed to the
Description of particular Swellings, which we cast into four Heads. 1. Those
that proceed from the Stagnation of Blood. 2. Such as are Critical. 3. Such as
arise from the Depravation of the Lymph; and 4. Those which relate to the
Blood Vessels.

1. Under the first Head we comprehend Inflammations, Blood-shot and St.
Antony's Fire. Inflammations are cured thus: Inwardly we exhibit the same
Medicines as we prescribed for a Pleurisy; to which we add Nitre, by reason of
the Fever that accompanies 'em. Externally we first bleed; and then endeavor
to discuss 'em by applying the Decoction of Sulphur in Urine, and the Plaster
of Sperma Ceti, or the Juice of River-Crabs and Horse-dung; or the Spirit of
Wine camphoriz'd, mixed with gentle Diaphoretics, and the Water of Spirma
Ceti^; or Quick-l^me-water with Sugar of Lead; or the Lee of the Ashes of
Vine-twigs mixed with Vinegar, Nitre and Salt. If these do not succeed, we must
endeavor to bring the Swelling to a head, by applying Milk, in which
Castle-soap is boiled. But if the Inflammation and Heat be great, we must avoid
oily fat Ingredients. If the Inflammation be spurious, that is, if a pituitous
Humor accompany the stagnating Blood, we may add Ripeners of the sharper kind.
Generally the Plasters of Melilot and Diachylon, softer'd with the Oil of
Li^^ies, or Ointment of sweet Almonds, are very proper. After the Swelling is
open, apply the Balsam of Sulphur and Plaster Diasulphuris, or an Ointment of
Turpentin, Honey of Roses, and Balsam of Peru dissolved in the Yelk of an Egg.
If the Ulcers are deep and hollow, inject the Decoction of Tobacco and
Plantain, mixed with Myrrh and Aloes, or tempered with Limewater and the
Spirit of Venice Triacle. Some are wont to apply Astringent Cataplasms and
Plasters in the beginning of an Inflammation, in order, as they fancy to
hinder the irruption of the Blood; but the Rules of Circulation have discovered
their Mistake.

Blood-shot is the effect of Contusions, or the Distortion of the Capillary
Vessels. Its internal Cure is the same as that of a Pleurisy. Externally we
apply a slice of raw Beef; or Venice Triacle mixed with the Syrup of Elder,
Sugar of Lead, and Salt of Wormwood. If these prove successless, we must have
recourse to Cataplasms of the Roots of Solomon's Seal and Comfry, bruised and
boiled in Wine; or to the Spirit of Wine camphoris'd and the Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac. If a nervous part be affected by the Contusion, we exhibit the Oil of
Lavender inwardly, and anoint the part with the Balsam of Peru mixed with
Spirit of Wine and Oil of Castor. If the Symptom do not disappear after these
Applications, we must endeavor to suppurat, and after Suppuration consolidate
as above. But when the Part quickly becomes black, and threatens a Gangrene, or
when the Contusion is deep and reaches beyond the Cuticle, it is not safe to
stay for Maturation; therefore we scarify it, and then apply Aromatic
Decoctions, or Limewater sharpened with the Spirit of Wine and sweet Mercury.

St. Antony's Fire is an Inflammation incident to Scorbutical Persons, and
seems to proceed from a subtle volatile Acid, that ferments with the volatile
Salt of the Blood, and causes it to stagnat. It is ushered in by shivering, and
attended by a notable Heat and Fever. Its Color is very red; when touched it
becomes white, but quickly reassumes its redness; It spreads over the
neighboring Parts, and is apt to degenerat into sordid Ulcers or Gangrenes.
When it besets the Arms, it is more troublesome than in the Legs: If it strike
in, or seize the Head, Face, Mouth, or Fundament, it is very dangerous. Its
internal Cure is accomplished by the Water, Essence, and Syrup of
Elder-flowers, mixed with the volatile Salt of Hartshorn, or that of Amber,
Camphyr, Sugar of Lead, Diaphoretic Antimony, Cinnabar of Antimony, and
absorbent Pouders. Purgation before the Declension is absolutely pernicious; as
also bleeding, unless the Disease be occasioned by a Contusion, Fracture or
Wound. Externally cold, astringent, oily and fat Ingredients are hurtful; the
more proper Medicines are the Decoctions of Elder-flowers in which Venice
Triacle and Castle-soap are dissolved; the Spirit of Wine impregnated with
Camphyr or Saffron; the Decoction of Myrrh, and Frankincense in Wine, mixed
with Camphyr and Saffron; the Water of Sperma Ceti, and that of Cow's Dung
distilled in May; the bruised Leaves of Radishes applied as Cataplasms; Clouts
dipped in Hare's Blood, or the first Flood of a Virgin's Terms; the Leaves of
Arsemart bruised and applied; the Pouders of Myrrh, Frankincense, Chalk, Sugar
of Lead and Camphyr, sprinkled upon brown Paper dipped into the Spirit of Wine
impregnated with Saffron. To all which we may add Laudanum Opiatum, as occasion
requires. The following Ointment is also much approved.

Take of the Powder of Elder-flowers three Drams; Ceruss a Dram and a half:
With Salt of Wormwood, and Venice Triacle make an Ointment. The Ointment of
Sugar of Lead and Syrup of Elder, is likewise of noted Efficacy.

If notwithstanding these Precautions, the Swelling be ulcerated, apply the
Water of Quicklime prepared with Elder flowers, and mixed with the Juice of
Cresses, Sugar of Lead and Ceruss.

2. Under the Second Head, viz. Critical Swellings, we comprehend Buboes,
Swellings of the Glandules behind the Ears, the fiery Botches called
Carbuncles; those called Furunculi, Phymata, and Phygilta; the Swellings in the
Fingers called Paronychia, and Chilblains in the Hands and Feet.

A Bubo is a Swelling in the Groin or Armpits. If it lie deep, low, and flat,
it is very dangerous. If it accompany pestilential Fevers, we ought to promote
its Suppuration, by avoiding Purgation and Bleeding; exhibiting Sudorifics; and
applying externally Cataplasms of the Juice of Celandine, mixed with Venice
Triacle, Soot, and roasted Onyons and Garlic; or Toads dried and soaked in
Wine. If the Skin be thick and the Swelling obstinat, we apply a blistering
Plaster, and when the Blister is open, Sala's Magnes Arsenicalis, which will
extract the Malignity in the form of a Crust. After this Crust is removed, we
cleanse the Ulcer with a Mixture of the Balsam of Sulphur, Ointment, Basilicon
and Venice Triacle. Venereal Bubo's are accounted for above.

The Critical Swellings behind the Ears ought to be brought to a Head when they
accompany malignant Fevers, by ripening Cataplasms and Plasters. To which, if
the Swellings are very hard, we add Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, and the
stinking Oils of Guajacum and Tartar. When the Swelling is ripe, it ought to be
opened and cleans'd.

Carbuncles are very malignant Swellings, caused by a sharp, caustic, lixivious
Salt separated from the Blood, which creates a bitter Heat and Pain, mortifies
and blackens the Part, and occasions a crusty Ulcer, like those that follow the
Application of potential Cauteries. This Ulcer is sometimes ushered in by
little whitish or livid Pushes; and is always surrounded with a red or livid
Circle, according as the adjacent parts are more or less mortified. It Is cured
thus: Apply the Butter of Antimony to the middle of the Ulcer, and make a
Circle with it about the mortified part: So the corrupt part will fall off, and
the further Progress of the Mortification be prevented. In the room of the
Butter of Antimony, some choose to apply Sala's Magnes Arsenicalis, the Part
being first prepared by a blistering Plaster. Valeriola orders it to be
scarify'd, and then he applies the following Cataplasm.

Take of the Juices of Comfry, Scabious and Marygold, of each an Ounce; Venice
Triacle three Drams; common Salt a Dram, and two Yelks of Eggs. Mix for a
Cataplasm: which separats the Crust, and prepares the Ulcer for being cleans'd
first by Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, then by the Oil of Eggs, the Balsam of Sulphur,
and the Plaster Diachylon with Gums. In the mean while we administer
internally Antimonial Sudorifics mixed with Acids.

The Swellings called Furunculi are the red, hot, pointed Botches appearing in
glandulous parts. They are cured by promoting Suppuration, and avoiding
Repellents; as likewise those called Phymata, which are round glandulous
Swellings, flat in the lower part, and pointed like a Plant in the upper. Those
styled Phygeltons are hard glandulous Swellings resembling a Mushroom adhering
to a Tree. They are cured by applying discussing Medicines mixed with softning
and anodyn Ingredients.

The Swelling called Paronychia is a painful Tumor of the Joints of the
Fingers, sometimes fixed, sometimes wandering from one Joint to another. The
Cause is a sharp corrosive Humor collected about the roots of the Nails, where
it gnaws the Periostium and Tendons, and so causes Inflammations, Imposthums,
and sometimes Gangrenes. For Cure, we administer Mercurial Purges, and apply
the Spirit of Earthworms, Balsam of Sulphur and the Plaster Diachylon; or a
Liniment of Earwax, Sugar of Lead, and the expressed Oil of Filberts. Some
order the Finger to be put into a new-laid Egg while it is hot, or into a
Dunghill, and held so for some time. Sometimes it is necessary to lay the
Swelling open, and then apply to it Venice Triacle dissolved in Wine. And for a
defensive to the whole Hand, a Liniment of the Ointments Populeum and Album
Camphoratum mixed with Opium and Venice Triacle.

The Chilblains or Kibes are whitish Swellings in the Hands and Feet, apt to
become bluish, and sometimes to ulcerat. They are generally occasioned by
Cold, and are cured or prevented by applying Rock-Oil, or the distilled Oil of
the Pine Tree, or the distilled Oil of Turpentine mixed with the expressed Oil
of Rapes. Some order the part to be rubbed Morning and Evening with Ice or cold
Snow, and to be washed with the Decoction of frozen Rapes; or with the Spirit
of Wine camphoris'd, or impregnated with Strawberries or Saffron. If the parts
are much injured, we apply Cataplasms of Yest, distilled Vinegar, and Sulphur
of Antimony. If the Kibes are ulcerated, we apply a Liniment expressed from a
Rape, excavated and filled with the Oil of St. John's-wort, and so roasted; or
sprinkle 'em with the Powder of Man's Dung, and then anoint 'em with an
Ointment of fresh Juniper Berries and boiled Butter; or of the Mucilage of
Quinces, extracted with Nightshade-water, and mixed with prepared Tutty.

3. The Tumors next in order are such as proceed from the Disorders of the
Lymph. Such are the serous, watery, soft, painless Swellings, that receive no
impression by the pressure of one's Finger, and if looked upon sideways, seem
to be pellucid. They proceed from the Obstruction of the Lymph, and are cured
internally by administering Diuretics, and the Decoctions of sudorific Woods;
externally by applying Limewater impregnated with Spirit of Wine, and
Cataplasms of Cow's Dung, Cumin-seeds and Lie; or the Plaster of Bay Berries
mixed with Goat's Dung and Honey.

If the Lymph be viscid, it occasions a soft, white, painless Swelling that
retains Pits by the pressure of one's Finger, and is called an Oedema, which
generally accompanies Chronical Distempers: For the internal Cure we prescribe
stomachical and aromatic Medicines, and whatever corrects the Crudities of the
Chyle, that are justly accounted the Causes of viscid Lymph. Externally we
apply Discussives, for it is in vain to attempt Suppuration. As,

Take of the Leaves of Tamarisk, Rosemary and Rue, of each a handful: boil them
in Wine till they become soft; then add of the Meal of Vetches and Bran, of
each three Ounces; Cow's Dung four Ounces; Duck's Fat an Ounce and a half; Honey
four Ounces. Make a Cataplasm. If Oedema's happen in the declensions of
Fevers, Cataplasms of the Herb Robert or of Celandin bruisd with Wormwood are
very proper. Some fumigate the Parts with Amber and Vinegar upon red hot
stones, and apply the Plaster of Bayberries mixed with distilled Oil of Amber,
renewing it twice a day. Rosemary-leaves and Juniper berries boild in Lie for a
wash for the Feet, or Bay Berries boiled in Limewater and the Lee of
Vine-twigs to be applied with a Sponge, are much approved. If the Swelling be
hard, a Cataplasm of Goats Dung and Man's Urine is very proper.

If the viscid Lymph be fixed by an Acid, and stagnat in glandulous parts, it
creats scrophulous Swellings called the King's Evil, some of which are hard,
some soft, some loose and moveable, others immovable; some painless, and
others very painful and shooting, as being near akin to Cancers. These Tumors
we endeavor to discuss by applying Cataplasms of the Leaves and Roots of wild
Cucumbers with Goat's-Dung, and the Plaster de Ranis with Mercury; or Gum
Caran mixed with Mercury and Turpentin; and anointing with Helmont's distilled
Oil. In their Infancy the Fat of Vipers is also very proper. If they cannot be
discussed, we must endeavor to bring 'em to maturity by applying the Plaster
of Melilot mixed with the Oil of sweet Almonds and Fat of Snakes; or Platerus's
Plaster of Tobacco, or Sala's Magnetic Plaster mixed with Diasulphuris. When
they are ripe, we ought not to open 'em, but leave 'em to their natural
leisure, that so the better part of the Glandule may be dissolved into Pus.
After they are broke, we apply the common Digestives mixed with precipitat
Mercury well washed. If the Swellings are loose and pendulous, we tie 'em with
a Horse-hair, and so by degrees force their separation. If they are enclosed in
proper Tunicles, 'twill be needful to extirpate the whole Membrane by the hand
of a Surgeon.

The internal Cure of the King's Evil is compassed by purging with sweet
Mercury, and black Hellebor, and administering the Decoction of Swallow-wort,
Pile-wort, Dropwort and Broom, or the following absorbent Powder. Take of burnt
Sea-spunge three Ounces; Bone of the Cuttlefish, Jaw bone of a Pike, prepared
Crab's-eyes, long Peper, white Ginger, Roots of Pellitory of Spain, Galls, and
calcined Egg-shells, of each an Ounce. Make a Powder. Dose half a Dram to be
given with a convenient quantity of Arcanum Duplicatum. The Powder of Lizards
with Honey in the Form of an Electuary is also of excellent use.

Next to the Kings Evil are Schirrus's which are hard, immovable Tumors in
soft fleshy parts, both internal and external. They proceed from the
Coagulation of Blood, as when they follow Inflammations, or from the stagnation
of crude Chyle, either in company with the Blood or in any other Vehicle. For
the most part these Tumors are free of Pain: if they happen to be very painful
and livid, they are of a spurious race, and apt to degenerat into Cancers. For
Cure, we endeavor to discuss a Schirrus by applying Cow's Dung boiled in
Vinegar, or the stinking Oil of Tartar, and that of Earthworms mixed with
Spirit of Wine; or Cataplasms of Briony-roots, Goats-Dung, Lie and Soap. If
these be insufficient, we must have recourse to the Gums, especially Gum
Ammoniac and the Plaster of Hemlock with Mercury, or a Plate of Lead applied
to the part. If the Tumor cannot be discussed, we must bring it to a Head with
ripening Ingredients; but withal take care that they be not too violent, lest
it degenerat into a Cancer.

A Cancer for the most part is the Consequent of schirrous and scrophulous
Tumors, and frequently invades the Breasts and glandulous places. If it come
by it self, it appears first as a Tumor no bigger than a Bean, and by degrees
increases, becomes hard, black, livid, and molested with shooting pains.
Afterward it festers, stinks, and corrodes the adjacent parts, being
surrounded with Veins swollen with black Blood. The immediate Cause is a volatile
corrosive Acid, which if it be not supplied with fresh Recruits may lie hid in
the part a long time before it fester, and then we call it an occult Cancer.
But as soon as it becomes an Ulcer, it is justly intitl'd a manifest one. If a
Cancer proceed from internal Causes: If the whole Mass of Blood, and the Bowels
are tainted: If the Tumor lie very deep or near to large Vessels: If the pain
be violent, and frequent Bleedings ensue, it is a dangerous case. If a Cancer be
occult, it ought not to be tampered with, nor is it safe to apply any thing
except some very temperat Alcalies; such as the Juice of Nightshade beaten in a
leaden Mortar, the Juice of the Prick-thistle called Onophordon, the Pulp of
rotten Apples, or Quick-lime-water prepared with the Water of rotten Apples,
the Juice of River-Crabs and Man's Dung. Sugar of Lead, and all Preparations
from Lead are of excellent use; especially a Plate of Lead covered with
Quicksilver. Ointments and Cerecloths of burnt Lead, mixed with the Oil of
Roses, Oil of Frogs, etc. are also recommended; but all oily things ought to be
cautiously used. In the mean while 'twill be proper to exhibit internally
absorbent Anti-acid Pouders followed by Purges of black Hellebor and sweet
Mercury. After which the Sugar of Lead, the Tincture of Antimony tartaris'd,
the volatile Spirit of Tartar, the Decoction of River-Crabs in Milk; and above
all, the Powder of Wood-lice mixed with Crab's-eyes, are used with notable
success: sometimes Issues are useful. As for manifest Cancers, we shall have
occasion to take notice of 'em afterward under the Head of Ulcers.

The Acidity of the Lymph stands also charged, as being the Cause of the Gummy
Tumors that grow upon the Bones in the French Pox: For it is the vicious Acid
that perverts the natural Nourishment of the Bones, and occasions its
degeneracy into a preternatural Swelling. They are cured internally by the
sudorific Decoctions, or by a Salivation with Mercury interlac'd with
Preparations of Steel and Vipers. Externally we apply the dissolving Gums, with
the distilled Oil of Guajacum and Mercury, or a Plate of Lead covered with
Quicksilver, or Quicksilver congealed by the Fumes of Lead. For mitigating
the pain we may add Opium to all such Compositions.

The occasional Depravation of the nourishment of the several parts of the Body
will also cause several sorts of Tumors. As upon broken Bones a Callus; upon
tendonous places a Ganglion, and upon fleshy parts fleshy Excrescences. The
first two are discussed by applying a Plate of Lead with Mercury, or the
stinking Oil of Tartar with Castle-Soap, or the Spirit of Wine with the Juice
of Rue; or in obstinat Cases, the Plaster de Ranis with Mercury. Fleshy
Excrescences, unless they adhere to the Nerves or Arteries, ought to be cut
off, and the Root eaten away by the Butter of Antimony and Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum.

Some Excrescences are enclosed within their own proper Membrans, and contain
peculiar Humors, sometimes like Honey, sometimes like Pap, and in other Cases
like Soap or Fat. The Cause of such Excrescences is the distortion and
enlargement of the Fibers, occasioning a large accession of Juice which
distends and adds to the Growth of the misplaced Fibers, till by shooting out
new Tendrels, they join one another in the Form of a Concave Membrane,
containing the stagnating Juice variously altered according to the different
occasions. They frequently happen about the Head and Neck, and share the common
Fate of some nervous Swellings, in being liable to alterations from the Moon.
For Cure; if they are recent, we may attempt to discuss 'em with Gum Ammoniac,
Balsam of Peru, Sulphur, etc. If they cannot be discussed, we ply 'em with
sharp suppurating Ingredients; such as Gum Ammoniac, Pellitory of Spain,
Euphorbium, and Oil of Amber. When the Tumors are thus ripened, we open 'em
with a Lance, and apply a Caustic of the Ointment Aegyptiacum, the dulcified
Earth of Vitriol and Salt, for extirpating the Membrans; But if the Excrescence
be hard and stubborn, 'twill be needful to set aside all discussing or
suppurating Ingredients, and cut up the skin cross-ways so as not to touch the
Membran; then separat the one from the other, and cut out the Membran with the
enclosed Tumor by the Root: and after all, stop the bleeding and cleanse the
Ulcer, as in other cases.

Sometimes when the nervous Fibers in the Skin are tore or corroded, they throw
out their nutritious Juice which settles into Warts; and in the Toes of the
Feet, where the nutritious Juice of the Bones is squeezed out, into hard Corns.
Some of these Warts and Corns are fixed so deep into the Tendons, that they
cannot be extirpated without incurring the danger of Inflammations, Convulsions
or Gangrenes. But others are only superficial and easily removed. Warts are
extirpated by applying the Juice of Celandine, or the Ashes of Briony mixed
with its Juice, or the Juice of Spurge, scarifying the part gently before
Application. Some commend an Ointment of Honey with the Spirit of Sulphur, and
the Solution of Sal Ammoniac in Water, or the Juice that Snails cast forth when
rubbed with Salt; but the best method of rooting them out, is to touch 'em with
Butter of Antimony or Aqua fortis, or rather to burn them out with a hot Iron.
If they are pendulous and hang by a small Root, a thread of Silk tied about the
Root will cut off their nourishment, and make 'em fall off. As for the venereal
Warts that generally invade the Genitals, we apply the Solution of sublimat
Mercury and Alum in Plantain-water.

As for Corns, we order the Feet to be washed, and the thick Skin to be scraped
off; then we apply Galbanum or Gum Ammoniac, or the Plaster of Hemlock with
Mercury softened in the Oil of Bricks. Some recommend pieces of raw Beef, or
Onions mixed with Soap in the form of a Cataplasm. If these prove successless,
we apply Aqua fortis, or Butter of Antimony mixed with Honey, taking care to
defend the neighboring parts, and take off the Eschara with the Plaster
Diachylon with Gums. But if the Corns lie deep, and be fixed in the Tendons,
it is dangerous to apply Caustics, or to cut them with a Knife; tho in other
Cases, such Operations may succeed.

Sometimes we meet with spungy Swellings about the Joints, that proceed from
the nutritious Juice of the Membrans mixed with the glutinous Matter that
bedews the Joints. The best way of curing 'em (if so be they admit of a Cure)
is to throw astringent Pouders upon 'em; such as the Sugar of Lead, Vitriol,
Calaminar Stone, and sometimes precipitat Mercury. Stronger Caustics, or
Emollient Ointments, or manual Section, are for the most part very dangerous,
by reason of their tendency to Cancers.

4. The fourth Class was allotted for the Tumors of the Blood Vessels, which
are of two sorts; 1. Those of the Arteries called Aneurisma's. 2. Those of the
Veins called Varix's. The former are occasioned by cutting the Artery in
Blood-letting; or relaxating its Coats by violent Motion, Crying, etc. or by
the Corrosion of some internal Cause; all which are apt to occasion a
Collection of Blood about the injured part of the Artery, and consequently a
Tumor. The Signs are a Swelling rising gradually according to the Pulsation of
the Artery; if the Artery lie near the Skin, its Color is reddish; when the
Swelling is pressed by ones Finger, it sinks and disappears, without it be
inveterate. It Is cured by opening a Vein in the opposite part of the Body,
avoiding all oily fat things, and applying Bole Armenic, Frankincense, Earth of
Vitriol, Dragon's Blood, and Laudanum Opiatum, with a Plate of Lead and a
strong Ligature. In France they follow a new Method; as for example in the Arm,
they squeeze the superior part of the Artery so close, that no Pulse is
perceived; then they open the Tumor with a Lance, and remove the congealed
Blood. Having discovered the Wound of the Artery, they apply to it a little
ball of Vitriol wrapped up in Cotton, and the Pouders of Sarcocol, Frankincense,
and Pine-tree-Rosin with Tow, and above all Bolsters covered with the common
Digestive, and tied down with a strong Ligature. The upper Bolsters are renewed
every day; but the Ball of Vitriol which is no bigger than a Pea, and which is
insensibly dissolved by the Blood that soaks through the Cotton, is suffered to
continue till it fall off.

The immediate Cause of a Varix is the Relaxation and Distention of the softer
Fibers of the Veins. The remote Causes are the thickness of the Blood, or the
Compression of corresponding Veins, as when the Iliac Vessels being straightened
by big Bellies, occasion a Varix in the Veins of the Legs. The Diagnostics are
the Turgidity, and bluish Blackness of the Veins. It seldom requires a Cure
unless it be painful or threaten a Rupture, Ulcer or Gangrene. If it be very
painful, we apply the Ointment Populeum, with Mucilages of Flea-wort and
Fenugrec-seeds, the Oil of Chamomil and Flower of Beans. If they are ulcerated,
apply the Plaster of Frog's Spawn with Hartshorn, Frankincense and sweet
Mercury. If the Tumor be very high, and apt to break, open it with a golden or
silver Needle, and apply a Plate of Lead, or foment with a Sponge soaked in the
Decoction of Alum, Salt, and the Fruit of Acacia in Vinegar; or apply a
Cataplasm of the Flower of Lupins, dried Goat's Dung, and Vinegar in which a
hot Iron has been five times extinguished; remembering still, to tie a strong
Ligature about the part. If the Varix is open and bleeds excessively, apply the
Powder of Hog's Dung, or Clouts dipped in the Solution of Steel and Alum. In
the mean while we ought to take care that the Ligatures do not hinder the
Circulation of the Blood, and exhibit inwardly attenuating Sudorific Decoctions.

CHAP. II. Of Wounds.
THE Nourishment of wounded parts, and the Blood which flows from 'em, being
corrupted by the external Air, become acid, corrode the nervous Fibers,
extinguish the innate Spirit, and produce all the tragical Consequents of
Wounds.

The Wounds of internal parts are discovered by the lame performance of their
respective Offices, or by the alteration of Excrements voided by 'em. Wounds of
sanguine parts ought to be carefully distinguished from those of the Nerves or
Membrans; as also the Curable from the Incurable; some of which are mortal,
some not. The mortal are said to be such, either when an internal Bowel
essential to Life is disabled, or when the Blood, Spirits, or Vital Juices are
too copiously evacuated, or thrown upon some Cavity from which they cannot be
retrieved.

Thus the Wounds of the Heart are not always mortal, without they reach into
the Cavities, especially the left: but those of the Lungs, Bronchia and
Windpipe; of the Middrif, especially its tendonous part; of the internal side
of the Guller and Orifices of the Stomac; of the Guts (excepting that part of
the straight Gut which may be reached from without) of the Caul, Sweetbread,
and Liver (especially if they reach the large Vessels) of the Gall, Bladder,
and Branches of the choleric Passage; of the Spleen, which is full of Arterious
Blood; of the Conduit of the Breast, the Navel-string, Kidneys, and the Neck of
the Bladder; of the Womb while the Woman is with Child; of the Medulla of the
Brain, intercostal Nerve, Cerebellum, and Marrow of the Backbone, betwixt the
Vertebrae of the Neck, and those of the Back: these I say are all mortal. Those
of the Mesentery are curable if the large Vessels be safe: as likewise those of
the cortical part of the Brain, of the temporal Muscles, of the bottom and
muscular part of the Bladder, and the inferior part of the spinal Marrow, if
it be not cut acro^s.

A Surgeon's Duty with reference to Wounds is to remove the corrupt Blood and
Juice that hinders Coalition, to join the divided parts, and apply such
vulnerary balmy Ingredients, as preserve their nutritious Juice from
Corruption. Now for so much as the natural Temperature of the nutritious Juice
consists in a temperat oily volatile Salt, surrounded with a Dewy Vehicle, and
consequently its Degeneracy is justly called Acidity; we ought therefore to
keep the Wound safe from the Injury of the Air, which has a notable Virtue of
creating Acids, and to untye or open it as seldom as ever we can. Some Surgeons
being more amused with the Effect than the Cause, choose rather to provide for
the removal of the Gore and Filth, than be so nice in exposing the Wound to the
Air. But as their Practice is unaccountable, so it ought not to be looked upon
as a Precedent. The Surgeon's Breath, especially that of drunken Persons or
Women in their Terms, is likewise prejudicial to a Wound; and therefore ought
to be avoided as well as the Influence of the Moon, which stupifies and benums
whatever is exposed to it, as appears by gathering its Rays with a Unequal Glass.

Thus the Corruption of the natural Juice is prevented by applying temperat,
volatile, balmy, saline Medicines, such as the Balsam of Peru, Turpentin, Oil of
St. John's wort, Balsam of Sulphur, and especially Paracelsus's Balsam of
Samech prepared from the Salt of Tartar volatiliz'd by the Spirit of Wine. The
common expressed Oils without they be further prepared are pernicious, by
reason of their latent Acid; as also all sharp volatile Salts, because they
increase the Pain, melt down and consume the Nourishment of the Part, and
hinder Consolidation. But above all, let Acids be strictly prohibited. In the
mean while we administer internally Medicines prepared from the vulnerary
Plants, Dog's Dung, Earthworms, burnt River-Crabs, and the Blood of Goats.
Crab's-eyes mixed with Wine are also of good use; for they qualify and correct
the Acid of the Wine, which of it self is highly pernicious. Nay the chief
Virtue of all vulnerary Ingredients is that of subduing an Acid; thus Mercury
fixed by Acids is revived by boiling in the Juices of vulnerary Plants.

Some are wont to apply Digestive suppurating Ingredients to all Wounds; but if
the Wound be free of Contusion, and no heterogeneous Substance be lodged in it,
they are noxious, as causing a needless Afflux of Matter, and converting the
Wound into an Ulcer. It Is true that Wounds received by a Pistol, which
generally carry Contusion along with them, or those of the Head which require
to be kept open for some time, or such as are already ulcerated, require
Digestives. Such are Turpentin, the Yelk of an Egg, Myrrh, Balsam of Peru, Oil
of Roses, Camphyr, Honey, and in a word, all oily Alcalies, to which we add
Absorbent Pouders, as Chalk, Lead, Copper, etc. After Digestion we add some
sharper Ingredients for cleansing the Ulcer.

The remaining part of a Surgeon's Office is to take out the heterogeneous
Substance, if any such there be; and to join the divided parts either by
convenient Ligatures, or sewing 'em together. The heterogeneous Substance is
extracted by proper Instruments, or by applying the fat of Hares with Amber and
living Crabs, or the dried Tongue of a Fox soaked in Wine, or a Plaster of
Honey, Yest, and Misseltoe of the Oak: and administering in the mean while the
vulnerary Decoctions, such as that of Dittany with Crab's-eyes. For joining the
sides of the Wound, we use a Fillet of two ends meeting in one Body, which
joint Body we apply to the part opposite to the Wound, and bring the two ends
across upon it, so as to join its Lips. These Fillets will serve for joining
simple Wounds that run along with the length of the Fibers; but for large ones
that come across the Fibers, or the Joints, or when any part is almost cut off
to a very Point, then 'twill be needful to few up the Part with a Needle and
Thread. But we ought to take care not to attempt sewing up a nervous Part, for
fear of enlarging the Pain or pricking a Nerve; as also when we few, not to
bring the sides of the Wound, too close, because they are apt to swell; and
besides, the purulent matter, if it have not a sufficient Vent left, will
recoil, and create hidden Ulcers, or corrode the Bones.

Wounds that come by Pricks rather than Cuts are plied with Tents, which
provide for the Incarnation of the remote bottom of the Wound, before its
surface be covered with Flesh. But in applying Tents we ought to observe these
Cautions; 1. They must not be too long applied, because they retard
Consolidation. 2. In nervous parts they ought not to be long or hard for fear
of irritation. 3. They ought not to be too large for fear of rubbing off the
Gore which cements the sides of the Wound, or hurting the growing tender Flesh,
and denying Reception to the purulent matter. When the Wound is a closing we
ought not to be too liberal in applying astringent Pouders, because they
straiten the Pores, harden the Fibers, and so occasion a Scar or Roughness,
especially in adult Persons, whose nutritious cementing Juice is not so balmy
as that of young People. To prevent such Deformities, let the Fat of a Graylin
be frequently dropped into the Wound when it begins to consolidate. It Is true,
that moderat Astringents are useful for drying up the thin serous Humor that
accompanies the nutritious Juice of the part, cramps its cementing Faculty, and
renders the part flaccid, soft, and overgrown with luxuriant Flesh. But in
simple Wounds, where there is no loss of Substance, they are not so very
necessary.

To conclude, we may justly infer from the foregoing Premises, that vulnerary
Medicines are enriched with a temperat volatile oily Salt, and a gentle
astringent Force, as being such as do not of themselves create new Flesh, but
only preserve the natural state of the nutritious balmy Juice, which alone is
able to consolidate and repair the loss. They are prescribed in these or the
like Forms. First, Internally,

Take of River-Crabs, in number twelve; Comfryroots an Ounce; Leaves of Bugloss
and Ground Ivy, and Tops of St. John's-wort, of each a handful: Boil them in
Water and Wine, and sweeten the strained Decoction with the Syrup of
Ground Ivy; and if a nervous part be wounded, add Oil of Amber. Dose, six
Ounces twice a day. Note 1. The simple vulnerary Medicines are best. Therefore
Crab's-eyes and Diaphoretic Antimony; in Fevers Antimonial Nitre, and in
nervous Wounds the Oil or Spirit of Amber, are sufficient for internal use.
Note 2. When any heterogeneous Matter is lodged within the Wound, or when it is
very foul, we add to such Decoctions, Savin, Mugwort, Speedwel, Agrimony, etc.
and when the Wound is sufficiently cleans'd, leave 'em out.

Secondly, Vulnerary Medicines are prescribed for Injections: As, Take of the
Herbs Speedwel, Winter-green, Sanicle and Tobacco leaves, of each two handfuls;
Dog's Dung four Ounces. Boil them in Water. Add to the strained Liquor Spirit
of Wine with Honey, and wash the Wound with the Mixture.

Thirdly, They Are prescribed in the Forms of Oils or Balsams to be dropped into
the Wound; of which the Oil of St. John's wore, Balsam of Sulphur, or that of
Peru, and especially Capaivi, are infinitely the best.

Fourthly, Ointments: As, Take of Benzoin an Ounce; Spirit of Wine an Ounce and
a half; Mastic a Dram; of the black Balsam, half an Ounce. Make a Liniment. Or,
Take of Ear-wax two Drams; Sugar of Lead two Drams: With the expressed Oil of
Walnuts make an Ointment. Note 1. Ear-wax is of peculiar use for Wounds of
nervous parts. 2. Spirit of Wine not over-rectify'd is of admirable Efficacy
for preventing Corruption and Consolidating. Hence Venice Triacle mixed with it
and applied to the Wound is much approved.

Fifthly, Plasters; of which Paracelsus's Oppodeldoch, and Crollius's Styptic
Plaster are the best.

Some pretend to cure Wounds by Sympathy; as by mixing the Blood of the Wound
with the Vitriol of Copper calcined by the Sun; or by applying Arsmart to the
Wound, it being first dipped in cold Water, and then removing it from the Wound
while it is hot, and burying it in a Dunghill. But the Colcothar of Vitriol
washed and dissolved, infused or boiled in Wine for washing the Wound, is
certainly a useful Medicine.

The general Cure of Wounds being thus premised, we come next to consider some
particular sorts; as 1. Bruises, or those which partake of Contusion. If the
Contusion be very considerable, 'twill be needful to scarify the Wound; if not,
the common Digestives and suppurating Medicines will sufficiently cleanse it;
to which we may add the Oil of Wax, expressed Oil of St. John's-wort, and the
Plaster of Cummin. Toward the end of the Cure, we may apply the Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac, distilled with Quicklime. -- Of this Nature are the Wounds received
from Guns; for so much as Bullets tear and bruise wherever they come, in curing
them we ought first to promote Suppuration by applying Tents dipped in Spirit of
Wine, and covered with the following Liniment.

Take of the Oil of White Lillies four Pound; boil two Puppies in it till their
Bones be dissolved; then add of Earthworms boiled in Wine a Pound. Boil them
together, and when the Liquor is strained, add Venice Turpentin three Gunces,
Spirit of Wine an Ounce and a half. Make a Liniment. After Suppuration is
obtained, let the Wound be cleans'd with the following Ointment.

Take of Venice Turpentin five Ounces; Oil of Roses an Ounce; Honey of Roses
strained three Ounces; Myrrh, Aloes, Mastic, and round-rooted Birth-wort, of
each half a Dram; Flower of Barley three or four Drams. Make an Ointment to be
sprinkled with Spirit of Wine. If the Part be much corrupted, we may add
precipitat Mercury. If the Bones be seized with Aches after they are cured (as
it sometimes happens in these Wounds) anoint 'em with the Oil of Turpentin. If
when the Wound was received, the Gun was very near the Person, the wounded part
will be likewise burnt; in which case Quick-lime-water with the Juice of
River-Crabs and Phlegm of Alum is very useful.

2. Malignant and venomous Wounds. The Causes are a poisoned Instrument, or the
biting of an angry or mad Animal. The Symptoms are an unaccountable Pain,
sudden blewness or blackness of the Part, and its tendency to a Gangrene;
difficulty of Breathing, cold Sweats, Swoonings, Headaches, etc. If the Wound
be deep, it must be scarify'd, and Venice Triacle with Spirit of Wine applied
to it. If it was caused by the biting of a Viper, apply a living Toad bruised,
or the Powder of a dried Toad in Vinegar, and touch the part with a hot Iron,
but so as not to burn it, and exhibit Urine to drink. For the Bites of mad
Dogs, etc. apply the Stone of an Indian Serpent, or in want of that, Sala's
Magnetic Plaster mixed with the Powder of River-Crabs; or a Cataplasm of
Onyons, Garlic, Venice Triacle, and Yest. After the Poison is extracted, we
apply Digestives as above. Wounds received by poisoned Darts, etc. are cured
after the same manner. In the mean while we administer internally Venice
Triacle, Diaphoretic Antimony, etc. with distilled Vinegar.

3. Wounds of Veins and Arteries. In which the most pressing Indication is to
stop the Bleeding: For this end we apply styptic Liquors of the Solution of the
Vitriol of Steel mixed with a half quantity of the Solution of Alum in some
Astringent Vehicle; or a mixture of strong Vinegar, Crocus of Steel, and the
dulcified Caput Mortuum of Vitriol; or above all, the Moss of a dead Man's
Scull, or the Mushroom called Crepitus Lupi, tied very hard to the part. If the
bleeding be obstinat, and if there be no Nerves or Tendons in the way, we apply
a Caustic of Vitriol calcined till it become white, mixed with Crepitus Lupi.
For Amputations, Ligatures are of very good use. Internally we exhibit nitrous
Acids with Astringent Tinctures. But in the mean while the Patient must
carefully avoid all Emotions either of Body or Mind.

4. Wounds of the Nerves, or nervous Parts, are very dangerous, by reason of
their liableness to Convulsions, Inflammations, Gangrenes, etc. If a Nerve or
Tendon be pricked, drop into it the distilled Oil of Turpentin mixed with
Spirit of Wine, and Camphyr or Euphorbium. If a Nerve or Tendon be cut across,
avoid all Tents, and expressed Oils, or fat Ingredients; and apply volatile
vulnerary Balsams sharpened with the distilled Oil of Amber, or the Powder of
Earthworms mixed with Turpentin, or the Powder of Snake's Cast-Coats mixed with
that of Crabseyes; or a Mixture of the Oil of Earthworms, Oil of Foxes, Man's
Fat and Juice of Earthworms, rubbing the whole Interval betwixt the wounded
part, and the Original of the Nerve. Sometimes when Tendons are cut across,
they may be few'd together with a fine Needle, according to the Example of a
late Instance of that Nature in Paris.

5. The Wounds of the Breast. In curing of which we ought to mind these
Cautions: 1. That if the Wound be lower than the seventh Rib, it belongs to the
Belly, and not to the Breast. 2. 'Twill be needful to use Tents for the Wounds
of the Breast; but they ought not to be put in during the time of Inspiration,
lest they be sucked in: and besides, they ought to have large Heads to prevent
their Ingress. 3. Internally Dieuretics are very proper, by reason that matter
in the Breast has ofttimes a tendency to pass by Urine. 4. Antipleuritical
Medicines will be also very convenient for preventing the Evils that may ensue.

6. Wounds of the Head: In all which the Belly ought to be kept open. If
they are only superficial, let a Plaster of Tacamahac, and the Plaster of
Betony be applied. If the Scull be injured, apply the Pouders of the
Flowerde-luce, Aloes and Myrrh mixed with Spirit of Wine, or distilled Oil of
Turpentin. If the Meninges and Scull be cut quite through, we must stop the
internal Bleeding by the Pouders of Aloes, Frankincense, and Bole Armenic mixed
with the Whites of Eggs, and put into the Wound Clouts impregnated with the Oil
of Turpentin or Balsam Capaivi. Some apply the Oil of Roses, but that and all
fat viscid Ingredients are absolutely pernicious. As for Bruises of the Head;
if they are without Wounds, and are not likely to be discussed, we must promote
their Suppuration, and open 'em very quickly, lest the stagnating matter should
injure the Scull. If they are accompanied by Wounds, but such as do not injure
the Cranium, we apply a Digestive of Turpentin, Gum Elemi, Fat of Beavers, and
that of Hogs. If the Scull be hurt by Bruises, they cause either a Fracture, or
a Fissure, or Depression of the Bone; of which more anon.

We shall conclude this Chapter of Wounds, with a few of their most remarkable
Symptoms. 1. Inflammations of Wounds are cured by applying Limewater or the
Juice of River-Crabs with Camphyr and Sugar of Lead. 2. An Erysipelas, by
applying Venice Triacle and Salt of Wormwood dissolved in Spirit of Wine. 3.
Luxuriant over-growing Flesh caused by the spongyness and flagginess of the
Part is removed by applying burnt Alum, Crocus Metallorum, the Ointment
Aegyptiacum, Platerus's Green Water, or rather the Powder of the Crystals of
Silver dissolved in Spirit of Nitre. 4. The Pain which generally attends Wounds
of nervous parts is mitigated by applying a Mixture of the Oil of Earthworms,
distilled Oil of Lavender, and that of Amber. 5. A Synovia or Efflux of the
nutritious Juice of the wounded Joints, is cured by applying Clouts soaked in
the Water distilled from River-Crabs or in a Virgin's first Menstrual Blood; or
a Cataplasm of Hog's Dung boiled with the Blood of the Wound; or the Moss of a
dead Man's Scull, or Wurzius's brown Ointment; or in the room of 'em all, the
following Powder, viz. Take of the Powder of Oyster-shells an Ounce;
Calaminar-stone, Cuttle-bones, and Jaw-bones of Pikes, of each two Drams;
prepared Spodium, and seal'd-Earth or Alum, of each a Dram and a half. Mix and
make a Powder. 6. Convulsions of wounded parts are cured internally as an
Epilepsy, and externally by applying the Balsam of Peru with the distilled Oil
of Amber, and if a Nerve be pricked, treating it as above; or if it be
imperfectly cut, by cutting it or the Tendon quite through, and so saving the
Person's Life, tho at the expense of the Sense of that Part. 7. The Fevers
that attend Wounds are for the most part ushered in by extraordinary Heat,
Redness of the Eyes, unwonted pain, and frequent Flushing; they are cured by
Sudorifics, such as Crab's-eyes, Diaphoretic Antimony, Coral, and Sal Ammoniac
mixed with Nitre and the Juice of Citrons.

CHAP. III. Of Ulcers.
ULcers are the Corrosion of the Fibers, occasioned by a sharp acid Ferment
flowing from the corrupted Nourishment of the Part, or the vicious Blood and
Lymph. The Acidity of this corrosive Ferment is sufficiently made out by the
acid Smell of Plasters, after they have been applied to Ulcers, and the
unfitness of Alcalin Caustics to corrode, as being more apt to mortify. In
nervous parts, whose nutritious Juice is not laden with such a strong volatile
Salt, as that of the sanguine; and in glandulous places, where the Lymph does
naturally incline to Acidity, Ulcers are more troublesome and dangerous than
elsewhere. In Persons whose Blood is degenerat from its volatile State, and
become acid, Ulcers are very obstinat, and scarce curable, without the Crasis
of the Blood be retrieved. If an Ulcer be closed before the malignant Ferment
be quite drained, 'twill either relapse in the same place, or corrupt the
adjacent Bones, or display its Energy in another part of the Body. If they be
much exposed to the Air, their Lips become hard and callous, and sometimes dry:
If they are much discolored, they signify a Gangrene: If they continue long,
they cause Consumptions, Fevers, and Ulcers of the Lungs. If the Matter that
issues from 'em be bloody, thin, sharp, yellow, or stinking, it is not so
favorable as when it is white and thick. When Ulcers become dry, unaccountably,
and of a sudden, they portend imminent Death.

Ulcers are cured by volatile Acalies and fixed Absorbents, which mortify the
prevailing Acid. The external Remedies are of three sorts. 1. Digesting. 2.
Cleansing; and 3. Healing. Those of a digesting Force are the more temperat
Alkalies: such as Turpentin, Yelks of Eggs, Mastic, Oil of St. John's-wort,
Myrrh, etc. and are used for qualifying the sharp bloody matter, and working it
into a thick Consistence called Pus. For the prevailing Acid converts the
nutritious Juice of the part into a sharp thin matter, which ought to be
qualified by an Alcali, in order to become thick; but so as not to destroy all
the force of the Acid, which entitles it to whitish Color. When the matter is
thus prepared, we proceed to cleansing Remedies, that is, sharper Alkalies that
destroy the Acid more powerfully, and hinder the Conversion of the nutritious
Juice into corrupt matter. Their cleansing Virtue is only accidental, and less
to be regarded than that which directly stifles the Causes. Of this Nature are
the Decoctions of vulnerary Plants in Limewater, or Cataplasms of the bruised
Leaves of vulnerary Plants which are infinitely more useful than all the Oils,
Ointments, and Plasters of the Shops; the last being of no use but for
defending the Wound from Air and Cold.

Take of Tobacco-leaves two Handfuls; Wormwood-tops and the Herb Speedwell, of
each a handful; Roots of round-rooted Birthwort an Ounce; Juniper Berries half
an Ounce; Crude Alum from three to six Drams. Boil them in
Black-Smith's-water, strain the Liquor to be injected into the Ulcer, adding at
every Injection a convenient quantity of the Spirit of Wine.

Take of Limewater a Pound; Sweet Mercury two Drams; Spirit of Venice Triacle
camphoris'd an Ounce. Mix, etc.

Take of the Crocus of Steel, prepared by Precipitation two or three Drams;
Calaminar Stone or sealed Earth a Dram; Lac Lunae a Dram and a half; Mace,
Myrrh, Olibanum and Aloes, of each a Dram; Camphyr half a Dram. Make a Powder
to be sprinkled with the Spirit of Triacle camphoris'd, and applied to obstinat
Ulcers. A cleansing Ointment may be prepared of the Juices of Tobacco,
Wormwood, Betony, Honey of Roses, Aloes, Myrrh, Flowers of Sulphur and
Turpentin. If the Ulcers are rotten, or the part much corrupted, the Ointment
Aegyptiacum, or Verdigrise with distilled Vinegar will be proper.

When the Wound is cleans'd, we apply healing Remedies, which retrieve the
natural balmy Juice of the part, cement the Wound, and by a gentle astringent
Force strengthen the Fibers, and prevent the unseasonable Growth of luxuriant
Flesh: Such are the Balsam of Sulphur, expressed Oil of Filberts, Balsam of
Pern, etc. mixed with the dulcified Earth of Vitriol for benign, and arsenic or
precipitat Mercury for Malignant Ulcers. But ofttimes oily Ingredients are
improper; and therefore we shift 'em for Honey and the Juices of vulnerary
Plants; and in rebellious Cases add Quicksilver, from which the Spirit of
Nitre is drawn off. If the Ulcer be covered with luxuriant Flesh, touch it with
Crocus Metallorum, or the Crystal of Silver dissolved in Aqua fortis. If the
Ulcer become suddenly dry, apply an Ointment of Turpentin, Honey, Juice of
Smallage, and Flower of Beans or Fenugrec. In general the following Plaster is
of singular use for consolidating Ulcers.

Take of Mastic an Ounce; Turpentin three Ounces; yellow Wax four Ounces. Mix,
and make a Plaster according to Art. Or, Take a convenient quantity of
Quicklime washed twice or thrice, and dried. Mix it with the Oil of Linseed,
and Bole Armenic, for a Plaster.

In the mean while 'twill be requisite to administer vulnerary Decoctions and
Essences inwardly, especially those of River-Crabs, Dog's Dung, Ground Ivy, and
Tops of St. John's-wort. To which we add the Decoctions of Sudorific-woods, the
Tinctures of Antimony, the Spirit and volatile Salt of Vipers, Myrrh, Saffron,
Chalybeat Diaphoretic Antimony, and Coral or Crab's-eyes exhibited with Vinegar;
and interlac'd with Purgatives of Turbith Mineral, or Sweet Mercury with the
Extract of Black Hellebor. In desperate Cases we must have recourse to a
Salivation.

Having dispatched the general Cure of Ulcers, we shall now descend to a few
Particulars; as 1. The Ulcers that are attended by a Caries or Rottenness of
the Bones, which must be particularly accounted for before the Ulcer can be
cured. When a Caries begins, the Bone appears fat, oily, and yellowish; and
when it is perfectly rotten, becomes black, uneven, and full of little Holes.
If the Bone be not exposed to one's view either by the naked Eye, or through a
Microscope, its roughness and little Pits are discovered by a Probe. If a
Caries approach to the Joints, or be surrounded by many nervous parts, it is not
easily cured. However the Method of Cure is first to dilate the Ulcer with
Tents of the Roots of Gentian, or the Heart of Elder; then to apply the
rectified Spirit of Wine, and the Powder of Euphorbium mixed with the Root of
Florentin Orris, Birthwort, Aloes or Myrrh. The distilled Oil of Guajacum and
that of Cloves are also very proper; but all Oils by Expression or Infusion are
pernicious. Injections of warm Plantain-water, in which Sweet Mercury is
dissolved, are of excellent use for cleansing the Bone, and fetching off its
Scales. But if they prove ineffectual, we must either scrape the Bone with a
Knife till it appear white and solid, with the Marks of little Blood Vessels;
or apply an Actual Caustic, the adjacent parts being carefully defended from
its Injury. After scraping or burning; we apply the Spirit of Wine, or
distilled Oil of Cloves.

2. Fistulas or winding Ulcers with Callous Sides. The Figure and number of
their Turnings must be carefully traced by a small Candle of Wax and Turpentin:
If the bottom of the Fistula be a Bone, it discovers it self to the Probe; and
if it be painless, signifies that the Periostium is broke: If it end in a
nervous part, the exquisit Pain will lead us to the knowledge of it; if in a
Blood-Vessel, the obscure Color of the matter will give us to know so much.
Glandulous places are most liable to 'em, and unless the hardness can be
removed, they prove incurable. Now in order to remove it, and to cleanse the
Ulcer, we first dilate the Orifice (which in Callous Ulcers is always narrow)
with a Tent of Gentian-roots sprinkled with burnt Alum: then we inject
Limewater with Spirit of Wine; or the Juice of River-Crabs with the Juice of
Tobacco and Sweet Mercury; or a Mixture of the Honey of Roses, Spirit of Wine,
and Precipitat Mercury. In inveterat Cases, we apply the green Waters, or the
following Mixture. Take of the Ointment Aegyptiacum half an Ounce; Sublimat
Mercury a Dram; Lie four Ounces; Rose Water an Ounce; Plantain-water four
Ounces; Arsenic a Scruple. Boil them till the third part be consumed, and apply
the Remainder with Tents. If the Pain be so violent that these Remedies cannot
be applied, we must lay open the Fistulas, and consume the Callus as above. For
a Fistula in the Corner of the Eye, called Fistula Lachrymalis, the following
Mixture is of noted efficacy. Take of prepared Tutty a Dram; fine Powder of
Lead and Crude Antimony, of each half a Dram; Ceruss and Litharge, of each a
Scruple. With the Cerecloth Diachalcitidos mix, etc.

3. Sordid or rotten Ulcers. In the former the matter is slimy, thick, livid or
black; in the latter, it stinks horridly. Sometimes Ulcers become fordid through
the indiscreet Application of far Oils and viscous Ointments, in which Case
Cataplasms of the Dung of Animals with Wine are very successful. In general,
for all fordid Ulcers, we prescribe strong Cleansers; such as the Juice of
Tobacco or Savin, Spirit of Wine, the Ointment Aegyptiacum, Quick limewater
with Sweet Mercury, or a Precipitat upon which Spirit of Wine has been
frequently distilled.

4. The inveterate Ulcers in the Legs called Phagedema, which generally are
somewhat corrosive and apt to enlarge their Dimensions. Let 'em be washed with
distilled Water of rotten Apples, mixed with the Extract of Birthwortroots, or
with rectified Spirit of Wine, Sweet Mercury, and Sugar of Lead; or the
Decoction of Tobacco in which Alum is dissolved; or the Solution of Precipitat
Mercury, or of the Dross of the Regulus of Antimony, in Plantain-water; or the
Solution of Gunpouder in Wine. After washing, apply the Ointment
Diapompholigos, and Sugar of Lead, or Precipitat Mercury, with Tents. And
anoint the Circumference or Edges of the Ulcer with the rectified stinking Oil
of Man's Dung.

5. Cancrous Ulcers. Their Causes and Symptoms are accounted for in the Chapter
of Tumors. As for their Cure, let the Dung of a Cat fed with River-Crabs; or
the Powder of a Toad and a Lizard calcined together in a new close Vessel; or
mixed with black Pepper, Salt, dry Soot, and Orpine; be sprinkled upon the
Ulcer after it is washed with Plantane-water. If these prove successless, apply
the Oil of Man's Dung, and for the last Refuge Arsenic fixed with Nitre, and
mixed with Scot and Rulandus's Balsam of Sulphur in the form of an Ointment, or
the Oil per deliquium of the Arsenic thus fixed, it being dulcified with Spirit
of Wine. If the Cancer still continue after these Applications, 'twill be
needful to cut it off, and then burn out its Roots with a hot Iron; for if the
least Particle of the Ferment be left, 'twill revive again. Alliot Physician to
the Duke of Lorrain published a Schedule at Paris some years ago, in which he
pretended to cure an ulcerated Cancer without cutting or burning; and that by a
certain Alcalin Salt that is so fixed, that it will not dissolve or melt as the
other Alcalin Caustics, which by so doing exasperate the Cancer. This Salt he
says makes an Eschara, and converts the sharp matter into a laudable Pus.

6. Ulcers caused by Burning. In order to adjust their Method of Cure, we ought
to distinguish three degrees in Burning. 1. When the outer Cuticle alone is
hurt, and lifted up in little watery Bladders. This is the ordinary effect of
hot Water, burning Straw, etc. 2. When the inner Skin is also contracted and
wrinkl'd. This is the effect of hot Oil, Wax, Pitch, etc. 3. When the Flesh it
self is burnt, and the Skin cast into a Crust, as by melted Metals, etc. The
Cure consists in subduing the volatile Sulphurous Acid of the Fire which melts
down the nutritious Juice of the Part, and causes the fiery Bladders. For this
end we apply for the first degree Quick-lime-water prepared with the Decoction
of Rapes, and mixed with the Oil of Linseed to the Consistence of a thin
Ointment; or a Liniment of Quicklime (frequently washed and purged of its
sharp Salt) Tutty, Whites of Eggs, with Vinegar and Oil of Roses; or the Juice
of Onyons or Garlic mixed with Salt, Castle-Soap, and Oil of Roses. The
Mucilage of bruised River-Crabs extracted with the Water of Frog's Spawn, or an
Ointment of River-Crabs bruised and mixed in a Leaden Mortar with fresh Butter;
the Solution of Litharge in Vinegar mixed with the Oil of Rapes, Camphyr,
Mucilage of Quince-seeds, and the Whites of Eggs; a Liniment of common Oil
mixed with the Whites of Eggs; or the Syrup of Elder mixed with Spirit of Wine,
are all approved in the same case.

In the second degree we lay open the Bladder without any delay, and then apply
the abovementioned Medicines, or a Liniment expressed from fresh Hen's Dung
fried with fresh Butter and Sage, and Plantain-leaves; or a Mixture of the Pulp
of Apples boiled in the Water of Frog's Spawn, with Sugar, Camphyr and Saffron.

In the third degree we lay open the Pushes with all possible speed, and apply
emollient Liniments for separating the Crust, such as Butter mixed with the
Decoction of Mallows, or the Mucilage of Quinces extracted with the Water of
Frog's Spawn, and mixed with Butter, the Oil of Eggs, and that of white
Lillies. If the Crust do not come easily off, it must be cut with a Lance, for
fear the imprisoned matter should create a deep Ulcer. After the Crust is
removed, we apply Digestives and Cleansers as in other Cases.

CHAP. IV. Of Dislocations.
THE Bones designed for Motion are received into Cavities called Sinus's, and
fastened to 'em by Ligaments, Tendons, or Muscles. And when the Head of any
Bone is justled out of its proper Sinus, it is called a Dislocation. The Causes
are generally external; tho sometimes a vicious Acid thickening the nutritious
Juice that waters these Cavities, may straiten their Capacities, and so deny
Admission to the Bone, as in the Sciatica and Gout; and sometimes a sharp
saltish Catarrh, such as Scorbutical Persons are obnoxious to, by relaxating
the nervous Ligaments may indirectly promote a Dislocation. When a Bone is put
out of joint, its Figure, Situation, Length and inability to move will discover
it. Some Dislocations are called perfect, when the Bone is quite out of its
place; others imperfect, when it sticks upon the side of its Cavity. The former
is more difficult to cure than the latter. The Dislocation of the Thigh Bone,
as it dos not easily happen by reason of the extraordinary Strength of its
Ligament; so it is hard to cure, the Muscles being very thick, and the part in a
manner inaccessible. But that of the small Bones about the Ankle is much more
dangerous, they being surrounded with many Tendons, which, when they are
misplaced, are apt to create grievous Pain, Inflammations, Convulsions, etc.

When a Bone is set, let the contracted Muscles be extended to their due
Length, and the whole Member be conveniently tied fast with broad or narrow
Swathes, as its nature requires, remembering still not to tie it too hard, nor
to apply Astringents (as most Surgeons are wont to do) lest the Stagnation of
the Blood or Serum should occasion Inflammations or Tumors. If the part be much
inflamed, we must not pretend to extend it, or to set the Bone, till the
Inflammation be abated by the following Decoction.

Take of the Tops of St. John's-wort, a handful and a half; of the Herbs
Betony, Chamomil, and Rosemary, of each a handful; Comfrey-roots three Ounces;
Roots of round-rooted Birth-wort six Drams; the four large hot Seeds, of each
an Ounce and a half. Boil them in Water, and add to a Pound and a half of the
strained Liquor, six Ounces of Wine, in which Sage has been infused. Mix and
foment the part, and after it is tied up, wet the Swathes with a Sponge dipped
into it. If the Pain be excessive, we may add Poppy-Heads to the Decoction. In
the mean while give internally volatile Alcalies and fixed Diaphoretics, for
preventing the Stagnation of the Blood.

If a white Swelling invade the part, either before or after the Bone is set,
anoint it with the distilled Oil of Tartar, or of Man's Bones rectified with
burnt Hartshorn. However, in all Cases let expressed Oils and Astringent
Cataplasms be avoided; the former shut the Pores and relaxat the Fibers; and
the latter cause Inflammations and Tumors. The common Plea for Astringents is,
that they strengthen the Fibers: Whereas the Fibers are much more benefited by
fomenting 'em with Aromatic and nervous Decoctions, and applying Cephalic
Plasters of Amber, Elemi, Balsam of Peru, etc. If the Dislocation be caused by
the internal Coagulation of the nutritious Juice of the Joint, it is incurable,
unless Mercury give relief. If it be only threatened, we endeavor to prevent
it by giving inwardly the volatile Preparations of Tartar, especially its Spirit
prepared from Tartar fermented with its own Alcaly; to which we may add Sal
Ammoniac, and the Spirit and volatile Salt of Man's Bones. Externally we apply
the Spirit of Earthworms mixed with Spirit of Sal Ammoniac; and in a word,
whatever was recommended for the Sciatica. Particularly the following Oil,

Take of the distilled Oil of Man's Bones one part; stinking Oil of Tartar two
parts. Mix 'em with Quick-lim^, and distill, through a Retort, a most
penetrating Oil.

If the Relaxation of the Ligaments occasioned by a saltish Serum threaten a
Dislocation, administer inwardly Poterius's Diaphoretic Gold, the Spirit of
Earthworms, Essence of Sassafras, and Sal Volatile Oleosum; and rub externally
with the Spirit of Earthworms and the Oil of Earth, applying a Plaster of
Tacamahac and Caran softened with the Oil of Amber, or Crollius's Styptic
Plaster mixed with Stone Oil.

CHAP. V. Of Fractures.
BONES are broken mostly by external Causes; tho there are some uncommon
Instances of Fractures occasioned by violent internal Convulsions. Some
Fractures come across the Bone, and frequently cause Splinters, which gall the
nervous Parts most sensibly; and sometimes wound the Skin. They are easily
discovered by their extreme pain, loss of Motion, the contraction and
distortion of the muscular Fibers, the inflammations and soft swellings of the
Part, and by feeling with one's fingers, especially if the Bone be out of its
place. But the Inflammations that attend 'em at first, ought to be
distinguished from the Erysipelas that sometimes appears about the fourth day,
being ushered in by shiverings, and accompanied by a Fever, as arising from
the growing Acidity of the nutritions Juices of the injured Membrans, which
provoke 'em to Contractions, and so waken all the Juices in the Body. Other
Fractures are more properly Fissures, viz. When the Bone is split lengthways.
The Symptoms of a Fissure are these. A profound Pain gradually seizes the Bone,
but it is still capable of performing its wonted Offices: Afterward a small
reddish Tumor appears, especially if the Fissure be great; the nutritious Juice
of the Bone runs out of the Cleft, and glides along the Member, till the
Tendons about the Joints thwart its Passage, and oblige it to stagnat, and so
become an Ulcer. In the mean while the Bone it self where it is split, becomes
rotten, and feeds the Ulcer with continual supplies of corrupt matter tho at
some distance. Therefore a Surgeon ought to be very cautious in all Ulcers
lying near the Joints, to examine the Bone narrowly, and inquire after the
abovementioned Symptoms, since Ulcers proceeding from Fissures can never be
cured, 'till the distant Cause be traced out and accounted for.

As touching Prognostics: Fractures in the middle of the Bone without Wounds
or Splinters, are more favorable than those about the Joints, or where the two
joining Bones are both broke, or where the Bone is beaten to pieces, and the
Wounds, whether occult or manifest, threaten Ulcers. Fractures about tendonous
places are very dangerous. The Bones of the Thigh seldom consolidat, being
closely blocked up by bulky Muscles. The time of the Reunion of broken Bones is
uncertain as depending upon the difference of Ages and Constitutions. Women
with Child are not easily cured, but after Delivery their Cure succeeds.

When a Bone is broken across, it is the Surgeon's Office to extend the Member,
and join the two ends together, fastening 'em with proper Ligatures, and
ordering an easy Posture of the Part according to the custom of the Patient.
Thus the two ends of the broken Bone being laid together, the nutritious Juice
will stagnat betwixt 'em, and gradually harden into a Substance of equal
Consistence joining 'em together. If the Part be inflamed, nothing can be
attempted toward setting, till the Inflammation be removed. After it is set,
bathe it with the Spirit of Wine mixed with a third part of the Spirit of
Earthworms; or anoint it with the Oil of Earthworms, distilled Oil of Rosemary,
and the Oil of Man's Fat rectified upon Man's Bones; applying afterward a
Plaster of Tacamahac softened with the distilled Oil of Rosemary; or the
common Plaster of white Rosin, Turpentin, Pouders of Snakeweed and
Birthwortroots, the Extract of round-rooted Birth-wort prepared with Spirit of
Wine, and distilled Oil of Amber. The Plaster must be so applied that its two
ends do not come quite together, lest they should suppress the Tumors that
always happen. If the Part be bruised, apply Honey with the Spirit of Wine.
After the Plaster is applied, tie it down with Swathes and Splents, but the
Swathes must not be too hard tied, nor the Splents too many. Astringent
Cataplasms are generally used, but to the detriment of the Patient. If
Cataplasms are demanded, let 'em be made of the Leaves of the Herb Robert
bruised, or of the Powder of Snakeweed-roots with Wine.

In the mean while 'twill be proper to exhibit inwardly vulnerary Decoctions,
especially of Rosemary, Agrimony, Savin, and the Herb Robert. The Stone of
Osteocolla given to a Dram in Wine or Vinegar is of singular use.

As for Fissures; the divided parts of the Bone must be joined, the
abovementioned Plaster applied, and the Member tied up with Swathes. If a
Tumor beset the Part, let it be opened, and treated as a Fracture with a Wound.
If an Ulcer happen, lay it open to the very Fissure, and cleanse the rotten
Bone and Ulcer as above.

If a Fracture be attended by a Wound, it must be kept open for some time, to
give vent to the pieces of Bones that do not consolidate with the rest. If the
Bone hang out at the Wound, and be not tainted by the Air, it ought to be put
into its proper place; if otherwise, it must be sawed off, or otherwise
separated. The Separation may be promoted by the following Liniment.

Take of Aloes and Myrrh, of each half a Dram; Comfry and Birthwort-roots, of
each three Drams; Euphorbium two Drams: With Turpentin and Wax make a Liniment.

Sometimes the Callus which joins the Bones is too bulky, and causes a
Deformity, which may be helped while it is soft and green; but it if be
confirmed, there is no relief: For if a new Fracture be endeavored, it will not
fall upon the Callus, but near to it.

CHAP. VI. Of a Gangrene and Sphacelus.
A Gangrene and Sphacelus differ only gradually; the former being an imperfect,
the latter a perfect Mortification. They are equally the Consequents of all the
preceding Disorders, viz. Tumors, Wounds, Ulcers, Dislocations and Fractures;
and therefore seemed to claim a peculiar Chapter to themselves. Their immediate
Cause is a prevailing Alcali that destroys the innate volatile Acid, and
dissolves its Sulphur. The remote Causes are, whatever prevents the Influx and
Circulation of the Blood and Animal Spirits, which are wont to recruit the
volatile Acid, as Ligatures, Bruises, Wounds, Cold, or the sudden Contraction of
the Pores, Poison, malignant Diseases, etc. The Symptoms are these. At first
the Arteries beat very high in the Part, but the Pulsation, Heat and Sense
dwindle gradually away; the Muscles become soft and flaccid, and separat, as it
were, from the Skin, whose Color becomes pale, blew, and at length black. If an
Ulcer degenerat into a Gangrene, it voids no corrupt Matter; or if there be
any, it is discolored and fetid. If a Gangrene proceed from an internal Cause,
it is incurable; for tho the Part be cut off, 'twill revive elsewhere. Nervous
parts are more liable, and more difficult to cure than the sanguine. Sometimes
a Tendon, when seized by a Gangrene, may be moved by the Muscle, which being
long and at some distance is not touched, and therefore Motion is no certain
sign of a sound part.

For Cure. In a Sphacelus the mortified part must be cut off. In a recent
Gangrene, we must prevent its progress; internally by exhibiting the Spirit of
Triacle camphoris'd, Spirit of Wine camphoris'd, Spirit of Juniper Berries,
Spirit of Hartshorn, etc. and externally by applying the Spirit of Wine
camphoris'd with Myrrh, Aloes and Frankincense; or the Decoction of Quicklime
mixed with Spirit of Wine, and Sweet Mercury; or the Decoction of the Dross of
Antimony in Vinegar; or the Decoction of Lupines with White Wine, Lie and
Saffron. Cataplasms of Germander, Wormwood, Hyssop, Sage, Agrimony, etc. boiled
in Limewater, and Clouts dipped in the Decoction of the Caput Mortuum of Aqua
fortis in Rose water, are also much commended. If the Gangrene be far advanced,
let the part be scarify'd, and washed with the following Mixture.

Take of Pickle four Ounces; Spirit of Wine camphoris'd two Ounces: Ointment
Aegyptiacum an Ounce. Mix, etc. After it is washed apply the Butter of Antimony,
or sublimat Mercury with Myrrh, Aloes, Alum, and the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol,
or precipitat Mercury boiled with the Oil of Nuts. Some extol the following
Cataplasm.

Take of Wormwood-tops, Chamomil, and Elder-flowers, of each a handful and a
half; of the Herb Germander a handful and a half; Rue half a handful;
Horse-dung three Ounces. Boil them in Pickle, adding in the end two Ounces of
Ink, and three Ounces of the Spirit of Wine.

In a Sphacelus the mortified part must be cut off with all convenient Speed,
without waiting (as some do) till it come to the Joint. Some perform
Amputations with red hot Instruments, thinking thereby to prevent the excessive
bleeding; others are content with cold Instruments, and stop the bleeding with
the Powder of Hog's Dung, and dulcified Earth of Vitriol; or with Clouts dipped
into a Mixture of the Vitriol of Steel and Alum with the Juice of Plantain.

FINIS.

