A LETTER FROM Sir Maurice Eustace Knight, His Majesty's Sergeant at Law in the
Kingdom of IRELAND, and Speaker of the House of Commons, in Parliament there.

Being a perfect Relation of the last true News from IRELAND.

printer's device (McKerrow 382)

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for I. Wright. 1642.

SIR,
I Might have taken occasion many times since, you went from hence to have
written unto you, concerning the Earl of Ormond, for in this great and
general apostacy, which has happened in this Kingdom, no man of either
Nation has stood more firm to the Crown of England, nor ventured his own
person further for the suppressing of the present rebellion then his Lordship
has done. I could write much to demonstrate this, if there were any doubt to
be made thereof: But this being a truth, which cannot but be acknowledged by
all, I pass it over, and will only give you account of his Lordships last
journey, into our parts of the province of Leinster, where in a pitched field
upon friday last in the afternoon, between the h^ures of two and three; his
Lordship gave in a field between Kelrush, and Rathemoore, a great overthrow to
the whole power of the counties o^ Wick^^w, Wexford, Cathercaghe, Kildare,
Queens County, Kilkenny, Tipperarie and some ^orces which were drawn out of
the County of Westmeathe. And in this Battle, he had to deal with his great
Uncle, the Lord Viscount M^untgarret, his own brother Mr. Richard Butler, the
Lord of Ikerni^ married to his Aunt, and the Lord of Dunboyne, his near
kinsman, Tibbet Funcell commonly known by the name of Baron Locher, who is
married to his Lordships Aunt, and whose Son and heir, is married to his
Lordships Sister; young Bagnau who is Cousin German to his Lordship; Philip O
darre, Mr. Walter, and most of the Gentry of our Counties of Kilkenny, and
Tipperarie; General Hugh Birne, Sir Morgan Cavenaugh, Colonel Fitz Gerrald of
Ballysoran, Colonel Talbot, Colonel Moore, Colonel Sutton, Mr. Rob. Ha^pole,
Mr. Thomas Davills; and many more of great rank and condition, who were all
beaten, and put to a most shameful flight by his Lordship, who in the time of
that battle, did like Levy forget father and mother, neither did acknowledge
his own brethren, nor nearest kinsmen, but pursued them to the death. A
service never to be forgotten, but to be had in remembrance, to his everlasting
honor. I give you this in gross at first, because I would not keep the best
news, which hitherto we have had long from you. And now having satisfied you
to the full, give me leave to digest it further unto you, wherein I will
faithfully and truly set forth unto you every days service.

Upon Saturday the second of this month, the Earl of Ormond did march from
this City of Dublin toward the Naas, with 3000. Foot, and 500. Horse, and did
encampe that night at Rathecoole, which is six miles from this City; his
Lordship was not above two miles on his way, when a post was sent after him, to
let his Lordship know, that his Countess and Children, were landed at the
Rings end, which many did think would have brought himself back that night;
But his mind was so intent upon the great business of the Kingdom about which
he was then sent, that though he had not seen his Countess nor Children in
six months before, and could not assure himself that he should live to see
them, if that he omitted that opportunity, yet neither this nor any other
consideration could bring him back from the Army, but lodged with them in the
fields that night, as if the spirit of that great warryer Vriah had been in
him, who said, The servants of my Lord are encamped in the open field, shall I
then go to my house to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife, I will not
do this thing.

Upon Sunday his Lordship marched from thence, the mountain way to the Naas,
and burned all that part of the Country, and encamped there that night; there
was no opposition given by the enemy all that way, only at Tipper, which is
within one mile of the Naas, there was some shot made at some of our men, who
went thither out of the Castle by some of the Rebels; there we lost a
trumpeter, and four of our Souldi^r^, besides six which were hurt, which so
enraged our men, that they sent for a barrel of powder to the Naas, and having
made their approach unto it blew it up, and all who were in it, except ^hree
men, who were taken and hanged, there was in the Castle a Friar, uncle to
Sutton of Tipper, a fit incendiary to be blown up amongst the rest, for it is
such fiery spirits, which have put this poor and miserable Kingdom into that
flame, wherein now it is: upon Monday, the hurt Soldiers were sent from the
Naas to this City upon Carres, with a convoy of twelve horse, but these being
set upon between Rathecoole, and this City by some of the Rebels, they were
forced to leave the wounded men, to the cruelty of the Rebels, who most
barbarously and cruelly murdered them, and the poor innocent Car men, who it
may be did wish them better then our side.

This accident thus happening, it stopped all intercourse, between our Army
and the state, neither being able to spaire that strength, which might pass
with safety between them, which kept us and them in ignorance, until their
return to us, we not knowing how the Army did move, nor the army hearing from
us, which was a mighty advantage unto the rebels, and a very great
disadvantage unto our designs.

Upon Tuesday at night, our Army came to Athye and raised that Seidge, but the
Town, smen not knowing of the approach of our Army, and being hard set to by
the Rebels the night before fired most part of the out Town not being able to
keep it, which was some disappointment to our army when they came to quarter
there.

Upon Wednesday, his Lordship rested there with the Army, but sent Sir Patrick
Weames Captain of his own troup, Captain Armestrong, and Captain Harman to
Catherlagh, to releeve the Castle there, which for a long time had been
beleagured by the Rebels, but their Scouts discovering our troops gave notice
thereof to the Rebels, and thereupon they fired the town and betook
themselves to flight, which our horse perceiving, made what haste they could
after them and killed of them in the chase, 70. men, and had done execution
upon the rest, but that they betook themselves to a Bogg, where our horse
could not serve upon them; But they releeved the Castle, and likewise the
Castle of Clogh grevan, and returned that night to the Army. There was 700. of
the Rebels in the Town of Catherlagh, when our horse made their approach
thither. The same day was the Castle of Ballylivan likewise releeved by some
horse, which his Lordship sent thither.

Upon Thursday his Lordship marched to Stradebally; where he encamped that
night, but left Colonel Crafforde at Athy, with some foot and horse to make
good the Town until his Lordships return; and the next day came to
Marriborrow, and releeved the sort there, which is a place of very great
consequence; and seated amongst ill and dangerous neighbors.

Upon Saturday his Lordship was taken with a burning fever, which together
with a great Flux, held him until Tuesday; the one did abate the violence and
rage of the other; that Saturday Sir Charles Coot, and Sir Thomas Lucas, with
some troops of horse releeved Ballynekill, and the Burris, and killed diverse
of the Rebels, which lay before Ballynekill to the number of 80. and returned
that night to Marriborow upon the Sunday being Easter day, Sir Charles Coot,
and Sir Thomas Lucas went with 250 horse, and releeved Birr and some other
places, which were much distressed: The horse had of this a very hard service,
being to pass through woods, Boggs, and great fastness, and in their way, had
many skirmishes with the Rebels, but always had the good fortune to beat
them, many horses were lost this journey, and it is Gods great goodness, that
we did not suffer in this more then we did.

Whilst these things were in acting, the Rebels did gather together from the
Counties formerly mentioned; and upon Easter Sunday displayed above forty
Colors, within two miles of Athy, on the further side of the Burrow in the
Queens County; whereof Colonel Crafforde gave notice unto my Lord of Ormond
by letters, and thereupon his Lordship returned back to Athy upon Wednesday,
and rested there with the Army upon Thursday.

That Thursday, his Lordship sent to Sir Patrick Weames, and Captain
Armes-strong, who were quartered at Grangomelan on this side of the river of
the Barrow, and in a direct line opposite to the place on the other side of the
river, where the enemy was encamped to discover their number and strength,
whereupon they sent out ten of their horse to inform them of the truth hereof,
which being perceived by the enemy, they sent 30. Horsemen over the river, and
each Horseman had a Musquetier behind him, with an intention to cut off those
ten Horsemen of ours, but this being discovered by Sir Patrike Weames, and
Captain Armestrong, they sallyed forth with some horse, cut off of the
Musketeers, killed two of the horsemen, and the rest did in their haste miss
the ford, and swimmed over the river, where some of them were drowned. Sir
Patricke Weames had his Horse killed under him in that service.

This being notified to the Earl of Ormond, his Lordship came thither with
some Troops of H^rse to view the enemy, who appeared on the other side of the
River of the Barrow at a place called Tankerdstowne right over against
Grangemellam, and as his Lordship and the rest of the Commanders who were then
with him could judge, they could be no less then six or seven thousand foot,
besides 300. horse. His Lordship thus satisfied by his own eye, returned to
Athy, and gave out that the next day h^ would draw out of the Town and advance
thither to fight with them, but his resolution was to march away the next day,
and in regard that he had done the business^, he went for, not to sight upon
such odds, if that he might avoid it. But this was not so secretly carried,
but the enemy had notice thereof, which made ^^^ to dislodge that night, and to
pass over the River by the Bridge of Moygame, and prepare themselves for a
pursuit.

Upon Friday morning about seven of the clock our Army did rise, and began
their march, and kept the high and nearest way coward this City, but they were
not half a mile on their way, when they discovered their bells marching wide of
them on the right hand in another rode way, and it (...) that there was a bog
which was three quarters of a mile in breadth between both the Armies, which
ran between them for three or four miles; and so they marched in view of
each other all that way, with their Colors flying and Drums bearing; when our
Army halted they likewise halted, and when ours did move they did move, and so
they kept this posture until both ways did meet, by which time the vantgard
of the Rebels was within 3 furlongs of our van. And at the meeting of both the
ways there was a narrow passage through which our Army was to pass, where it
was thought the enemy did intend to charge our rear, and cut off our men,
which if we had advanced forward, they might have done with much ease, it being
a place of very great advantage for the enemy, which the Earl of Ormond
perceiving, he caused Sir Charles Coote who commanded in chief under his
Lordship, and the rest of the Commanders and Officers of the field together,
and told them that before he went any further he would fight with the enemy,
though all the Rebels in Ireland we^e there together, to which they all most
cheerfully and willing assented and his Lordship further told them that they
had God and a good curse on their side, and that that day should be his, and he
doubted not but that God would fight for them; and thereupon drew up his
battle in that s^rt as did best sort with the ground where it was pitched, and
the enemy did the like in another great field which was opposite to the place
where our Army was. But the battle of the enemy was much sooner in order then
ours by reason that they had nothing to hinder the drawing up of their men, and
that our Carriages which were very many, so divided the Van from the Rear that
it took up some time to bring them together, so as if the enemy had fallen
upon us as soon as they were ready, we should have been in some hazard, but
they stood still where they pitched their battle, and did not move forward:
whereupon my Lord of Ormond gave order to Sir Charles Coote and the rest of the
Commanders and Officers according to their several charge to advance forward,
which they most courageously did, and came up to the field, where the enemy
stood in battle array; and the ditches being levelled by our Pioners our
Field-peeces were drawn up, and order given that they should play upon the
enemy, which was done, but with little or no loss unto them, only the noise
with which they were not much acquainted did seem so to amaze them as they
stood like so many statues without life or motion. After this our Musketeers
did their part, and soon after by direction from my Lord of Ormond, Sir Thomas
Lucas, Sir Richard Greenowill, Sir Patricke Weames, Captain Garnyer, Captain
Armestrong, and the rest of the Captains of Horse did in an instant and so
gallantly charge the Rebels that upon the sudden they routed them, and had the
execution of them for two or three miles, only there was a great body of 2000.
led by the Lord Vicecount Mountgarret and General Hugh Birne which wheeled
about and thought to possess themselves of our Ordinance, Carriage, and
Ammunition, which my Lord of Ormond perceiving, he drew out one of his divisions
to attend that great body, and with them and some few volunteere Horse, to the
number of thirty, which were then with his Lordship (for all the rest were
following the excution) he faced that body, and within a short time did
likewise break them and put them to rout. There were six or seven hundred of
them killed in the place, and very many wounded; and if our Horse had not been
harrowed by their journey to Birne the execution had been very great, but that
and the evening drawing on, and a great bog which was near, whereunto they
did run, did preserve very many of them, who otherwise had been cut off:
diverse who have been in the battle, have assured me that the bog was all
over black with them like a field in seed-time with Rookes. They lost twenty
Colors, and many Drums, all their Powder and Ammunition, the Lord Vicecount
Montgarrets Waine drawn with eight Oxen, where all his provision was, his
Sumpture, and the Lord of Ikernies Sumpture. There were many of note and
quality slain and vvounded in battle who were not known, and only the heads
of the Lord of Dunboyns brother, the Lord of Ikernis son, and Colonel
Cavenaghe, brought by some of the soldiers hither. We did not loose one of our
Foot in this conflict, and very fevv of our Horse.

This victory must be attributed wholy to God, for we were not above two
thousand Foot strong, and 500. Horse, in regard that very many of the Army
which went forth were sick, and diverse of them left in garrison in the places
which were releeved; and the enemy was at least 300. Horse, and 7000. Foot
well appointed, besides 2 or 3 thousand more who were not so well appointed but
attended to do execution if they had broken upon our men. They had likewise
all the advantages that they could desire, for our men and horse were harrowed
with long and continual marches, but there men were fresh and vigorous, and
all the day before hastening to the fight like Lions to the prey, parturiunt
montes, etc. They had the advantage of the ground being upon a hill, and our
men forced to march up unto them, and they had likewise the Wind of us. But the
Lord of Hosts was on our side and took away their former spirits and
resolutions from them, having neither hearts nor resolutions to fight, only in
the flight many of themselves did kill one another, and some of them who
escaped the battle, being afterward asked how they lost the field, they said
that no reason could be given for it, but that God was on our side: The night
before the battle, they were so confident of the victory, that they laid
down rules to whom quarter should be given, and to whom not, and how the
Wagons and spoils should be divided, and that after the defeat they should
march to this City of Dublin with our Colors, and fall upon it. If we had
lost the day, the Kingdom certainly had been in great hazard, and if that
we do well consider it, we shall find this victory to be of as great honor
to our side, and of as much consequence, all things considered, as that which
was given at Kinsale, The Lord make us thankful. Friday is appointed for a
solemn day of due public thanks in our Churches for this victory which was
got the last Friday, which is the day of our public fast and humiliation.
And sure we were then in our Churches striving with God like Moses in prayer
at the time of the battle, and God heard us.

As soon as this victory was thus miraculously gained, and a retreat sounded,
the Earl of Ormond called together all the Commanders, Captains, and
Soldiers, and in the same place where God showed himself so gloriously for
them they did give God solemn thanks, herein imitating Moses and the children
of Israel who being pursued by their enemies, and delivered from them, sung
this song unto the Lord, and spoke saying, I will sing unto the Lord, for he
has triumphed gloriously, the Horse and his rider he has thrown down, etc.

I dare not venture to set forth the particular acts of every Commander and
valiant soldier in this battle, but sure every man's valor was such that he
who did best might envy his companion, every man striving to out-goe each other
in this common cause. I have tired my self, and I do believe that by this
time I have tired you, and yet I do wish that the like subject may often fall
out for me to write, and you to read; I commit you to God, and remain,

Your faithful friend, and servant, Mau. Eustace.
Dublin April 24. 1642.
FINIS.

