LETTER TO Mr. MILES PRANCE, In Relation to the Murder of Sir Edmond-bury
Godfrey.
Mr. PRANCE,
PErceiving by some late Pamphlets several Rumors raised, as if there were
endeavors used to asperse your Evidence in relation to the Death of Sir E.B.G.
and to lay that Murder upon Himself. And remembering the consternation which
then was in all peoples minds by the Discovery at that time of a Dreadful and
most Horrid Popish Plot, which occasioned diverse to report, and most to believe
(even several days before the dead Body was found,) That he was Murdered by the
Papists at Somerset House. And hearing that the Coroners Jury or Inquest were
first of Opinion, and accordingly declared he was Felo de Se; And that there
was much Art and Skill used to procure their Verdict to the contrary; More
particularly, the refusing of the Body (at their Instance and request) to be
opened; and opposing the Assistance of the Coroner of Westminster, (who is
taken notice of to be a Knowing and Impartial Man in the Execution of his
Office;) who was desired to, and did attend for that purpose, but was dismissed
with a Guiney; telling him, they had no need of his Service. I made it my
business, partly for Yours, but chiefly for the Truths sake, to make a strict
Enquiry into the farther Causes of the aforesaid Rumors, and do find these
particulars very much urged, and discoursed of, (viz.)

I. In opposition to the Evidence of his being dogged up and down, and lodged in
a great House at St. Clements on Saturday the 12 of October 1678. (being the
day he was first missing.) It is affirmed he went out of his House that very
Saturday morning about 9 a Clock; (which is the last time he ever returned
thither;) And about 10 that Forenoon was in the Fields walking toward
Marybone, (in which Parish his dead Corpse was afterward found;) And was there
met by a Brewer in S. Giles's, who discoursed with him; And about 11. of the
same day he was seen passing by the Lady Cooks Lodgings near the Cockpit;
After which, he was seen in St. Martin's- lane, went by the Church, and down
Church lane into the Strand; About 1. passed by the door of one Mr. Ratcliff an
Oyl-man in the Strand And soon after was met in the back Court of Lincolns Inn
by two Gentlemen, who observed him to make a sudden turn, and to go out at the
back Door; They went out at that Door also, and did see him turn the corner
Wall; Between which place and Turn-Stile, he was met by a Barrister at Law; And
that a person living near Primrose-Hill, declared before diverse persons, that
he saw him about 3 that Saturday in the Afternoon walking in those Fields, his
usual Walk being that way.

II. They say, the place where and the posture wherein he was found, are very
remarkable. As to the place; It was in a Ditch on the South side of
Primrose-hill, surrounded with diverse Closes, Fenced with high Mounds and
Ditches, no Road near, only some deep dirty Lanes made only for the convenience
for driving Cows and such like Cattle in and out of the Grounds; And those very
Lanes not coming near 500 yards of the place, and impossible for any Man on
Horse back with a Dead Corpse before him at Midnight to approach, unless Gaps
were made ith'Mounds, as the Constable and his Assistants found by Experience
when they came on Horseback thither. As to the posture, his Breast was
Unbutton'd, his Wastcoat and Shirt put by, his Sword run in under his left Pap
next his Skin, the Point coming out at his right Shoulder about 6 Inches, his
left Arm doubled under him, (on which his Head seemed to lean,) and his right
Arm stiff, stretched out upon the Bank, his Belly and Breast being supported by
the side of the Bank, his Knees knit together, and with his Hips a little
bending or doubling under him.

And they infer from thence, that he being a tall raw-bon'd Man, (after he had
been several days dead,) could never be crooked so as to be cram^d into a
Sedan, (which are very low built, and difficult to be carried with proper
Braces, much more as You Evidenced with Cords,) then straightned, and his Legs
opened, and mounted on Horseback, and then put into the posture he was found
in, and stiffen'd again.

III. Now although the Matters aforesaid may be said to be only circumstantial,
Yet they produce undeniable Arguments against your Evidence, (viz.) They say,
that if a Man, or any other Creature be Strangled, or Hanged, and his Body
cold, and the Blood settled in the Veins, (as he must needs be if Your Evidence
be true,) run 20 Swords through such a Body, not one drop of Blood will come
out: But on the contrary, his Body when found, was full of Blood, insomuch,
that (over and above the Cakes or great Goblets of congealed putrified Blood
found afterward in his Clothes) the Constable when he pulled the Sword out of
his Body, it crash'd against his Backbone, and Gobbets of Blood and Water
gushed or gubbled out of that Wound in abundance, not only in that very place
where the Sword was pulled out, but in all his passage to the White-House,
especially there where his Body was lifted over two high Stumps; and also when
he was laid upon the Table, the Blood and Water so issued out of that Wound,
that it ran from off the Table upon the Floor, and from thence into the Celler;
So that they do averr, that That Wound that he received by that Sword must of
necessity be the cause of his Death. And they take notice, that so much of the
Sword as was in his Body, was discolored and blackish; and that part that came
out at his back was of a dullish color, and the Point thereof was rusty; Also,
that his Clothes, Belt and Scabbard were weather-heaten to rags; his Body stunk
extremely; his Eyes, Nostrils, and corners of his Mouth were Fly-blown; all
which must naturally be by his being so long in the Air.

IV. They say, That when a Man is Strangled or Hanged, his Eyes will be
extorted, his Face will be swelled and black; Whereas His Eyes were shut his
Face was pale, only the left part of his Chin, with his Breast and Belly being
next the Earth, were putrified, and looked of a Blue and Greenish color, more
especially about the Wound; For that the Blood, when hot, running to the Wound,
caused the greater putrefaction in that place; Whenas, if the Wound had been
made after he was dead, and cold, the rest of his Body would have putrified as
soon, and as much as there.

V. They say, That the cleanness of his Shoes makes against Your Evidence; For
his Shoes were cleaned or rather glazed on the very bottoms of the Soles,
occasioned by his walking in the Grass, and Grass-seeds were observed to stick
in the Seams of his Shoes; And besides, there was not one speck of Dirt on his
Clothes, or Legs, not so much as a Horse-hair sticking thereon; Whereas, the
Constable, and those that went with him, were dirty'd and moil'd up to the very
Saddle-skirts, and not easily to be cleaned; And Mr. Prance, you know that a
tall Dead Man on Horseback, cannot lift up his Legs to save them from the Dirt.

VI. As to the looseness of his Neck, and the Rim or Green Circle about it,
They say they are Ridiculous and Impertinent Arguments against so many
Demonstrative ones; especially, when there is not a Nurse, or any Woman of Age,
that has buried any Relations, but will tell you it is very common for People
to die with Necks as loose as his was: And the Rim about his Neck was so far
from being like one made with a Cravat or Hankerchief, that it seems to be
occasioned by the great height and stifness of his Collar, which was fast
Buttoned about his Neck, and on which his Head wrested, and was unbutton'd
about 10 of the clock the next day, before the Coroner or Jury came. But if
that Rim, or those Bruises, that Your Evidence seems to make the cause of his
Death, were really so; Then they alledg, that in such case, the whole Mass of
Blood would have settled there, and his Neck and Bruises would have swelled,
and have been perfect Black, which was not in His case.

VII. They also say, That all these Matters are Notorious, and will be proved
by diverse credible and undeniable Eye and Ear Witnesses; And besides, They
observe, that Bedlow's (before the Committee of Lords,) and Your Evidence in
relation to this Gentleman's Death, are as different as the East is from the
West; For You Dog him out of St Clements; the other decoys him from
Charing Cross: You swear he was Strangled with a Hankerchief near the Stables
going to the Waterside; Bedlow, that he was Smothered with a Pill^w in a Room
in the great Court in Somerset House. You say he took Horse at So-ho; Bedlow
says he took Coach at Clarenden-house, with many more suck like contradictions;
And considering the Old Proverb, fore-warned, fore armed A further and fuller
account of the whole matter expect, I being loath at present to exceed the
bounds of a Letter, I am,

Sir, Your very Loving Friend, Truman.
Cammbridge, Febr. 23. 1681.
LONDON, Printed for M.G. at the Sign of Sir E.B.G's. Head near Fleet-bridge.


