ACETARIA.

A DISCOURSE OF SALLETS.

By J. E. S. R. S. Author of the Kalendarium.

(...). Crat. in Glauc. LONDON, Printed for B. Took at the Middle Temple Gate
in Fleetstreet, 1699.

TO THE Right Honorable JOHN Lord SUMMERS OF EVESHAM. Lord High-Chancellor of
England, and President of the Royal-Society.
My Lord,
THE Idea and Plan of the Royal-Society, having been first conceived and
delineated by a Great and Learned Chancellor, which High Office your Lordship
deservedly bears; not as an Acquisition of Fortune, but your Intellectual
Endowments; Conspicuous (among other Excellencies) by the Inclination Your
Lordship discovers to promote Natural Knowledge: As it justifies the
Discernment of that Assembly, to pitch upon Your Lordship for their President,
so does it no less discover the Candor, yea, I presume to say, the Sublimity of
your Mind, in so generously honoring them with your Acceptance of the Choice
they have made.

A Chancellor, Lord Viscount Brouncker, Chancellor to the Late Qu. Consort, now
Dowager. The Right Honorable Cha. Montague, Esquire; Chancellor of the Exchequer.
and a very Learned Lord, was the First who honored the Chair; and a no less
Honorable and Learned Chancellor, resigns it to Your Lordship: So as after all
the Difficulties and Hardships the Society has hitherto gone through; it has
through the Favor and Protection of its Presidents, not only preserved its
Reputation from the Malevolence of Enemies and Detractors, but gone on
Culminating, and now Triumphantly in Your Lordship: Under whose propitious
Influence, I am persuaded, it may promise it self That, which indeed has
hitherto been wanting, to justify the Glorious Title it bears of a ROYAL
SOCIETY. The Emancipating it from some Remaining and Discouraging
Circumstances, which it as yet labors under; among which, that of a Precarious
and unsteady Abode, is not the least.

This Honor was reserved for Your Lordship; and an Honor, permit me to call it,
not at all unworthy the Owning of the Greatest Person living: Namely, the
Establishing and Promoting Real Knowledge; and (next to what is Divine) truly
so called; as far, at least, as Humane Nature extends toward the Knowledge of
Nature, by enlarging her Empire beyond the Land of Specter, Forms, Intentional
Species, Vacuum, Occult Qualities, and other Inadaequate Notions; which, by
their Obstreperous and Noisy Disputes, affrighting, and (till of late)
deterring Men from adventuring on further Discoveries, confined them in a lazy
Acquiescence, and to be fed with Fantasms and fruitless Speculations, which
signify nothing to the specific Nature of Things, solid and useful Knowledge;
by the Investigation of Causes, Principles, Energies, Powers, and Effects of
Bodies, and Things Visible; and to improve them for the Good and Benefit of
Mankind.

My Lord, That which the Royal Society needs to accomplish an entire Freedom,
and (by rendering their Circumstances more easy) capable to subsist with Honor,
and to reach indeed the Glorious Ends of its Institution, is an Establishment
in a more Settled, Appropriate, and Commodious Place; having hitherto (like the
Tabernacle in the Wilderness) been only Ambulatory for almost Forty-Years: But
Solomon built the First Temple; and what forbids us to hope, that as Great a
Prince may build Solomon's House, as that Great Chancellor (one of Your
Lordship's Learned Predecessors) had designed the Plan; Verulamii Atlantis
there being nothing in that August and Noble Model impossible, or beyond the
Power of Nauare and Learned Industry.

Thus, whilst King Solomon's Temple was Consecrated to the God of Nature, and
his true Worship; This may be Dedicated, and set apart for the Works of Nature;
delivered from those Illusions and Impostors, that are still endeavoring to
cloud and depress the True, and Substantial Philosophy: A shallow and
Superficial Insight, wherein (as that Incomparable Person rightly observes)
having made so many Atheists: whilst a profound, and through Penetration into
her Recesses (which is the Business of the Royal Society) would lead Men to the
Knowledge, and Admiration of the Glorious Author.

And now, My Lord, I expect some will wonder what my Meaning is, to usher in a
Trifle, with so much Magnificence, and end at last in a fine Receipt for the
Dressing of a Sallet with an Handful of Pot Herbs! But yet, My Lord, this
Subject, as low and despicable as it appears, challenges a Part of Natural
History; and the Greatest Princes have thought it no Disgrace, not only to make
it their Diversion, but their Care, and to promote and encourage it in the
midst of their weightiest Affairs: He who wrote of the Cedar of Libanus, wrote
also of the Hysop which grows upon the Wall.

To verify this, how much might I say of Gardens and Rural Employments,
preferrable to the Pomp and Grandeur of other Secular Business, and that in the
Estimate of as Great Men as any Age has produced! And it is of such Great Souls
we have it recorded; That after they had performed the Noblest Exploits for the
Public, they sometimes changed their Scepters for the Spade, and their Purple
for the Gardiner's Apron. And of these, some, My Lord, were Emperors, Kings,
Consuls, Dictators, and Wise Statesmen; who amidst the most important Affairs,
both in Peace and War, have quitted all their Pomp and Dignity in Exchange of
this Learned Pleasure: Nor that of the most refined Part of Agriculture (the
Philosophy of the Garden and Parterre only) but of Herbs, and wholesome
Sallets, and other plain and useful Parts of Geoponicks, and Wrote Books of
Tillage and Husbandry; and took the Plough-Tackle for their Banner, and their
Names from the Grain and Pulse they sowed, as the Marks and Characters of the
highest Honor.

But I proceed no farther on a Topic so well known to Your Lordship: Nor urge I
Examples of such Illustrious Persons laying aside their Grandeur, and even of
deserting their Stations; (which would infinitely prejudice the Public, when
worthy Men are in Place, and at the Helm) But to show how consistent the
Diversions of the Garden and Villa were, with the highest and busiest
Employment of the Commonwealth, and never thought a Reproach, or the least
Diminution to the Gravity and Veneration due to their Persons, and the Noble
Rank they held.

Will Your Lordship give me Leave to repeat what is said of the Younger Pliny,
(Nephew to the Naturalist) and whom I think we may parallel with the Greatest
of his time (and perhaps of any since) under the Worthiest Emperor the Roman
World ever had? A Person of vast Abilities, Rich, and High in his Master's
Favor; that so Husbanded his time, as in the Midst of the weightiest Affairs,
to have Answered, and by his Si quid temporis a civilibus negotiis, quibus
totum jam intenderat animum, suffurari potuit, colendis agris, priscos illos
Romanos Numam Pompilium, Cincinnatum, Catonem, Fabios, Cicerones, aliosque
virtute claros viros imitare; qui in magno honor constituti, vites putare,
stercorare agros, and irrigare nequaquam turpe and inhonestum putarunt. In Vit.
Plin. 2.
Example, made good what I have said on this Occasion. The Ancient and best
Magistrates of Rome, allowed but the Ninth Day for the City and Public
Business; the rest for the Country and the Sallet Garden: There were then fewer
Causes indeed at the Bar; but never greater Justice, nor better Judges and
Advocates. And it is hence observed, that we hardly find a Great and Wise Man
among the Ancients, qui nullos habuit hortos, excepting only Pomponius Atticus;
whilst his Dear Cicero professes, that he never laid out his Money more
readily, than in the purchasing of Gardens, and those sweet Retirements, for
which he so often left the Rostra (and Court of the Greatest and most
flourishing State of the World) to visit, prune, and water them with his own
Hands.

But, My Lord, I forget with whom I am talking thus; and a Gardener ought not
to be so bold. The Present I humbly make Your Lordship, is indeed but a Sallet
of Crude Herbs: But there is among them that which was a Prize at the Isthmian
Games; and Your Lordship knows who it was both accepted, and rewarded as
despicable an Oblation of this kind. The Favor I humbly beg, is Your Lordship's
Pardon for this Presumption. The Subject is mean, and requires it, and my
Reputation in danger; shou d Your Lordship hence suspect that one could never
write so much of dressing Sallets, who minded any thing serious, besides the
gratifying a Sensual Appetite with a Voluptuary Apician Art.

Truly, My Lord, I am so far from designing to promote those Supplicia
Luxuriae, (as Seneca calls them) by what I have here written; that were it in
my Power, I would recall the World, if not altogether to their Pristine Diet,
yet to a much more wholesome and temperate than is now in Fashion: And what if
they find me like to some who are eager after Hunting and other Field-Sports,
which are Laborious Exercises? and Fishing, which is indeed a Lazy one? who,
after all their Pains and Fatigue, never eat what they take and catch in
either: For some such I have known: And though I cannot affirm so of my self,
(when a well dressed and excellent Sallet is before me) I am yet a very moderate
Eater of them. So as to this Book-Luxury, I can affirm, and that truly what the
Poet says of himself (on a less innocent Occasion) Lasciva pagina, vita proba.
God forbid, that after all I have advanced in Praise of Sallets, I should be
thought to plead for the Vice I censure, and choose that of Epicurus for my
Lemma; In hac art consenui; or to have spent my time in nothing else. The Plan
annexed to these Papers, and the Apparatus made to superstruct upon it, would
acquit me of having bent all my Contemplations on Sallets only. What I humbly
offer Your Lordship, is (as I said) Part of Natural History, the Product of
Horticulture, and the Field, dignified by the most illustrious, and sometimes
tilled Laureato Vomere; which, as it concerns a Part of Philosophy, I may
(without Vanity) be allowed to have taken some Pains in Cultivating, as an
inferior Member of the Royal Society.

But, My Lord, whilst You read on (if at least You vouchsafe me that Honor to
read at all) I am conscious I rob the Public of its most Precious Moments.

I therefore Humbly again Implore Your Lordship's Pardon: Nor indeed needed I
to have said half this, to kindle in Your Breast, that which is already shining
there (Your Lordship's Esteem of the Royal Society) after what You were pleased
to Express in such an Obliging manner, when it was lately to wait upon Your
Lordship; among whom I had the Honor to be a Witness of Your Generous, and
Favorable Acceptance of their Addresses, who am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Most Obedient-Servant, JOHN EVELYN.

THE PREFACE.
THE Favorable Entertainment which the Calendar has found, encouraging the
Bookseller to adventure upon a Ninth Impression, I could not refuse his Request
of my Revising, and Giving it the best Improvement I was capable, to an
Inexhaustible Subject, as it regards a Part of Horticulture; and offer some
little Aid to such as love a Diversion so Innocent and Laudable. There are
those of late, who have arrogated, and given the Glorious Title of Complete and
Accomplished Gardiners, to what they have Published; as if there were nothing
wanting, nothing more remaining, or farther to be expected from the Field; and
that Nature had been quite emptied of all her fertile Store: Whilst those who
thus magnify their Discoveries, have after all, penetrated but a very little
Way into this Vast, Ample, and as yet, Unknown Territory; Who see not, that it
would still require the Revolution of many Ages; deep, and long Experience, for
any Man to Emerge that Perfect, and Accomplish d Artist- Gardener they boast
themselves to be: Nor do I think, Men will ever reach the End, and far extended
Limits of the Vegetable Kingdom, so incomprehensible is the Variety it every
Day produces, of the most Useful, and Admirable of all the Aspectable Works of
God; since almost all we see, and touch, and taste, and smell, eat and drink,
are clad with, and defended (from the Greatest Prince to the Meanest Peasant)
is furnished from that Great and Universal Plantation, Epitomiz d in our
Gardens, highly worth the Contemplation of the most Profound Divine, and
Deepest Philosopher.

I should be ashamed to acknowledge how little I have advanced, could I find
that ever any Mortal Man from Adam, Noah, Solomon, Aristotle, Theophrastus,
Dioscorides, and the rest of Nature's Interpreters, had ever arrived to the
perfect Knowledge of any one Plant, or Vulgar Weed whatsoever: But this perhaps
may yet possibly be reserved for another State of Things, and a Ut hujusmodi
historiam vix dum incohatum, non ante absolvendam putem,
Exitio terras quam dabit una dies. D. Raius Praefat. Hist. Plan.

longer Day; that is, When Time shall be no more, but Knowledge shall be
increased.

We have heard of one who studied and contemplated the Nature of Bees only, for
Sixty Years: After which, you will not wonder, that a Person of my
Acquaintance, should have spent almost Forty, in Gathering and Amassing
Materials for an Hortulan Design, to so enormous an Heap, as to fill some
Thousand Pages; and yet be comprehended within two, or three Acres of Ground;
nay, within the Square of less than One (skilfully Planted and Cultivated)
sufficient to furnish, and entertain his Time and Thoughts all his Life-long,
with a most Innocent, Agreeable, and Useful Employment. But you may justly
wonder, and Condemn the Vanity of it too, with that Reproach, This Man began to
build, Luke 15.30.
but was not able to finish! This has been the Fate of that Undertaking; and I
dare promise, will be of whosoever imagines (without the Circumstances of
extraordinary Assistance, and no ordinary Expense) to pursue the Plan, erect,
and finish the Fabric as it ought to be.

But this is that which Abortives the Perfection of the most Glorious and
Useful Undertakings; the Unsatiable Coveting to Exhaust all that should, or can
be said upon every Head: If such a one have any thing else to mind, or do in
the World, let me tell him, he thinks of Building too late; and rarely find we
any, who care to superstruct upon the Foundation of another, and whose Idea's
are alike. There ought therefore to be as many Hands, and Subsidiaries to such
a Design (and those Masters too) as there are distinct Parts of the Whole
(according to the subsequent Table) that those who have the Means and Courage,
may (though they do not undertake the Whole) finish a Part at least, and in time
Unite their Labors into one Entire, Complete, and Consummate Work indeed.

Of One or Two of these, I attempted only a Specimen in my SILVA and the
CALENDAR: Imperfect, I say, because they are both capable of Great
Improvements: It is not therefore to be expected. (Let me use the Words of an
Old, and Experienced Gardener) Cuncta me dicturum, Columella de R. R. Lib. 5.
Cap. 1.
quae vastitas ejus scientiae contineret, sed plurima; nam illud in unius
hominis prudentiam cadere non poterit, neque est ulla Disciplina aut Ars, quae
singulari consummata sit ingenio.

May it then suffice aliquam partem tradidisse, and that I have done my
Endeavor.

-- Ju^tilis olim
Ne Videar vixisse.
Much more might I add upon this Charming, and Fruitful Subject (I mean,
concerning Gardening:) But this is not a Place to Expatiate, deterred, as I
have long since been, from so bold an Enterprise, as the Fabric I mentioned. I
content my self then with an Humble Cottage, and a Simple Potagere, Appendant
to the Calendar; which, Treating only (and that briefly) of the Culture of
Moderate Gardens; Nothing seems to me, should be more Welcome and Agreeable,
than whilst the Product of them is come into more Request and Use amongst us,
than heretofore (beside what we call, and distinguish by the Name of Fruit) I
did annex some particular Directions concerning SALLETS.

THE PLAN OF A Royal Garden: Describing, and Showing the Amplitude, and Extent
of that Part of Georgicks, which belongs to Horticulture; In Three Books.
BOOK I.
Chap. I. OF Principles and Elements in general. Chapter II. Of the Four (vulgarly
reputed) Elements; Fire, Air, Water, Earth. Chapter III. Of the Celestial
Influences, and particularly of the Sun, Moon, and of the Climates. Chapter IV. Of
the Four Annual Seasons. Chapter V. Of the Natural Mould and Soil of a Garden. Chapter
VI. Of Composts, and Stercoration; Repastination, Dressing and Stirring the
Earth and Mould of a Garden.
BOOK II.
Chap. I. A Garden Derived and Defined; its Dignity, Distinction, and Sorts.
Chapter II. Of a Gardener, how to be qualified, regarded and rewarded; his
Habitation, Clothing, Diet, Under- Workmen and Assistants. Chapter III. Of the
Instruments belonging to a Gardener; their various Uses, and Machanical Powers.
Chapter IV. Of the Terms used, and affected by Gardiners. Chapter V. Of Enclosing,
Fencing, Platting, and disposing of the Ground; and of Terraces, Walks, Allies,
Malls, Bowling-Greens, etc. Ch VI. Of a Seminary, Nurseries; and of Propagating
Trees, Plants and Flowers, Planting and Transplanting, etc. Chapter VII. Of Knots,
Parterres, Compartiments, Borders, Banks and Embossments. Chapter VIII. Of Groves,
Labyrinths, Dedals, Cabinets, Cradles, Close-Walks, Galleries, Pavilions,
Portico's, Lanterns, and other Relievo's; of Topiary and Hortulan Architecture.
Chapter IX. Of Fountains, Jetto's, Cascades, Rivulets, Piscina's, Canals, Baths,
and other Natural, and Artificial Waterworks. Chapter X. Of Rocks, Grotts,
Cryptae, Mounts, Precipices, Ventiducts, Conservatories, of Ice and Snow, and
other Hortulan Refreshments. Chapter XI. Of Statues, Busts, Obelisks, Columns,
Inscriptions, Dials, Vasa's, Perspectives, Paintings, and other Ornaments. Chapter
XII. Of Gazon-Theatres, Amphitheatres, Artificial Echo's, Automata and
Hydraulic Music. Chapter XIII. Of Aviaries, Apiaries, Vivaries, Insects, etc. Chapter
XIV. Of Verdures, Perennial Greens, and Perpetual Springs. Chapter XV. Of
Orangeries, Oporotheca's, Hybernacula, Stoves, and Conservatories of Tender
Plants and Fruits, and how to order them. Chapter XVI. Of the Coronary Garden:
Flowers and Rare Plants, how they are to be Raised, Governed and Improved; and
how the Gardener is to keep his Register. Chapter XVII. Of the Philosophical
Medical Garden. Chapter XVIII. Of Stupendous and Wonderful Plants. Chapter XIX. Of the
Hort Yard and Potagere; and what Fruit Trees, Olitory and Esculent Plants, may
be admitted into a Garden of Pleasure. Chapter XX. Of Sallets. Chapter XXI. Of a
Vineyard, and Directions concerning the making of Wine and other Vinous
Liquors, and of Teas. Chapter XXII. Of Watering, Pruning, Plashing, Pallisading,
Nailing, Clipping, Mowing, Rolling, Weeding, Cleansing, etc. Chapter XXIII. Of the
Enemies and Infirmities to which Gardens are obnoxious, together with the
Remedies. Chapter XXIV. Of the Gardiner's Almanac or Kalendarium Hortense,
directing what he is to do Monthly, and what Fruits and Flowers are in prime.
BOOK III.
Chapter I. Of Conserving, Properating, Retarding, Multiplying, Transmuting, and
Altering the Species, Forms, and (reputed) Substantial Qualities of Plants,
Fruits and Flowers. Chapter II. Of the Hortulan Elaboratory; and of distilling and
extracting of Waters, Spirits, Essences, Salts, Colors, Resuscitation of
Plants, with other rare Experiments, and an Account of their Virtues. Chapter III.
Of Composing the Hortus Hyemalis, and making Books, of Natural, Arid Plants and
Flowers, with several Ways of Preserving them in their Beauty. Chapter IV. Of
Painting of Flowers, Flowers enameled, Silk, Callico's, Paper, Wax, Guns,
Pasts, Horns, Glass, Shells, Feathers, Moss, Pietra Comessa, Inlayings,
Embroyderies, Carvings, and other Artificial Representations of them. Chapter V. Of
Crowns, Chaplets, Garlands, Festoons, Encarpa, Flower-Pots, Nosegays, Poesies,
Deckings, and other Flowery Pomps. Chapter VI. Of Hortulan Laws and Privileges. Chapter
VII. Of the Hortulan Study, and of a Library, Authors and Books assistant to
it. Chapter VIII. Of Hortulan Entertainments, Natural, Divine, Moral, and
Political; with diverse Historical Passages, and Solemnities, to show the
Riches, Beauty, Wonder, Plenty, Delight, and Universal Use of Gardens. Chapter IX.
Of Garden Burial. Chapter X. Of Paradise, and of the most Famous Gardens in the
World, Ancient and Modern. Chapter XI. The Description of a Villa. Chapter XII. The
Corollary and Conclusion.
-- Laudato ingentia rura, Exiguum colito. --
ACETARIA.
SALLETS in general consist of certain Esculent Plants and Herbs, improved by
Culture, Industry, and Art of the Gardener: Or, as others say, they are a
Composition of Edule Plants and Roots of several kinds, to be eaten Raw or
Green, Blanched or Candied; simple, and per se, or intermingl'd with others
according to the Season. The Boiled, Baked, Pickled, or otherwise disguised,
variously accommodated by the skilful Cooks, to render them grateful to the
more feminine Palate, or Herbs rather for the Pot, etc. challenge not the name
of Sallet so properly here, though sometimes mentioned; And therefore,

Those who Criticize not so nicely upon the Word, seem to distinguish the Olera
a frigidis distinct. See Spartianus in Pescennio. Salmas. in Jul. Capitolin.
Olera (which were never eaten Raw) from Acetaria, which were never Boiled; and
so they derive the Etymology of Olus, from Olla, the Pot. But others deduce it
from (...), comprehending the Universal Genus of the Vegetable Kingdom; as from
(...) Panis; esteeming that he who had Panis erat primis virides mortalibus
Herbae;
Quas tellus nullo sollicitante dabat.
Et modo carpebant vivaci cespite gramen;
Nunc epulae tenera fronde cacumen erant.
Ovid, Fastor. iv.
Bread and Herbs, was sufficiently blessed with all a frugal Man could need or
desire: Others again will have it, ab Olendo, i. e. Crescendo, from its
continual growth and springing up: So the younger Scaliger on Varro: But his
Father Julius extends it not so generally to all Plants, as to all the
Esculents, according to the Text: We call those Olera (says (...), Theophrast.
Plant. l. vii. cap. 7.
Theophrastus) which are commonly eaten, in which sense it may be taken, to
include both Boiled and Raw: Last of all, ab Alendo, as having been the
Original, and genuine Food of all Mankind from the Genesis 1.29.
Creation.

A great deal more of this Learned Stuff were to be picked up from the Cumini
Sectores, and impertinently Curious; whilst as it concerns the business in
hand, we are by Sallet to understand a particular Composition of certain Crude
and fresh Herbs, such as usually are, or may safely be eaten with some Acetous
Juice, Oil, Salt, etc. to give them a grateful Gust and Vehicle; exclusive of
the Plutarch Sympos.
(...), eaten without their due Correctives, which the Learned Salmas. in
Solin. against Hieron. Mercurialis.
Salmasius, and, indeed generally, the Galen. 2 R. Aliment. cap. 1. Et Simp.
Medic. Averroes, lib. v. Colloc.
old Physicians affirm (and that truly) all Crude and raw (...) require to
render them wholesome; so as probably they were from hence, as Plin. lib. xix.
c. 4.
Pliny thinks, called Acetaria: and not (as Hermolaus and some others)
Acceptaria ab Accipiendo; nor from Accedere, though so Convictus facilis, sine
art mensa Mart. Ep. 74.
ready at hand, and easily dressed; requiring neither Fire, Cost, or
Attendance, to boil, roast, and prepare them as did Flesh, and other
Provisions; from which, and other Prerogatives, they were always in use, etc.
And hence indeed the more frugal Italians and French, to this Day, Accept and
gather Ogni Verdura, any thing almost that is Green and Tender, to the very Tops
of Nettles; so as every Hedge affords a Sallet (not unagreeable) seasoned with
its proper Oxybaphon of Vinegar, Salt, Oil, etc. which doubtless gives it both
the Relish and Name of Salad, Ensalada (...), which Suidas calls (...), Olera
quae cruda sumuntur ex Aceto. Harduin in loc:
, as with us of Sallet; from the Sapidity, which renders not Plants and Herbs
alone, but Men themselves, and their Conversations, pleasant and agreeable: But
of this enough, and perhaps too much; least whilst I write of Salt and Sallet,
I appear my self Insipid: I pass therefore to the Ingredients, which we will
call

Furniture and Materials.
THE Materials of Sallets, which together with the grosser Olera, consist of
Roots, Stalks, Leaves, Buds, Flowers, etc. Fruits (belonging to another Class)
would require a much ampler Volume, than would suit our Calendar, (to which
this pretends to be an Appendix only) should we extend the following Catalogue
further than to a brief enumeration only of such Herbaceous Plants, Oluscula
and smaller Esculents, as are chiefly used in Cold Sallets, of whose Culture we
have treated there; and as we gather them from the Mother and Genial Bed, with
a touch only of their Qualities, for Reasons hereafter given.

1. Alexanders, Hipposelinum; S. Smyrnium vulgar (much of the nature of
Persly) is moderately hot, and of a cleansing Faculty, Deobstructing,
nourishing, and comforting the Stomach. The gentle fresh Sprouts, Buds, and
Tops are to be chosen, and the Stalks eaten in the Spring; and when Blanched,
in Winter likewise, with Oil, Peper, Salt, etc. by themselves, or in
Composition: They make also an excellent Vernal Pottage.

2. Artichaux, Cinara, (Carduus Sativus) hot and dry. The Heads being slit in
quarters first eaten raw, with Oil, a little Vinegar, Salt, and Pepper,
gratefully recommend a Glass of Wine; Dr. Muffet says, at the end of Meals.

They are likewise, whilst tender and small, fried in fresh Butter crisp with
Persley. But then become a most delicate and excellent Restorative, when full
grown, they are boiled the common way. The Bottoms are also baked in Pies, with
Marrow, Dates, and other rich Ingredients: In Italy they sometimes broil them,
and as the Scaly Leaves open, baste them with fresh and sweet Oil; but with
Care extraordinary, for if a drop fall upon the Coals, all is marred; that
hazard escaped, they eat them with the Juice of Orange and Sugar.

The Stalk is Blanched in Autumn, and the Pith eaten raw or boiled. The way of
preserving them fresh all Winter, is by separating the Bottoms from the Leaves,
and after Parboiling, allowing to every Bottom, a small earthen glazed Pot;
burying it all over in fresh melted Butter, as they do Wild-Fowl, etc. Or if
more than one, in a larger Pot, in the same Bed and Covering, Layer upon Layer.

They are also preserved by stringing them on Pack-thread, a clean Paper being
put between every Bottom, to hinder them from touching one another, and so hung
up in a dry place They are likewise Pickled.

It Is not very long since this noble Thistle came first into Italy, Improved to
this Magnitude by Culture; and so rare in England, that they were commonly sold
for Crowns a piece: But what Carthage yearly spent in them (as Pliny computes
the Sum) amounted to Sestertia Sena Millia, 30000 l. Sterling.

Note, That the Spanish Cardon, a wild and smaller Artichoak, with
sharp-pointed Leaves, and lesser Head; the Stalks being Blanched and tender,
are serv'd-up a la Poiverade (that is with Oil, Pepper, etc.) as the French
term is.

3. Basil, Ocimum (as Baulm) imparts a grateful Flavor, if not too strong,
somewhat offensive to the Eyes; and therefore the tender Tops to be very
sparingly used in our Sallet.

4. Baulm, Melissa, Baum, hot and dry, Cordial and exhilarating, sovereign for
the Brain, strengthening the Memory, and powerfully chasing away Melancholy. The
tender Leaves are used in Composition with other Herbs; and the Sprigs fresh
gathered, put into Wine or other Drinks, during the heat of Summer, give it a
mavelous quickness: This noble Plant yields an incomparable Wine, made as is
that of Cowslip-Flowers.

5. Beet, Beta; of which there is both Red, Black, and White: The Costa, or Rib
of the White Beet (by the French called the Chard) being boiled, melts, and
eats like Marrow. And the Roots (especially of the Red) cut into thin slices,
boiled, when cold, is of it self a grateful Winter Sallet; or being mingled
with other Oluscula, Oil, Vinegar, Salt, etc. It Is of quality Cold and Moist,
and naturally somewhat Laxative: But however by the Epigrammatist styled
Foolish and Insipid, as Innocentior quam Olus (for so the Learned Plin. H. Not.
lib. xix. cap. 8.
Harduin reads the place) it is by Diphilus of old, and others since, preferred
before Cabbage as of better Nourishment: Martial (not unlearned in the Art of
Sallet) commends it with Wine and Pepper: He names it indeed -- Fabrorum
prandia, for its being so vulgar. But eaten with Oil and Vinegar, as usually,
it is no despicable Sallet. There is a Beet growing near the Sea, which is the
most delicate of all. The Roots of the Red Beet, pared into thin Slices and
Circles, are by the French and Italians contrived into curious Figures to adorn
their Sallets.

6. Blite, Blitum; English Mercury, or (as our Country House-wives call it)
All-good, the gentle Turiones, and Tops may be eaten as Sparagus, or sodden in
Pottage: There is both a white and red, much used in Spain and Italy; but
besides its humidity and detersive Nature, it is Insipid enough.

7. Borrage, Borrago (Gaudia semper ago) hot and kindly moist, purifying the
Blood, is an exhilarating Cordial, of a pleasant Flavor: The tender Leaves,
and Flowers especially, may be eaten in Composition; but above all, the Sprigs
in Wine, like those of Baum, are of known Virtue to revive the Hypochondriac,
and cheer the hard Student. See Bugloss.

8. Brooklime, Anagallis aquatica; moderately hot and moist, prevalent in the
Scorbute, and Stone.

9. Bugloss, Buglossum; in nature much like Borrage, yet something more
astringent. The Flowers of both, with the entire Plant, greatly restorative,
being Conserved: And for the rest, so much commended by Averroes; that for its
effects, cherishing the Spirits, justly called Euphrosynum: Nay, some will have
it the Nepenthes of Homer: But indeed, what we now call Bugloss, was not that
of the Ancients, but rather Borrage, for the like Virtue named Corrago.

Burnet, See Pimpinella.

10. Buds, Gemmae, Turiones; the first Rudiments and Tops of most
Sallet-Plants, preferrable to all other less tender Parts; such as Ashen-Keys,
Broom-buds, hot and dry, retaining the virtue of Capers, esteemed to be very
opening, and prevalent against the Spleen and Scurvy; and being Pickled, are
sprinkled among the Sallets, or eaten by themselves.

11. Cabbage, Brassica (and its several kinds) Pompey's beloved Dish, so highly
celebrated by old De R. R. cap. clvii.
Cato, Pythagoras, and Chrysippus the Physician (as the only Panacea) is not so
generally magnified by the rest of Doctors, as affording but a crass and
melancholy Juice; yet Loosening if but moderately boiled, if overmuch,
Astringent, according to C. Celsus; and therefore seldom eaten raw, excepting
by the Dutch. The Cymae, or Sprouts rather of the Cole are very delicate, so
boiled as to retain their Verdure and green Color. In raising this Plant great
care is to be had of the Seed. The best comes from Denmark and Russia,
especially the Cauly-flower, (anciently unknown) or from Aleppo. Of the French,
the Pancaliere a la large Cost, the white, large and ponderous are to be
chosen; and so the Cauly-flower: After boiling some steep them in Milk, and
seethe them again in Beef-Broth: Of old they added a little Nitre. The Broccoli
from Naples, perhaps the Halm^rida of Pliny (or Athenaeus rather) Capitata
marina and florida, our Sea-keele (the ancient Crambe) and growing on our
Coast, are very delicate, as are the Savoys, commended for being not so rank,
but agreeable to most Palates, and of better Nourishment: In general, Cabbages
are thought to allay Fumes, and prevent Intoxication: But some will have them
noxious to the Sight; others impute it to the Cauly-flower rather: But whilst
the Learned are not agreed about it, Theophrastus affirms the contrary, and
Pliny commends the Juice raw, with a little Honey, for the moist and weeping
Eye, not the dry or dull. But after all, Cabbage ('it is confessed) is greatly
accused for lying undigested in the Stomach, and provoking Eructations; which
makes me wonder at the Veneration we read the Ancients had for them, calling
them Divine, and Swearing, per Brassicam. It Is scarce an hundred Years since we
first had Cabbages out of Holland* Sir Anth. Ashley of Wiburg St. Giles in
Dorsetshire, being (as I am told) the first who planted them in England.

12. Cardon, See Artichaux.

13. Carrots, Dauci, or Pastinaca Sativa; temperately warm and dry, Spicy; the
best are yellow, very nourishing; let them be raised in Ground naturally rich,
but not too heavy.

14. Chervile, Chaerophyllum, Myrrhis; The sweet aromatic Spanish Chervile,
moderately hot and dry: The tender Cimae, and Tops, with other Herbs, are never
to be wanting in our Sallets, (as long as they may be had) being exceedingly
wholesome and chearing the Spirits: The Roots are also boiled and eaten Cold;
much commended for Aged Persons: This (as likewise Spinach) is used in Tarts,
and serves alone for diverse Sauces.

Vide Onions, Schoenopraesson.
Cibbols. Cives.
15. Clary, Horminum, when tender not to be rejected, and in Omlets, made up
with Cream, fried in sweet Butter, and eaten with Sugar, Juice of Orange, or
Limon.

16. Clavers, Aparine; the tender Winders, with young Nettle-Tops, are used in
Lenten Pottages.

17. Corn-sallet, Valerianella; loos'ning and refreshing: The Tops and Leaves
are a Sallet of themselves, seasonably eaten with other Salleting, the whole
Winter long, and early Spring: The French call them Salad de Preter, for their
being generally eaten in Lent.

18. Cowslips, Paralysis: See Flowers.

19. Cresses, Nasturtium, Garden Cresses; to be monthly sown: But above all the
Indian, moderately hot, and aromatic, quicken the torpent Spirits, and purge
the Brain, and are of singular effect against the Scorbute. Both the tender
Leaves, Calices, Cappuchin Capers, and Flowers, are laudably mixed with the
colder Plants. The Buds being Candy'd, are likewise used in Strewings all
Winter. There is the Nastur. Hybernicum commended also, and the vulgar
Water-Cress, proper in the Spring, all of the same Nature, though of different
Degrees, and best for raw and cold Stomachs, but nourish little.

20. Cucumber, Cucumis; though very cold and moist, the most approved Sallet
alone, or in Composition, of all the Vinaigrets, to sharpen the Appetite, and
cool the Liver, (...). Athen.
etc. if rightly prepared; that is, by rectifying the vulgar Mistake of
altogether extracting the Juice, in which it should rather be soaked: Nor ought
it to be over Oiled, too much abating of its grateful Acidity, and palling the
Taste, from a contrariety of Particles: Let them therefore be pared, and cut in
thin Slices, with a Clove or two of Onion to correct the Crudity, macerated in
the Juice, often turned and moderately drained. Others prepare them, by shaking
the Slices between two Dishes, and dress them with very little Oil, well
beaten, and mingled with the Juice of Limon, Orange, or Vinegar, Salt and
Pepper. Some again, (and indeed the most approved) eat them as soon as they are
cut, retaining their Liquor, which being exhausted (by the former Method) have
nothing remaining in them to help the Concoction. Of old they Cucumis elixus
delicatior, innocentior. Athenaeus.
boiled the Cucumber, and paring off the Rind, eat them with Oil, Vinegar, and
Honey; Sugar not being so well known. Lastly, the Pulp in Broth is greatly
refreshing, and may be mingled in most Sallets, without the least damage,
contrary to the common Opinion; it not being long, since Cucumber, however
dressed, was thought fit to be thrown away, being accounted little better than
Poison. Tavernier tells us, that in the Levant, if a Child cry for something to
Eat, they give it a raw Cucumber instead of Bread. The young ones may be boiled
in White Wind. The smaller sort (known by the name of Gerckems) muriated with
the Seeds of Dill, and the Mango Pickle are for the Winter.

21. Daisy, Buphthalmum, Ox-Eye, or Bellis-major: The young Roots are
frequently eaten by the Spaniards and Italians all the Spring till June.

22. Dandelion, Dens Leonis, Condrilla: Macerated in several Waters, to extract
the bitterness; though somewhat opening, is very wholesome, and little inferior to
Succory, Endive, etc. The French Country People eat the Roots; and 'twas with
this homely Sallet, the Good-Wife Hecate entertained Theseus. See Sowthistle.

23. Dock, Oxylapathum, or sharp-pointed Dock: Emollient, and though otherwise
not for our Sallet, the Roots brewed in Ale or Beer, are excellent for the
Scorbute.

Earth-Nuts, Bulbo-Castanum; (found in diverse places of Surry, near Kingston,
and other parts) the Rind pared off, are eaten crude by Rustics, with a little
Pepper; but are best boiled like other Roots, or in Pottage rather, and are
sweet and nourishing.

24. Elder, Sambucus; The Flowers infused in Vinegar, grateful both to the
Stomach and Taste; attenuate thick and viscid Humors; and though the Leaves are
somewhat rank of Smell, and so not commendable in Sallet; they are otherwise
(as indeed is the entire Shrub) of the most sovereign Virtue; and the spring
Buds and tender Leaves, excellently wholesome in Pottage at that Season of the
Year. See Flowers.

25. Endive, Endivium, Intubum Sativum; the largest, whitest, and tenderest
Leaves best boiled, and less crude. It is naturally Cold, profitable for hot
Stomachs; Incisive and opening Obstructions of the Liver: The curled is more
delicate, being eaten alone, or in Composition, with the usual Intinctus: It is
also excellent being boiled; the middle part of the Blanch'd-Stalk separated,
eats firm, and the ampler Leaves by many perferr'd before Lettuce. See Succory.

Eschalot. See Onions.

26. Fennel, Foeniculum: The sweetest of Bolognia: Aromatic, hot, and dry;
expels Wind, sharpens the Sight, and recreates the Brain; especially the tender
Vmbella and Seed-Pods. The Stalks are to be peeled when young, and then dressed
like Sellery. The tender Tufts and Leaves emerging, being minced, are eaten
alone with Vinegar, or Oil, and Pepper, and to correct the colder Materials,
enter properly into Composition. The Italians eat the blanched Stalk (which
they call Cartucci) all Winter long. There is a very small Green-Worm, which
sometimes lodges in the Stemm of this Plant, which is to be taken out, as the
Red one in that of Sellery.

27. Flowers, Flores; chiefly of the Aromatic Esculents and Plants are
preferrable, as generally endowed with the Virtues of their Simples, in a more
intense degree; and may therefore be eaten alone in their proper Vehicles, or
Composition with other Salleting, sprinkled among them; But give a more
palatable Relish, being Infused in Vinegar; Especially those of the
Clove-Gillyflower, Elder, Orange, Cowslip, Rosemary, Archangel, Sage,
Nasturtium Indicum, etc. Some of them are Pickled, and diverse of them make also
very pleasant and wholesome Theas, as do likewise the Wild Time, Bugloss, Mint,
etc.

28. Garlic, Allium; dry toward Excess; and though both by Spaniards and
Italians, and the more Southern People, familiarly eaten, with almost every
thing, and esteemed of such singular Virtue to help Concoction, and thought a
Charm against all Infection and Poison (by which it has obtained the Name of
the Country-man's Theriacle) we yet think it more proper for our Northern
Rustics, especially living in Vliginous and moist places, or such as use the
Sea: Whilst we absolutely forbid it entrance into our Salleting, by reason of
its intolerable Rankness, and which made it so detested of old; that the eating
of it was (as we read) part of the Punishment for such as had committed the
horrid'st Crimes. To be sure, it is not for Ladies Palats, nor those who court
them, farther than to permit a light touch on the Dish, with a Clove thereof,
much better supplied by the gentler Roccombo.

Note, That in Spain they sometimes eat it boiled, which taming its fierceness,
turns it into Nourishment, or rather Medicine.

Ginny-Pepper, Capsicum. See Pepper.

29. Goats-beard, Trago-pogon: The Root is excellent even in Sallet, and very
Nutritive, exceeding profitable for the Breast, and may be stewed and dressed
as Scorzonera.

30. Hops, Lupulus: Hot and moist, rather Medicinal, than fit for Sallet; the
Buds and young Tendrels excepted, which may be eaten raw; but more conveniently
being boiled, and cold like Asparagus: They are Diuretic; depurate the Blood,
and open Obstructions.

31. Hyssop, Hyssopus; Thymus Capitatus Creticus; Majoran, Mary-gold, etc. as
all hot, spicy Aromatics, (commonly growing in Kitchin-Gardens) are of Faculty
to Comfort, and strengthen; prevalent against Melancholy and Phlegm: Plants,
like these, going under the Names of Pot Herbs, are much more proper for Broths
and Decoctions, than the tender Sallet: Yet the Tops and Flowers reduced to
Powder, are by some reserved for Strewings, upon the colder Ingredients;
communicating no ungrateful Fragrancy.

32. Jack-by-the-Hedge, Alliaria, or Sauce-alone; has many Medicinal
Properties, and is eaten as other Sallets, especially by Country People,
growing wild under their Banks and Hedges.

33. Leeks, and Cibbols, Porrum; hot, and of Virtue Prolifick; since Latona,
the Mother of Apollo longed after them: The Welsh, who eat them much, are
observed to be very fruitful: They are also friendly to the Lungs and Stomach,
being sod in Milk; a few therefore of the slender and green Summities, a little
shred, do not amiss in Composition. See Onion.

34. Lettuce, Lactuca: Though by Metaphor called Eubulus.
Mortuorum Cibi, (to say nothing of In Lactuca occultatum a Venere Adonin
cecinit Cailimachus, quod Allegorice interpretatus Athenaeus illuc referendum
putat, quod in Venerem hebetiores fiant Lactucis vescentes assidue.
Adonis and his sad Mistress) by reason of its Soporiferous quality, ever was,
and still continues the principal Foundation of the universal Tribe of Sallets;
which is to Cool and Refresh, besides its other Properties: And therefore in
such high esteem with the Ancients; that diverse of the Valerian Family,
dignified and enobled their Name with that of Lactucinii.

It is indeed of Nature more cold and moist than any of the rest; yet less
astringent, and so harmless that it may safely be eaten raw in Fevers; for it
allays Heat, bridles Choler, extinguishes Thirst, excites Appetite, kindly
Nourishes, and above all represses Vapors, conciliates Sleep, mitigates Pain;
besides the effect it has upon the Morals, Temperance and Chastity. Galen
(whose beloved Sallet it was) from its pinguid, subdulcid and agreeable Nature,
says it breeds the most laudable Blood. No marvel then that they were by the
Ancients called Sana, by way of eminency, and so highly valued by the great
Apud Sueton.
Augustus, that attributing his Recovery of a dangerous Sickness to them, it is
reported, he erected a Statue, and built an Altar to this noble Plant. And that
the most abstemious and excellent Emperor Vopiscus Tacit. For the rest both of
the Kinds and Virtues of Lettuce, See Plin. H. Not. I. xix. c. 8. and xx, c. 7.
Fernel. etc.
Tacitus (spending almost nothing at his frugal Table in other Dainties) was
yet so great a Friend to Lettuce, that he was used to say of his Prodigality,
Somnum se mercari illa sumptus effusione. How it was celebrated by Galen we
have heard; how he used it he tells himself; namely, beginning with Lettuce in
his younger Days, and concluding with it when he grew old, and that to his
great advantage. In a word, we meet with nothing among all our crude Materials
and Sallet store, so proper to mingle with any of the rest, nor so wholesome to
be eaten alone, or in Composition, moderately, and with the usual Ox^laeum of
Vinegar, Pepper, and Oil, etc. which last does not so perfectly agree with the
Alphange, to which the Juice of Orange, or Limon and Sugar is more desirable:
Aristoxenus is reported to have irrigated his Lettuce-Beds with an Oinomelite,
or mixture of Wine and Honey: And certainly it is not for nothing that our
Garden-Lovers, and Brothers of the Sallet, have been so exceedingly Industrious
to cultivate this Noble Plant, and multiply its Species; for to name a few in
present use: We have the Alphange of Montpelier, crisp and delicate; the
Arabic; Ambervelleres; Belgrade, Cabbage, Capuchin, Cross-Lettuce, Curled; the
Genoa (lasting all the Winter) the Imperial, Lambs, or Agnine, and Lobbs or
Lop-Lettuces. The French Minion a dwarf kind: The Oak-Leaf, Passion, Roman,
Shell, and Silesian, hard and crimp (esteemed of the best and rarest) with
diverse more: And here let it be noted, that besides three or four sorts of this
Plant, and some few of the rest, there was within our remembrance, rarely any
other Salleting served up to the best Tables; with unblanch'd Endive, Succory,
Purselan, (and indeed little other variety) Sugar and Vinegar being the
constant Vehicles (without Oil) but now Sugar is almost wholly banished from
all, except the more effeminate Palates, as too much palling, and taking from
the grateful Acid now in use, though otherwise not totally to be reproved:
Lettuce boiled and Condited is sometimes spoken of.

35. Limon, Limonia, citrea mala; exceedingly refreshing, Cordial, etc. The
Pulp being blended with the Juice, secluding the over-sweet or bitter. See
Orange.

36. Mallow, Malva; the curled, emollient, and friendly to the Ventricle, and
so rather Medicinal; yet may the Tops, well boiled, be admitted, and the rest
(though out of use at present) was taken by the Poets for all Sallets in general.
Pythagoras held Malvae folium Sanctissimum; and we find Epimenides in De Legib.
Plato at his Mallows and Asphodel; and indeed it was of old the first Dish at
Table: The Romans had it also in deliciis, Hor: Epod. 11.
Malvae salubres corpori, approved by De Simp. Medic. L. vii.
Galen and Lib. ii. cap. 3.
Dioscorides; namely the Garden-Mallow, by others the Wild; but I think both
proper rather for the Pot, than Sallet. Nonius supposes the tall Rofea,
Arborescent Holi-hocks, that bears the broad Flower, for the best, and very
Exoneraturas Ventrem mihi Villica Malvas
Attulit, and varias, quas habet hortus, Opes.
Mart. Lib. x. And our sweet Poet: -- Nulla est humanior herba,
Nulla magis suavi commoditate bona est,
Omnia tam placide regerat, blandeque relaxat,
Emollitque vias, nec sinit esse rudes.
Cowl. Plan. L. 4.
Laxative; but by reason of their clamminess and Lentor, banished from our
Sallet, though by some commended and eaten with Oil and Vinegar, and some with
Butter.

Mercury, Bonus Henricus, English Mercury, or Lapathum Vnctuosum. See Blitum.

37. Melon, Melo; to have been reckoned rather among Fruits; and though an usual
Ingredient in our Sallet; yet for its transcendent delicacy and flavor, cooling
and exhilarating Nature (if sweet, dry, weighty, and well-fed) not only
superior to all the Gourd-kind, but Paragon with the noblest Productions of the
Garden. Jos. Scaliger and Casaubon, think our Melon unknown to the Ancients,
(which others contradict) as yet under the name of Cucumers: But he who reads
how artificially they were Cultivated, raised under Glasses, and exposed to the
hot Sun, (for Tiberius) cannot well doubt of their being the same with ours.

There is also a Winter-Melon, large and with black Seeds, exceedingly Cooling,
brought us from abroad, and the hotter Climates, where they drink Water after
eating Melons; but in the colder (after all dispute) Wine is judged the better:
That it has indeed by some been accused as apt to corrupt in the Stomach (as do
all things else eaten in excess) is not denied: But a perfect good Melon is
certainly as harmless a Fruit as any whatsoever; and may safely be mingled with
Sallet, in Pulp or Slices, or more properly eaten by it self, with a little
Salt and Pepper; for a Melon which requires Sugar to commend it, wants of
Perfection. Note, That this Fruit was very rarely cultivated in England, so as
to bring it to Maturity, till Sir Geo. Gardner came out of Spain. I my self
remembering, when an ordinary Melon would have been sold for five or six
Shillings. The small unripe Fruit, when the others are past, may be Pickled
with Mango, and are very delicate.

38. Mint, Mentha; the Angustifolia Spicata, Spear-Mint; dry and warm, very
fragrant, a little pressed, is friendly to the weak Stomach, and powerful
against all Nervous Crudities: The gentler Tops of the Orange-Mint, enter well
into our Composition, or are grateful alone (as are also the other sorts) with
the Juice of Orange, and a little Sugar.

39. Mushroms, Fungi; By the Cic. ad Attic.
Orator called Terrae, by Porphyry Deorum filii, without Seed (as produced by
the Midwifry of Autumnal Thunder-Storms, portending the Mischief they cause) by
the French, Champignons, with all the Species of the Boletus, etc. for being,
as some hold, neither Root, Herb, Flower, nor Fruit, nor to be eaten crude;
should be therefore banished entry into our Sallet, were I to order the
Composition; however so highly contended for by many, as the very principal and
top of all the rest; whilst I think them tolerable only (at least in this
Climate) if being fresh and skilfully chosen, they are accommodated with the
nicest Care and Circumspection; generally reported to have something malignant
and noxious in them: Nor without cause; from the many sad Examples, frequent
Mischiefs, and funest Accidents they have produced, not only to particular
Persons, but whole Families: Exalted indeed they were to the second, Course of
the Caesarian Tables, with the noble Title (...), a Dainty fit for the Gods
alone; to whom they sent the Emperor Sueton. in Claudi.
Claudius, as they have many since, to the other World. But he that reads how
Seneca Sen. Ep. lxiii.
deplores his lost Friend, that brave Commander Annaeus Serenus, and several
other gallant Persons with him, who all of them perished at the same Repast;
would be apt to ask with the Plin. N. H. l. xxli. c. 2^.
Naturalist (speaking of this suspicious Dainty) Quae voluptas tanta ancipitis
cibi? and who indeed would hazard it? So true is that of the Poet; He that eats
Mushroms, many times Nil amplius edit, eats no more perhaps all his Life after.
What other deterring Epithets are given for our Caution, (...), heavy and
choking. (Athenaeus reporting of the Poet Euripides's, finding a Woman and her
three Children strangled by eating of them) one would think sufficient warning.

Among these comes in the Fungus Reticularis, to be found about London, as at
Fulham and other places; whilst at no small charge we send for them into
France; as we also do for Trufles, P^g-nuts, and other subterraneous Tubera,
which in Italy they fry in Oil, and eat with Pepper: They are commonly
discovered by a Nasute Swine purposely brought up; being of a Chessnut Color,
and heady Smell, and not seldom found in England, particularly in a Park of my
Lord Cotton's, at Rushton or Rusbery in Northamptonshire, and doubtless in
other Transact. Philos. Number. 202.
places too were they sought after. How these rank and provocative Excrescences
are to be Apitius, lib. vii. cap. 13.
treated (of themselves insipid enough, and only famous for their kindly taking
any Pickle or Conditure) that they may do the less Mischief, we might here set
down. But since there be so many ways of Dressing them, that I can encourage
none to use them, for Reasons given (besides that they do not at all concern
our safer and innocent Sallet Furniture) I forbear it; and referr those who
long after this beloved Ragout, and other Voluptuaria Venena (as Seneca calls
them) to what our Learned Dr. Lyster Philos. Transact. Number. 89. Journey to
Paris.
says of the many Venomous Insects harboring and corrupting in a new found-out
Species of Mushroms had lately in deliciis. Those, in the mean time, which are
esteemed best, and less pernicious, (of which see the Appendix) are such as
rise in rich, airy, and dry Pratensibus optima fungis Natura est: aliis male
creditur, Hor. Sat. l. 7. Sat. 4.
Pasture-Grounds; growing on the Staff or Pedicule of about an Inch thick and
high; moderately Swelling ( Target-like) round and firm, being underneath of a
pale saffronish hue, curiously radiated in parallel Lines and Edges, which
becoming either Yellow, Orange, or Black, are to be rejected: But besides what
the Harvest-Months produce, they are likewise raised Bacon Not. Hist. 12. Cent.
vii. 547, 548, etc.
Artificially; as at Naples in their Wine-Cellars, upon an heap of rank Earth,
heaped upon a certain supposed Stone, but in truth, (as the curious and noble
Gassend. Vita Peirs. l. iv. Raderus Mart. l. Epig. xlvi. In ponticum, says,
within four Days.
Peiresky tells us, he found to be) nothing but an heap of old Fungus's,
reduced and compacted to a stony hardness, upon which they lay Earth, and
sprinkle it with warm Water, in which Mushroms have been steeped. And in
France, by making an hot Bed of Asses-Dung, and when the heat is in Temper,
watering it (as above) well impregnated with the Parings and Offals of refuse
Fungus's; and such a Bed will last two or three Years, and sometimes our common
Melon-Beds afford them, besides other Experiments.

40. Mustard, Sinapi; exceeding hot and mordicant, not only in the Seed but
Leaf also; especially in Seedling young Plants, like those of Radishes (newly
peeping out of the Bed) is of incomparable effect to quicken and revive the
Spirits; strengthening the Memory, expelling heaviness, preventing the
Vertiginous Palsy, and is a laudable Cephalic. Besides it is an approved
Antiscorbutick; aids Concoction, cuts and dissipates Phlegmatic Humors. In
short, it is the most noble Embamma, and so necessary an Ingredient to all cold
and raw Salleting, that it is very rarely, if at all, to be left out. In Italy
in making Mustard, they mingle Limon and Orange-Peel, with the Seeds. How the
best is made, see hereafter.

Nasturtium Indicum. See Cresses.

41. Nettles, Vrtica; Hot, dry, Diuretic, Solvent; purifies the Blood: The
Buds, and very tender Cimae, a little bruised, are by some eaten raw, by others
boiled, especially in Spring-Pottage, with other Herbs.

42. Onion, Cepa, Porrum; the best are such as are brought us out of Spain,
whence they of St. Omers had them, and some that have weighed eight Pounds.
Choose therefore the large, round, white, and thin Skinned. Being eaten crude
and alone with Oil, Vinegar, and Pepper, we own them in Sallet, not so hot as
Garlic, nor at all so rank: Boiled, they give a kindly relish; raise Appetite,
corroborate the Stomach, cut Phlegm, and profit the Asthmatical: But eaten in
excess, are said to offend the Head and Eyes, unless Edulcorated with a gentle
maceration. In the mean time, as to their being noxious to the Sight, is
imputable only to the Vapor rising from the raw Onion, when peeled, which some
commend for its purging and quickening that Sense. How they are used in Pottage,
boiled in Milk, stewed, etc. concerns the Kitchen. In our cold Sallet we supply
them with the Porrum Sectile, Tops of Leeks, and Eschalots (Ascalonia) of gust
more exalted, yet not to the degree of Garlic. Or (by what of later use is
much preferred) with a Clove or two of Raccombo, of a yet milder and delicate
nature, which by rubbing the Dish only, imparts its Virtue agreeably enough. In
Italy they frequently make a Sallet of Scalions, Cives, and Chibbols only
seasoned with Oil and Pepper; and an honest laborious Countryman, with good
Bread, Salt, and a little Parsley, will make a contented Meal with a roasted
Onion. How this noble Bulb was deified in O Sanctas gentes, quibus haec
nascuntur in hortis
Numina. -- Juv. Sat. 15.

Egypt we are told, and that whilst they were building the Pyramids, there was
spent in this Root Herodotus.
Ninety Tun of Gold among the Workmen. So lushious and tempting it seems they
were, that as whole Nations have subsisted on them alone; so the Israelites
were ready to return to Slavery and Brick-making for the love of them. Indeed
Hecamedes we find presents them to Patroclus, in Homer, as a Regalo; But
certainly we are either mistaken in the Species (which some will have to be
Melons) or use Poetic License, when we so highly magnify them.

43. Orach, Atriplex: Is cooling, allays the Pituit Humor: Being set over the
Fire, neither this, nor Lettuce, needs any other Water than their own moisture
to boil them in, without Expression: The tender Leaves are mingled with other
cold Salleting; but it is better in Pottage. See Blitum.

44. Orange, Arantiae (Malum aureum) moderately dry, cooling, and incisive;
sharpens Appetite, exceedingly refreshes and resists Putrefaction: We speak of
the Sub-acid; the sweet and bitter Orange being of no use in our Sallet. The
Limon is somewhat more acute, cooling and extinguishing Thirst; of all the
(...) the best succedaneum to Vinegar. The very Spoils and Rinds of Orange and
Limon being shred and sprinkled among the other Herbs, correct the Acrimony.
But they are the tender Seedlings from the Hot-Bed, which impart an Aromatic
exceedingly grateful to the Stomach. Vide Limon.

45. Parsnep, Pastinaca, Carrot; first boiled, being cold, is of it self a
Winter- Sallet, eaten with Oil, Vinegar, etc. and having something of Spicy, is
by some, thought more nourishing than the Turnep.

46. Pease, Pisum; the Pod of the Sugar-Pease, when first beginning to appear,
with the Husk and Tendrels, affording a pretty Acid, enter into the
Composition, as do those of Hops and the Vine.

47. Peper, Piper; hot and dry in a high degree; of approved Virtue against all
flatulency proceeding from cold and phlegmatic Constitutions, and generally all
Crudities whatsoever; and therefore for being of universal use to correct and
temper the cooler Herbs, and such as abound in moisture; It is a never to be
omitted Ingredient of our Sallets; provided it be not too minutely beaten (as
often we find it) to an almost impalpable Dust, which is very pernicious, and
frequently adheres and sticks in the folds of the Stomach, where, instead of
promoting Concoction, it often causes a Cardialgium, and fires the Blood: It
should therefore be grossly contus'd only.

Indian Capsicum, superlatively hot and burning, is yet by the Africans eaten
with Salt and Vinegar by it self, as an usual Condiment; but would be of
dangerous consequence with us; being so much more of an acrimonious and
terribly biting quality, Which by Art and Mixture is notwithstanding rendered
not only safe, but very agreeable in our Sallet.

Take the Pods, and dry them well in a Pan; and when they are become
sufficiently hard, cut them into small pieces, and stamp 'em in a Mortar to
dust: To each Ounce of which add a Pound of Wheat-flour, fermented with a
little Levain: Kneed and make them into Cakes or Loaves cut long-wise, in shape
of Naples-Biscuit. These Re-bake a second time, till they are Stone-hard: Pound
them again as before, and serce it through a fine Sieve, for a very proper
Seasoning, instead of vulgar Peper. The Mordicancy thus allayed, be sure to
make the Mortar very clean, after having beaten Indian Capsicum, before you
stamp any thing in it else. The green Husks, or first peeping Buds of the
Walnut-Tree, dried to Powder, serve for Peper in some places, and so do
Myrtle-berries.

48. Persley, Petroselinum, or Apium hortense; being hot and dry, opens
Obstructions, is very Diuretic, yet nourishing, edulcorated in shifted warm
Water (the Roots especially) but of less Virtue than Alexanders; nor so
convenient in our crude Sallet, as when decocted on a Medicinal Account. Some
few tops of the tender Leaves may yet be admitted; though it was of old, we read,
never brought to the Table at all, as sacred to Oblivium and the Defunct. In
the mean time, there being nothing more proper for Stuffing, (Farces) and other
Sauces, we consign it to the Olitories. Note, that Persley is not so hurtful to
the Eyes as is reported. See Sellery.

49. Pimpernel, Pimpinella; eaten by the French and Italians, is our common
Burnet; of so chearing and exhilarating a quality, and so generally commended,
as (giving it admittance into all Sallets) it is passed into a Proverb: L'
Insalata non e buon, ne bella,
Ove non e la Pimpinella.
But a fresh sprig in Wine, recommends it to us as its most genuine Element.

50. Purslain, Portulaca; especially the Golden whilst tender, next the
Seed-leaves, with the young Stalks, being eminently moist and cooling, quickens
Appetite, asswages Thirst, and is very profitable for hot and Bilious Tempers,
as well as Sanguine, and generally entertained in all our Sallets, mingled with
the hotter Herbs: It Is likewise familiarly eaten alone with Oil and Vinegar;
but with moderation, as having been sometimes found to corrupt in the Stomach,
which being Pickled it is not so apt to do. Some eat it cold, after it has been
boiled, which Dr. Muffet would have in Wine, for Nourishment.

The Shrub Halimus, is a sort of Sea-Purslain: The newly peeping Leaves (though
rarely used) afford a no unpleasant Acidulae, even during Winter, if it prove
not too severe.

Purslain is accused for being hurtful to the Teeth, if too much eaten.

51. Radish, Raphanus. Albeit rather Medicinal, than so commendably
accompanying our Sallets (wherein they often slice the larger Roots) are much
inferior to the young Seedling Leaves and Roots; raised on the (...), quia
tertio a satu die appareat.
Monthly Hot-Bed, almost the whole Year round, affording a very grateful
mordacity, and sufficiently attempers the cooler Ingredients: The bigger Roots
(so much desired) should be such as being transparent, eat short and quick,
without stringiness, and not too biting. These are eaten alone with Salt only,
as carrying their Peper in them; and were indeed by Dioscorides and Pliny
celebrated above all Roots whatsoever; insomuch as in the Delphic Temple, there
was Raphanus ex auro dicatus, a Radish of solid Gold; and it is said of
Moschius, that he wrote a whole Volume in their praise. Notwithstanding all
which, I am sure, the great De diaeta lib. ii. cap. 25.
Hippocrates utterly condemns them, as Vitiosae, innatantes ac oegre
concoctiles. And the Naturalist calls it Cibus Illiberalis, fitter for Rustics
than Gentlemen's Tables. And indeed (besides that they decay the Teeth)
experience tells us, that as the Prince of Physicians writes, It is hard of
Digestion, Inimicous to the Stomach, causing nauseous Eructations, and
sometimes Vomiting, though otherwise Diuretic, and thought to repel the Vapors
of Wine, when the Wits were at their genial Club. Dioscorides and De Aliment.
Facult. lib. ii.
Galen differ about their Eating; One prescribes it before Meals, the latter
for after. Some macerate the young Roots in warm Milk, to render them more
Nourishing.

There is a Raphanus rusticanus, the Spanish black Horseradish, of a hotter
quality, and not so friendly to the Head; but a notable Antiscorbutic, which
may be eaten all the Winter, and on that account an excellent Ingredient in the
Composition of Mustard; as are also the thin Shavings, mingled with our cold
Herbs. And now before I have done with this Root, for an excellent and
universal Condiment. Take Horseradish, whilst newly drawn out of the Earth,
otherwise laid to steep in Water a competent time; then grate it on a Grater
which has no bottom, that so it may pass through, like a Mucilage, into a Dish of
Earthen Ware: This tempered with Vinegar, in which a little Sugar has been
dissolved, you have a Sauce supplying Mustard to the Sallet, and serving
likewise for any Dish besides.

52. Rampion, Rapunculus, or the Esculent Campanula: The tender Roots eaten in
the Spring, like those of Radishes, but much more Nourishing.

53. Rocket, Eruca Spanish; hot and dry, to be qualified with Lettuce,
Purcelain, and the rest, etc. See Tarragon.

Roccombo. See Onions.

54. Rosemary, Rosmarinus; Soverainly Cephalic, and for the Memory, Sight, and
Nerves, incomparable: And though not used in the Leaf with our Sallet furniture,
yet the Flowers, a little bitter, are always welcome in Vinegar; but above all,
a fresh Sprig or two in a Glass of Wine. See Flowers.

55. Sage, Salvia; hot and dry. The tops of the Red, well picked and washed
(being often defiled with Venomous Slime, and almost imperceptible Insects)
with the Flowers, retain all the noble Properties of the other hot Plants; more
especially for the Head, Memory, Eyes, and all Paralytical Affections. In
short, it is a Plant endu'd with so many and wonderful Properties, as that the
assiduous use of it is said to render Men Immortal: We cannot therefore but
allow the tender Summities of the young Leaves; but principally the Flowers in
our cold Sallet; yet so as not to domineer.

Salsifax, Scorzonera. See Vipergrass.

56. Sampier, Crithmum: That growing on the Sea-Cliffs (as about Dover, etc.)
not only Pickled, but crude and cold, when young and tender (and such as we may
Cultivate, and have in our Kitchin-Gardens, almost the Year round) is in my
Opinion, for its Aromatic, and other excellent Virtues and Effects. against the
Spleen, Cleansing the Passages, sharpning Appetite, etc. so far preferrable to
most of our hotter Herbs, and Sallet-Ingredients, that I have long wondered, it
has not been long since propagated in the Potagere, as it is in France; from
whence I have often received the Seeds, which have prosper'd better, and more
kindly with me, than what comes from our own Coasts: It does not indeed Pickle
so well, as being of a more tender Stalk and Leaf: But in all other respects
for composing Sallets, it has nothing like it.

57. Scalions, Ascalonia, Cepae; The French call them Appetites, which it
notably quickens and stirs up: Corrects Crudities, and promotes Concoction. The
Italians steep them in Water, mince, and eat them cold with Oil, Vinegar, Salt,
etc.

58. Scurvy Grass, Cochlearia, of the Garden, but especially that of the Sea,
is sharp, biting, and hot; of Nature like Nasturtium, prevalent in the
Scorbute. A few of the tender Leaves may be admitted in our Composition. See
Nasturtium Indicum.

59. Sellery, Apium Italicum, (and of the Petroseline Family) was formerly a
stranger with us (nor very long since in Italy) is an hot and more generous
sort of Macedonian Persley, or Smallage. The tender Leaves of the Blancht Stalk
do well in our Sallet, as likewise the slices of the whitened Stems, which
being crimp and short, first peeled and slit long wise, are eaten with Oil,
Vinegar, Salt, and Peper; and for its high and grateful Taste, is ever placed
in the middle of the Grand Sallet, at our Great Men's Tables, and Praetors
Feasts, as the Grace of the whole Board. Caution is to be given of a small red
Worm, often lurking in these Stalks, as does the green in Fennil.

Shallots. See Onion.

60. Skirrets, Sisarum; hot and moist, corroborating, and good for the Stomach,
exceedingly nourishing, wholesome and delicate; of all the Root-kind, not
subject to be Windy, and so valued by the Emperor Tiberius, that he accepted
them for Tribute.

This excellent Root is seldom eaten raw; but being boiled, stewed, roasted
under the Embers, baked in Pies, whole, sliced, or in pulp, is very acceptable
to all Palates. It Is reported they were heretofore something bitter; See what
Culture and Education effects!

61. Sorrel, Acetosa: of which there are diverse kinds. The French Acetocella,
with the round Leaf, growing plentifully in the North of England; Roman Oxalis;
the broad German, etc. but the best is of Green-Land: by nature Cold,
Abstersive, Acid, sharpning Appetite, asswages Heat, cools the Liver,
strengthens the Heart; is an Antiscorbutic, resisting Putrefaction, and
imparting so grateful a quickness to the rest, as supplies the want of Orange,
Limon, and other Omphacia, and therefore never to be excluded. Vide Wood Sorrel.

62. Sow-thistle, Sonchus; of the Intybus-kind. Galen was used to eat it as
Lettuce; exceedingly welcome to the late Morocco Ambassador and his Retinue.

63. Sparagus, Asparagus (ab Asperitate) temperately hot, and moist; Cordial,
Diuretic, easy of Digestion, and next to Flesh, nothing more nourishing, as
Sim. Sethius, an excellent Physician holds. They are sometimes, but very
seldom, eaten raw with Oil, and Vinegar; but with more delicacy (the bitterness
first exhausted) being so speedily boiled, as not to lose the verdure and
agreeable tenderness; which is done by letting the Water boil, before you put
them in. I do not esteem the Dutch great and larger sort (especially raised by
the rankness of the Beds) so sweet and agreeable, as those of a moderate size.

64. Spinach, Spinachia: of old not used in Sallets, and the oftener kept out
the better; I speak of the crude: But being boiled to a Pult, and without other
Water than its own moisture, is a most excellent Condiment with Butter,
Vinegar, or Limon, for almost all sorts of boiled Flesh, and may accompany a
Sick Man's Diet. It Is Laxative and Emollient, and therefore profitable for the
Aged, and (though by original a Spaniard) may be had at almost any Season, and in
all places.

Stone-Crop, Sedum Minus* See Trick-Madame.

65. Succory, Cichorium, an Intube; erratic and wild, with a narrow dark Leaf,
different from the Sative, though probably by culture only; and for being very
bitter, a little edulcorated with Sugar and Vinegar, is by some eaten in the
Summer, and more grateful to the Stomach than the Palate. See. Endive.

66. Tansy, Tanacetum; hot and cleansing; but in regard of its domineering
relish, sparingly mixed with our cold Sallet, and much fitter (though in very
small quantity) for the Pan, being qualified with the Juices of other fresh
Herbs, Spinach, Green Corn, Violet, Primrose-Leaves, etc. at entrance of the
Spring, and then fried brownish, is eaten hot with the Juice of Orange and
Sugar, as one of the most agreeable of all the boiled Herbaceous Dishes.

67. Tarragon, Draco Herba, of Spanish Extraction; hot and spicy: The Tops and
young Shoots, like those of Rochet, never to be secluded our Composition,
especially where there is much Lettuce. It Is highly cordial and friendly to the
Head, Heart, Liver, correcting the weakness of the Ventricle, etc.

68. Thistle, Carduus Mariae; our Lady's milky or dappl'd Thistle, disarmed of
its Prickles, is worth esteem: The young Stalk about May, being peeled and
soaked in Water, to extract the bitterness, boiled or raw, is a very wholesome
Sallet, eaten with Oil, Salt, and Peper: some eat them sodden in proper Broth,
or baked in Pies, like the Artichoak; but the tender Stalk boiled or fried,
some prefer; both Nourishing and Restorative.

^9. Trick-Madame, Sedum mi^us, Stone-Crop; is cooling and moist, grateful to
the Stomach. The Cimata and Tops, when young and tender, dressed as Purselane,
is a frequent Ingredient in our cold Sallet.

70. Turnep, Rapum; moderately hot and moist: Napus; the long Navet is
certainly the most delicate of them, and best Nourishing. Pliny speaks of no
fewer than six sorts, and of several Colors; some of which were suspected to
be artificially tinged. But with us, the yellow is preferred; by others the red
Bohemian. But of whatever kind, being sown upon the Hot-bed, and no bigger than
seedling Radish, they do excellently in Composition; as do also the Stalks of
the common Turnep, when first beginning to Bud.

And here should not be forgotten, that wholesome, as well as agreeable sort of
Bread, we are Philos. Transact. Vol. xvii. Number. 205. p. 970.
taught to make; and of which we have eaten at the greatest Persons Tables,
hardly to be distinguished from the best of Wheat.

Let the Turnips first be peeled, and boiled in Water till soft and tender;
then strongly pressing out the Juice, mix them together, and when dry (beaten
or pounded very fine) with their weight of Wheat-Meal, season it as you do
other Bread, and knead it up; then letting the Dough remain a little to
ferment, fashion the Paste into Loaves, and bake it like common Bread.

Some roast Turnips in a Paper under the Embers, and eat them with Sugar and
Butter.

71. Vine, Vitis, the Capreols, Tendrels, and Claspers (like those of the Hop,
etc.) whilst very young, have an agreeable Acid, which may be eaten alone, or
with other Sallet.

72. Viper-grass, Tragopogon, Scorzonera, Salsifex, etc. though Medicinal, and
excellent against the Palpitation of the Heart, Faintings, Obstruction of the
Bowels, etc. are besides a very sweet and pleasant Sallet; being laid to soak
out the bitterness, then peeled, may be eaten raw, or Condited; but best of all
stewed with Marrow, Spice, Wine, etc. as Artichoak, Skirrets, etc. sliced or
whole. They likewise may bake, fry, or boil them; a more excellent Root there
is hardly growing.

73. Wood Sorrel, Trifolium acetosum, or Alleluja, of the nature of other
Sorrels.

To all which might we add sundry more, formerly had in deliciis, since grown
obsolete or quite neglected with us: As among the noblest Bulbs, that of the
Tulip; a Root of which has been valued not to eat, but for the Flower (and yet
eaten by mistake) at more than an hundred Pounds. The young fresh Bulbs are
sweet and high of taste.

The Asphodil or Daffodil; a Sallet so rare in Hesiod's Days, that Lobel thinks
it the Parsnep, though not at all like it; however it was (with the Mallow) taken
anciently for any Edule-Root.

The Ornithogalons roasted, as they do Chestnuts, are eaten by the Italians,
the wild yellow especially, with Oil, Vinegar, and Peper. And so the small
tuberous Roots of Gramen Amygdalosum, which they also roast, and make an
Emulsion of, to use in Broaths as a great Restorative. The Oxylapathum, not
used of old; in the time of Galen was eaten frequently. As also Dracontium,
with the Mordicant Arum Theophrasti, which Dodonaeus teaches how to Dress. Nay,
diverse of the Satyrions, which some condited with Sugar, others boiled in Milk
for a great Nourisher, now discarded. But what think we of the Cicuta, which
there are who reckon among Sallet Herbs? But whatever it is in any other
Country, it is certainly Mortiferous in ours. To these add the Viola Matronalis,
Radix Lunaria, etc. nay, the Green Popy, by most accounted among the deadly
Poisons: How cautious then ought our Sallet-Gatherers to be, in reading ancient
Authors; lest they happen to be imposed on, where they treat of Plants, that
are familiarly eaten in other Countries, and among other Nations and People of
more robust and strong Constitutions? besides the hazard of being mistaken in
the Names of diverse Simples, not as yet fully agreed upon among the Learned in
Botany.

There are besides several remaining, which though Abdicated here with us, find
Entertainment still in Foreign Countries: As the large Heliotrope and
Sun-flower (e're it comes to expand, and show its golden Face) which being
dressed as the Artichoak, is eaten for a dainty. This I add as a new Discovery.
I once made Macaroons with the ripe blanched Seeds, but the Turpentine did so
domineer over all, that it did not answer expectation. The Radix Personata
mounting with their young Heads. Lysimachia siliquosa glabra minor, when fresh
and tender, begins to come into the Sallet-Tribe. The pale whiter Popy, is
eaten by the Genouese. By the Spaniards, the tops of Wormwood with Oil alone,
and without so much as Bread; profitable indeed to the Stomach, but offensive
to the Head: As is also Coriander and Rue, which Galen was accustomed to eat
raw, and by it self, with Oil and Salt, as exceedingly grateful, as well as
wholesome, and of great virtue against Infection. Pliny, I remember, reports it
to be of such effect for the Preservation of Sight; that the Painters of his
Time, used to devour a great quantity of it. And it is still by the Italians
frequently mingled among their Sallets. The Lapatha Personata (common Burdock)
comes now and then to the best Tables, about April, and when young, before the
Burrs and Clots appear, being stripped, and the bitterness soaked out, treated
as the Chardoon, is eaten in Poiverade; Some also boil them. More might here be
reckoned up, but these may suffice; since as we find some are left off, and
gone out, so others be introduced and come in their room, and that in much
greater Plenty and Variety, than was ever known by our Ancestors. The Cucumber
it self, now so universally eaten, being accounted little better than Poison,
even within our Memory, as already noted.

To conclude, and after all that has been said of Plants and Salleting,
formerly in great esteem, (but since obsolete and quite rejected); What if the
exalted Juice of the ancient Silphium should come in, and challenge the
Precedence? It is a Plin. H. Not. Lib. xix. cap. 3. and xx. c. 22. See Jo.
Tzetzes Chil. vi. 48. and xvii. 119.
Plant formerly so highly prized, and rare for the richness of its Taste and
other Virtues; that as it was dedicated to Apollo, and hung up in his Temple at
Delphi; So we read of one single Root brought to the Emperor Nero for an
extraordinary Present; and the Drug so esteemed, that the Romans had long
before amassed a quantity of it, and kept it in the Treasury, till Julius
Caesar robbed it, and took this away, as a thing of mighty value: In a word, it
was of that Account; that as a sacred Plant, those of the Cyrenaic Africa,
honored the very Figure of it, by stamping it on the Reverse of their
Spanheim, De usu and Praest. Numis^ Dissert. 4to. It was sometimes also the
Reverse of Jupiter Hammon.
Coin; and when they would commend a thing for its worth to the Skies, (...),
grew into a Proverb: Battus having been the Founder of the City Cyrene, near
which it only grew. It Is indeed contested among the Learned Botanosophists,
whether this Plant was not the same with Laserpitium, and the Laser it yields,
the odoriferous -- (...)
(...). Aristoph. in Pluto. Act. iv. Sc. 3.

Benzoin? But doubtless had we the true and genuine Silphium (for it appears to
have been often sophisticated, and a spurious sort brought into Italy) it would
soon recover its pristine Reputation, and that it was not celebrated so for
nothing extraordinary; since besides its Medicinal Virtue; it was a wonderful
Corroborater of the Stomach, a Restorer of lost Appetite, and Masculine Vigor,
etc. and that they made use of it almost in every thing they eat.

But should we now really tell the World, that this precious Juice is, by many,
thought to be no other than the Of which some would have it a courser sort,
inamoeni odoris, as the same Comedian names it in his Equites, p. 239. and 240.
Edit. Basil. See likewise this discussed, together with its Properties, m st
copiously, in Jo. Budaeus a Stapul. Comment. in Theophrast. lib. vi. cap. 1.
and Bauhin. Hist. Plant. lib. xxvii. cap. 53.
Foetid Assa; our nicer Sallet-Eaters (who yet bestow as odious an Epithet on
the vulgar Garlic) would cry out upon it as intolerable, and perhaps hardly
believe it: But as Aristophanes has brought it in, and sufficiently described
it; so the Scholiast upon the place, puts it out of Controversy: And that they
made use both of the Leaves, Stalk, (and Extract especially) as we now do
Garlic, and other Hautgouts as nauseous altogether. In the mean time, Garcius,
Bontius, and others, assure us, that the Indians at this day universally sauce
their Viands with it; and the Bramin's (who eat no Flesh at all) in rich their
Sallets, by constantly rubbing the Dishes with it. Nor are some of our own
skilful Cooks Ignorant, how to condite and use it, with the Applause of those,
who, ignorant of the Secret, have admired the richness of the Gust it has
imparted, when it has been substituted instead of all our Cipollati, and other
seasonings of that Nature.

And thus have we done with the various Species of all such Esculents as may
properly enter the Composition of our Acetaria, and cold Sallet. And if I have
briefly touched upon their Natures, Degrees, and primary Qualities, which
Intend or Remit, as to the Scale of Heat, Cold, Dryness, Moisture, etc. (which
is to be understood according to the different Texture of their component
Particles) it has not been without what I thought necessary for the Instruction
of the Gatherer, and Sallet-Dresser; how he ought to choose, sort, and mingle
his Materials and Ingredients together.

What Care and Circumspection should attend the choice and collection of Sallet
Herbs, has been partly showed. I can therefore, by no means, approve of that
extravagant Fancy of some, who tell us, that a Fool is as fit to be the
Gatherer of a Sallet as a Wiser Man. Because, say they, one can hardly choose
amiss, provided the Plants be green, young, and tender, wherever they meet
with them: But sad experience shows, how many fatal Mistakes have been
committed by those who took the deadly Cicutae, Hemlocks, Aconits, etc. for
Garden Persley, and Parsneps; the Myrrhis Sylvestris, or Cow-Weed, for
Choerophilum, (Chervil) Thapsia for Fennel; the wild Chondrilla for Succory;
Dogs-Mercury instead of Spinach: Papaver Corniculatum Luteum, and horned Poppy
for Eringo; Oenanthe aquatica for the Palustral Apium, and a world more, whose
dire effects have been many times sudden Death, and the cause of Mortal
Accidents to those who have eaten of them unwittingly: But supposing some of
those wild and unknown Plants should not prove so deleterious and Vide Cardanum
de usu Cibi.
unwholesome; yet may others of them annoy the Head, Brain, and Genus Nervosum,
weaken the Eyes, offend the Stomach, affect the Liver, torment the Bowels, and
discover their malignity in dangerous and dreadful Symptoms. And therefore such
Plants as are rather Medicinal than Nourishing and Refreshing, are studiously
to be rejected. So highly necessary it is, that what we sometimes find in old
Books concerning Edules of other Countries and Climates (frequently called by
the Names of such as are wholesome in ours, and among us) mislead not the
unskilful Gatherer; to prevent which we read of diverse Popes and Emperors, that
had sometimes Learned Physicians for their Master-Cooks. I cannot therefore but
exceedingly approve of that charitable Advice of Mr. Ray Vol. xx.
( Transact. Number. 238.) who thinks it the Interest of Mankind, that all Persons
should be cautioned of advent'ring upon unknown Herbs and Plants to their
Prejudice: Of such, I say, with our excellent Cowley: (...)
(...).
Hesiod.
Poet (a little changed) Happy from such concealed, if still do lie,
Of Roots and Herbs the unwholesome Luxury.


The Illustrious and Learned Columna has, by observing what Concerning this of
Insects, See Mr. Ray's Hist. Plant. li. 1. cap. 24.
Insects did usually feed on, make Conjectures of the Nature of the Plants. But
I should not so readily adventure upon it on that account, as to its
wholsomness: For though indeed one may safely eat of a Peach or Abricot, after a
Snail has been Taster, I question whether it might be so of all other Fruits
and Herbs attacked by other Insects: Nor would one conclude, the Hyoscyamus
harmless, because the Cimex feeds upon it, as the Learned Dr. Lyster has
discovered. Notice should therefore be taken what Eggs of Insects are found
adhering to the Leaves of Sallet-Herbs, and frequently cleave so firmly to
them, as not easily to be washed off, and so not being taken notice of, passing
for accidental and harmless Spots only, may yet produce very ill effects.

Grillus, who according to the Doctrine of Transmigration (as Plutarch tells
us) had, in his turn, been a Beast; discourses how much better he fed, and
lived, than when he was turned to Man again, as knowing then, what Plants were
best and most proper for him: Whilst Men, Sarcophagists (Flesh-Eaters) in all
this time were yet to seek. And it is indeed very evident, that Cattle, and
other (...), and herbaceous Animals which feed on Plants, are directed by their
Smell, and accordingly make election of their Food: But Men (besides the Smell
and Taste) have, or should have, Reason, Experience, and the Aids of Natural
Philosophy to be their Guides in this Matter. We have heard of Plants, that
(like the Basilisk) kill and infect by The poisoned Weeds: I have seen a Man,
who was so poisoned with it, that the Skin peeled off his Face, and yet he
never touched it, only looked on it as he passed by. Mr. Stafford, Philos.
Transact. Vol. III. Number. xl. p. 794.
looking on them only; and some by the touch. The truth is, there is need of all
the Senses to determine Analogically concerning the Virtues and Properties,
even of the Leaves alone of many Edule-Plants: The most eminent Principles of
near the whole Tribe of Sallet Vegetables, inclining rather to Acid and Sour
than to any other quality, especially, Salt, Sweet, or Luscious. There is
therefore Skill and Judgment required, how to suit and mingle our
Sallet-Ingredients, so as may best agree with the Constitution of the (vulgarly
reputed) Humors of those who either stand in need of, or affect these
Refreshments, and by so adjusting them, that as nothing should be suffered to
domineer, so should none of them lose their genuine Gust, Savor, or Virtue. To
this end,

The Cooler, and moderately refreshing, should be chosen to extinguish Thirst,
attemper the Blood, repress Vapors, etc.

The Hot, Dry, Aromatic, Cordial and friendly to the Brain, may be qualified by
the Cold and Moist: The Bitter and Stomachical, with the Sub-acid and gentler
Herbs: The Mordicant and pungent, and such as repress or discuss Flatulency
(revive the Spirits, and aid Concoction;) with such as abate, and take off the
keenness, mollify and reconcile the more harsh and churlish: The mild and
insipid, animated with piquant and brisk: The Astringent and Binders, with such
as are Laxative and Deobstruct: The over-sluggish, raw, and unactive, with
those that are Eupeptic, and promote Concoction: There are Pectorals for the
Breast and Bowels. Those of middle Nature, according as they appear to be more
or less Specific; and as their Characters (though briefly) are described in our
foregoing Catalogue: For notwithstanding it seem in general, that raw Sallets
and Herbs have experimentally been found to be the most sovereign Diet in that
Endemial (and indeed with us, Epidemical and almost universal) Contagion the
Scorbute, to which we of this Nation, and most other I^landers are obnoxious;
yet, since the Nasturtia are singly, and alone as it were, the most effectual,
and powerful Agents in conquering and expugning that cruel Enemy; it were
enough to give the Sallet-Dresser direction how to choose, mingle, and
proportion his Ingredients; as well as to show what Remedies there are
contained in our Magazine of Sallet-Plants upon all Occasions, rightly
marshaled and skilfully applied. So as (with our Cowley, Garden, Miscel. Stanz.
8.
sweet Cowley) If through the strong and beauteous Fence
Of Temperance and Innocence,
And wholesome Labors, and a quiet Mind,
Diseases passage find;
They must not think here to assail
A Land unarmed, or without Guard,
They must fight for it, and dispute it hard,
Before they can prevail;
Scarce any Plant is used here,
Which against some Aile a Weapon does not bear.


We have said how necessary it is, that in the Composure of a Sallet, every
Plant should come in to bear its part, without being overpowered by some Herb
of a stronger Taste, so as to endanger the native Sapor and Virtue of the rest;
but fall into their places, like the Notes in Music, in which there should be
nothing harsh or grating: And tho admitting some Discords (to distinguish and
illustrate the rest) striking in the more sprightly, and sometimes gentler
Notes, reconcile all Dissonancies, and melt them into an agreeable Composition.
Thus the Comical Master-Cook, introduced by Damoxenus, when asked (...); What
Harmony there was in Meats? The very same (says he) that a Diatessaron,
Diapente, and Diapason have one to another in a Consort of Music: And that
there was as great care required, not to mingle Sapores minime Consentientes
(...): Haec despicere ingeniosi est artificis: Neither did the Artist mingle
his Provisions without extraordinary Study and Consideration: (...). Horum
singulis seorsum assumptis, tu expedito: Sic ego tanquam Oraculo jubeo. --
Itaque literarum ignarum Coquum, tu cum videris, and qui Democriti scripta
omnia non perlegerit, vel potius, impromptu non habeat, eum deride ut futilem:
Ac illum Mercede conducito, qui Epicuri Canonem usu plane didicerit, etc. as it
follows in the Gastronomia of Archestratus, Athen. lib. xxiii. Such another
Bragadoccio Cook Horace describes, Nec sibi Coenarum quivis temere arroget artem
Non prius exacta tenui ratione saporem.
Sat. lib. ii. Sat. 4.


Sapores minime consentientes, jarring and repugnant Tastes; looking upon him
as a lamentable Ignorant, who should be no better versed in Democritus. The
whole Scene is very diverting, as Athenaeus presents it; and to the same sense
Macrobius, Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 1. In short, the main Skill of the Artist lies
in this: What choice to choose, for delicacy best;
What Order so contrived, as not to mix
Tastes not well joined, inelegant, but bring
Taste after Taste, upheld by kindliest change.
As our Milton's Paradise Lost.
Paradisian Bard introduces Eve, dressing of a Sallet for her Angelical Guest.

Thus, by the discreet choice and mixture of the Oxo^on (Oil, Vinegar, Salt,
etc.) the Composition is perfect; so as neither the Prodigal, Niggard, nor
Insipid, should (according to the Italian Rule) prescribe in my Opinion; since
One may be too profuse, the Other -- * Qui
Tingat olus siccum muria vafer in calice empta,
^ose-sacrum irrorans piper -- Pers. Sat. vi.

over-saving, and the Third (like himself) give it no Relish at all: It may be
too sharp, if it exceed a grateful Acid; too Insulse and flat, if the Profusion
be extreme. From all which it appears, that a Wiseman is the proper Composer
of an excellent Sallet, and how many Transcendences belong to an accomplished
Sallet-Dresser, so as to emerge an exact Critic indeed, He should be skilled in
the Degrees, Terms, and various Species of Tastes, according to the Scheme set
us down in the Tables of the Learned Dr. Grew, Lect. vi. c. 2, 3.
Dr. Grew, to which I refer the Curious.

It Is moreover to be considered, that Edule Plants are not in all their Tastes
and Virtues alike: For as Providence has made us to consist of different Parts
and Members, both Internal and External; so require they different Juices to
nourish and supply them: Wherefore the force and activity of some Plants lie in
the Root; and even the Leaves of some Bitter-Roots are sweet, and e contra. Of
others, in the Stem, Leaves, Buds, Flowers, etc. Some exert their Vigor
without Decoction; others being a little pressed or contus'd; others again Raw,
and best in Consort; some alone, and per se without any (...), Preparation, or
Mixture at all. Care therefore must be taken by the Collector, that what he
gathers answer to these Qualities; and that as near as he can, they consist (I
speak of the cruder Salleting) of the Oluscula, and ex foliis pubescentibus, or
(as Martial calls them) Prototomi rudes, and very tenderest Parts Gems, young
Buds, and even first Rudiments of their several Plants; such as we sometimes
find in the Craws of the Wood-Culver, Stock-Dove, Partridge, Pheasants, and
other Upland Fowl, where we have a natural Sallet, picked, and almost dressed
to our hands.

I. Preparatory to the Dressing therefore, let your Herby Ingredients be
exquisitely culled, and cleans'd of all worm-eaten, slimy, cankered, dry,
spotted, or any ways vitiated Leaves. And then that they be rather discreetly
sprinkled, than overmuch sob'd with Spring Water, especially Lettuce, which
Dr. Muffet, de Diaeta, c. 23.
Muffet thinks impairs their Virtue; but this, I suppose he means of the
Cabbage-kind, whose heads are sufficiently protected by the outer Leaves which
cover it. After washing, let them remain a while in the Cullender, to drain the
superfluous moisture: And lastly, swing them altogether gently in a clean
course Napkin; and so they will be in perfect condition to receive the
Intinctus following.

II. That the Oil, an Ingredient so indispensibly and highly necessary, as to
have obtained the name of Cibarium (and with us of Sallet-Oyl) be very clean,
not high-colour'd, nor yellow; but with an Eye rather of a pallid Olive green,
without Smell, or the least touch of rancid, or indeed of any other sensible
Taste or Scent at all; but smooth, light, and pleasant upon the Tongue; such as
the genuine Omphacine, and native Luca Olives afford, fit to allay the tartness
of Vinegar, and other Acids, yet gently to warm and humectate where it passes.
Some who have an aversion to Oil, substitute fresh Butter in its stead; but
it is so exceedingly clogging to the Stomach, as by no means to be allowed.

III. Thirdly, That the Vinegar, and other liquid Acids, perfectly clear,
neither sour, Vapid or spent; be of the best Wine Vinegar, whether Distilled,
or otherwise Aromatiz'd, and impregnated with the Infusion of
Clove-gillyflowers, Elder, Roses, Rosemary, Nasturtium, etc. enriched with the
Virtues of the Plant.

A Verjuice not unfit for Sallet, is made by a Grape of that Name, or the green
immature Clusters of most other Grapes, pressed, and put into a small Vessel to
ferment.

IV. Fourthly, That the Salt (aliorum Condimentorum Condimentum, as Plutarch
calls it) detersive, penetrating, quickening (and so great a resister of
Putrefaction, and universal use, as to have sometimes merited Divine Epithets)
be of the brightest Bay grey-Salt; moderately dried, and contus'd, as being the
least Corrosive: But of this, as of Sugar also, which some mingle with the Salt
(as warming without heating) if perfectly refined, there would be no great
difficulty; provided none, save Ladies, were of the Mess; whilst the perfection
of Sallets, and that which gives them the name, consists in the grateful Saline
Acid-point, tempered as is directed, and which we find to be most esteemed by
judicious Palates: Some, in the mean time, have been so nice, and luxuriously
curious as for the heightning, and (as they affect to speak) giving the utmost
poinant and Relevee in lieu of our vulgar Salt, to recommend and cry-up the
Essential-Salts and Spirits of the most Sanative Vegetables; or such of the
Alcalizate and Fixed; extracted from the Calcination of Baulm, Rosemary,
Wormwood, Scurvy Grass, etc. Affirming that without the gross Plant, we might
have healing, cooling, generous, and refreshing Cordials, and all the Materia
Medica out of the Salt-Cellar only: But to say no more of this Impertinence, as
to Salts of Vegetables; many indeed there be, who reckon them not much unlike
in Operation, however different in Taste, Crystals, and Figure: It being a
question, whether they at all retain the Virtues and Faculties of their
Simples. unless they could be made without Colcination. Franciscus Redi, gives
us his Opinion of this, in a Process how they are to be prepared; and so does
our Learned Dr. Grew, Annat. Plant. Lib. 1. Sect. iv. cap. 1, etc. See also,
Transact. Number. 107. Vol. ix.
Doctor (whom we lately named) whether Lixivial, Essential, Marine, or other
factitious Salts of Plants, with their Qualities, and how they differ: But
since it is thought all Fixed Salts made the common way, are little better than
our common Salt, let it suffice, that our Sallet-Salt be of the best ordinary
Bay Salt, clean, bright, dry, and without clamminess.

Of Sugar (by some called Indian-Salt) as it is rarely used in Sallet, it
should be of the best refined, white, hard, close, yet light and sweet as the
Madera's: Nourishing, preserving, cleansing, delighting the Taste, and
preferrable to Honey for most uses. Note, That both this, Salt, and Vinegar,
are to be proportioned to the Constitution, as well as what is said of the
Plants themselves. The one for cold, the other for hot Stomachs.

V. That the Mustard (another noble Ingredient) be of the best Tewksberry; or
else composed of the soundest and weightiest Yorkshire Seed, exquisitely
sifted, winnow'd, and freed from the Husks, a little (not overmuch) dried by
the Fire, tempered to the consistence of a Pap with Vinegar, in which shavings
of the Horseradish have been steeped: Then cutting an Onion, and putting it
into a small Earthen Gally-Pot, or some thick Glass of that shape; pour the
Mustard over it, and close it very well with a Cork. There be, who preserve the
Flower and Dust of the bruised Seed in a well-stopp'd Glass, to temper, and
have it fresh when they please. But what is yet by some esteemed beyond all
these, is composed of the dried Seeds of the Indian Nasturtium, reduced to
Powder, finely bolted, and mixed with a little Levain, and so from time to time
made fresh, as indeed all other Mustard should be.

Note, That the Seeds are pounded in a Mortar; or bruised with a polished
Cannon-Bullet, in a large wooden Bowl-Dish, or which is most preferred, ground
in a Quern contrived for this purpose only.

VI. Sixthly, That the Pepper (white or black) be not bruised to too small a
Dust; which, as we cautioned, is very prejudicial. And here let me mention the
Root of the Minor Pimpinella, or small Burnet Saxifrage; which being dried, is
by some extolled beyond all other Peppers, and more wholesome.

Of other Strewings and Aromatizers, which may likewise be admitted to enrich
our Sallet, we have already spoken, where we mention Orange and Limon-peel; to
which may also be added, Jamaica-Pepper, Juniper Berries, etc. as of singular
Virtue.

Nor here should I omit (the mentioning at least of) Saffron, which the German
Housewives have a way of forming into Balls, by mingling it with a little
Honey; which thoroughly dried, they reduce to Powder, and sprinkle it over their
Sallets for a noble Cordial. Those of Spain and Italy, we know, generally make
use of this Flower, mingling its golden Tincture with almost every thing they
eat; But its being so apt to prevail above every thing with which it is blended,
we little encourage its admittance into our Sallet.

VII. Seventhly, That there be the Yolks of fresh and new-laid Eggs, boiled
moderately hard, to be mingled and mash'd with the Mustard, Oil, and Vinegar;
and part to cut into quarters, and eat with the Herbs.

VIII. Eighthly, (according to the super-curious) that the Knife, with which
the Sallet Herbs are cut (especially Oranges, Limons, etc.) be of Silver, and
by no means of Steel, which all Acids are apt to corrode, and retain a Metalic
relish of.

IX. Ninthly and Lastly, That the Saladiere, (Sallet-Dishes) be of Porcelane,
or of the Holland-Delft-Ware; neither too deep nor shallow, according to the
quantity of the Sallet Ingredients; Pewter, or even Silver, not at all so well
agreeing with Oil and Vinegar, which leave their several Tinctures. And note,
That there ought to be one of the Dishes, in which to beat and mingle the
Liquid Vehicles; and a second to receive the crude Herbs in, upon which they
are to be poured; and then with a Fork and a Spoon kept continually stirred,
'till all the Furniture be equally moistened: Some, who are Husbands of their
Oil, pour at first the Oil alone, as more apt to communicate and diffuse its
Slipperiness, than when it is mingled and beaten with the Acids; which they
pour on last of all; and it is incredible how small a quantity of Oil (in this
quality, like the gilding of Wire) is sufficient, to imbue a very plentiful
assembly of Sallet-Herbs.

The Sallet-Gatherer likewise should be provided with a light, and neatly made
Withy-Dutch-Basket, divided into several Partitions.

Thus Instructed and knowing in the Apparatus; the Species, Proportions, and
manner of Dressing, according to the several Seasons you have in the following
Table.

It being one of the Inquiries of the Noble Philosoph. Transact. Vol. III. Number.
xl. p. 799.
Mr. Boil, what Herbs were proper and fit to make Sallets with, and how best
to order them? we have here (by the Assistance of Mr. London, His Majesty's
Principal Gardener) reduced them to a competent Number, not exceeding Thirty
Five; but which may be varied and enlarged, by taking-in, or leaving out, any
other Sallet-Plant, mentioned in the foregoing List, under these three or four
Heads.

Species. Ordering and Culture. Month. Order. and Cult. Species. IX. Blanch d.
1. Endive, Tied-up to Blanch. January, February and March. April, May, Blanched
as before

Green and Unblanch'd

Blanched

Green Herbs Unblanch'd.

Rampions, Endive, Succory, Fennel, sweet. Sellery,
Lamb-Lettuce, Lob-Lettuce, Radish, Cresses, Turnips, Mustard Seedling
Scurvy Grass, Spinach, Sorrel, Greenlan^ Sorrel, French, Chervel, sweet,
Burnet, Rocket, Tarragon, Balm, Mint, Sampier, Shalots, Gives, Cabbage-Winte^
Lop Silesian Winter Roman Winter
Radishes, Cresses, Purselan, Sorrel, French, Sampier,
2. Cichory, Earth'd-up. 3. Sellery, 4. Sweet-Fennel, 5. Rampions, 6. Roman
Lettuce, Tied-up to Blanch.

Tied close up.

Pome and Blanch of themselves.

7. Cosse Lettuce, 8. Silesian Lettuce, 9. Cabbage Lettuce, XXVI. Green (...)
10. Lob-Lettuce, Leaves, all of a midling size. 11. Corn-Sallet, 12. Purslane,
13. Cress^s broad, Seed-Leaves, and the next to them. 14. Spinach, curled, 15.
Sorrel, French, The fine young Leaves only, with the first Shoots. 16. Sorrel,
Greenland, 17. Radish, Only the tender young Leaves. 18. Cresses, The
Seed-Leaves, and those only next them. 19. Turnep, The Seed-Leaves only. 20.
Mustard, 21. Scurvy Grass, 22. Chervil, The young Leaves immediately after the
Seedlings. 23. Burnet, 24. Rocket, Spanish, 25. Persly, 26. Tarragon, The
tender Shoots and Tops. 27. Mints, 28. Sampier, The young tender Leaves and
Shoots. 29. Balm, 30. Sage, Red, 31. Shalots, The tender young Leaves. 32.
Cives and Onion, 33. Nasturtium, Indian The Flowers and Bud-Flowers. 34.
Rampion, Belgrade, The Seed-Leaves and young Tops. 35. Trip-Madame,

Proportion. Month. Order. and Cult* Species. Proportion. 10 Roots in Number. 2
Roots in Number. 5 Roots in Number. 10 Roots in Number. 4 Roots in Number.
A pugil of each.

Three parts each.

Of each One part.

Two parts.

One part of each.

Twenty large Leaves.

One small part of each.

Very few.

Two pugils or small handfuls.

Of each a pugil.

Three parts.

Two parts.

1 Fasciat, or pretty full gripe.

Two parts.

One part.

and June. July, August, and September. October, November, and December.

Note, That the young Seedling Leaves of Orange and Limon may all these Months
be mingled with the Sallet.

Blanched, and may be eaten by themselves with some Nasturtium- Flowers. Green
Herbs by themselves, or mingled with the Blanched.
Blanched Green
Onions, young. Sage-tops, the Red, Persley, Cresses, the Indian, Lettuce,
Belgrade, Trip-Madame, Chervil, sweet. Burnet,
Silesian Lettuce, Roman Lettuce, Cress, Cabbage,
Cresses, Nasturtium, Purslane, Lop-Lettuce, Belgrade, or Crumpen- Lettuce.
Tarragon, Sorrel, French, Burnet, Trip-Madame,
Endive. Sellery, Lop-Lettuce, Lambs-Lettuce, Radish, Cresses,
Turnips, Mustard Seedlings, Cresses, broad, Spinach,
Six parts.

Two parts.

Of each One part.

Two parts.

One whole Lettuce.

Two parts.

Four parts.

Two parts.

One part.

Two parts.

One part.

Two parts of each.

One part.

Two if large, four if small, Stalk and part of the Root and tenderest Leaves.

An handful of each.

Three parts.

Two parts.

One part of each.

Two parts of each.



But all these sorts are not to be had at the very same time, and therefore we
have divided them into the Quarterly Seasons, each containing and lasting Three
Months.

Note, That by Parts is to be understood a Pugil; which is no more than one
does usually take up between the Thumb and the two next Fingers. By Fascicule a
reasonable full Grip, or Handful.

Farther Directions concerning the proper Seasons, for the Gathering,
Composing, and Dressing of a Sallet.
AND First, as to the Season, both Plants and Roots are then properly to be
Gathered, and in prime, when most they abound with Juice and in Vigor: Some in
the Spring, or a little anticipating it before they Blossom, or are in full
Flower: Some in the Autumnal Months; which later Season many prefer, the Sap
of the Herb, though not in such exuberance, yet as being then better concocted,
and so rendered fit for Salleting, 'till the Spring begins a fresh to put forth
new, and tender Shoots and Leaves.

This, indeed, as to the Root, newly taken out of the Ground is true; and
therefore should such have their Germination stopped the sooner: The approaching
and prevailing Cold, both Maturing and Impregnating them; as does Heat the
contrary, which now would but exhaust them: But for those other Esculents and
Herbs employed in our Composition of Sallets, the early Spring, and ensuing
Months (till they begin to mount, and prepare to Seed) is certainly the most
natural, and kindly Season to collect and accommodate them for the Table. Let
none then consult Culpeper, or the Figure-flingers, to inform them when the
governing Planet is in its Exaltation; but look upon the Plants themselves, and
judge of their Virtues by their own Complexions.

Moreover, In Gathering, Respect is to be had to their Proportions, as provided
for in the Table under that Head, be the Quality whatsoever: For though there is
indeed nothing more wholesome than Lettuce and Mustard for the Head and Eyes;
yet either of them eaten in excess, were highly prejudicial to them both: Too
much of the first extremely debilitating and weakening the Ventricle, and
hastening the further decay of sickly Teeth; and of the second the Optic Nerves,
and Sight it self; the like may be said of all the rest. I conceive therefore,
a Prudent Person, well acquainted with the Nature and Properties of
Sallet-Herbs, etc. to be both the fittest Gatherer and Composer too; which yet
will require no great Cunning, after once he is acquainted with our Table and
Catalogue.

We purposely, and in transitu only, take notice here of the Pickled, Muriated,
or otherwise prepared Herbs; excepting some such Plants, and Proportions of
them, as are of hard digestion, and not fit to be eaten altogether Crude, (of
which in the Appendix) and among which I reckon Ash-keys, Broom-buds and Pods,
Haricos, Gurkems, Olives, Capers, the Buds and Seeds of Nasturtia, Young
Wall-nuts, Pineapples, Eringo, Cherries, Cornelians, Berberries, etc. together
with several Stalks, Roots, and Fruits; Ordinary Pot Herbs, Anis, Cistus
Hortorum, Horminum, Pulegium, Satureia, Thyme; the entire Family of Pulse and
Legumena; or other Sauces, Pies, Tarts, Omlets, Tansie, Farces, etc. Condites
and Preserves with Sugar by the Hand of Ladies; though they are all of them the
genuine Production of the Garden, and mentioned in our Calendar, together with
their Culture; whilst we confine our selves to such Plants and Esculenta as we
find at hand; delight our selves to gather, and are easily prepared for an
Extemporary Collation, or to Usher in, and Accompany other (more Solid, though
happily not more Agreeable) Dishes, as the Custom is.

But there now starts up a Question, Whether it were better, or more proper, to
Begin with Sallets, or End and Conclude with them? Some think the harder Meats
should first be eaten for better Concoction; others, those of easiest
Digestion, to make way, and prevent Obstruction; and this makes for our
Sallets, Horarii, and Fugaces Fructus (as they call 'em) to be eaten first of
all, as agreeable to the general Opinion of the great Hippocrates, and Galen,
and of Celsus before him. And therefore the French do well, to begin with their
Herbaceous Pottage, and for the Cruder, a Reason is given: Mart. Epig. lib. xi.
39.
Prima tibi dabitur Ventri Lactuca movendo
Vtilis, and Poris fila resecta suis.
And though this Custom came in about Domitian's time Athen. l. 2. Of which
Change of Diet se^ Plut. iv. Sympos. 9. Plinii Epist. 1. ad Eretrium.
, (...), they anciently did quite the contrary, Virg. Moreto.
Grataque nobilium Lactuca ciborum. But of later Times, they were constant at
the Ante-coenia, eating plentifully of Sallet, especially of Lettuce, and more
refrigerating Herbs. Nor without Cause: For drinking liberally, they were found
to expel, and allay the Fumes and Vapors of the genial Compotation, the
spirituous Liquor gently conciliating Sleep: Besides, that being of a crude
nature, more disposed, and apt to fluctuate, corrupt, and disturb a surcharged
Stomach; they thought convenient to begin with Sallets, and innovate the
ancient Usage.

Hor. Sat. l. 2. Sat. 4.
-- Nam Lactuca innatat acri
Post Vinum Stomacho --
For if on drinking Wine you Lettuce eat,
It floats upon the Stomach --
The Spaniards, notwithstanding, eat but sparingly of Herbs at Dinner,
especially Lettuce, beginning with Fruit, even before the Olio and Hot-Meats
come to the Table; drinking their Wine pure, and eating the best Bread in the
World; so as it seems the Question still remains undecided with them, Mart. Ep.
l. v. Ep. 17.
Claudere quae coenas Lactuca solebat avorum
Dic mihi cur nostras inchoat illa dapes?
The Sallet, which of old came in at last,
Why now with it begin we our Repast?


And now since we mentioned Fruit, there rises another Scruple: Whether Apples,
Pears, Abricots, Cherries, Plums, and other Tree, and Ort-yard-Fruit, are to be
reckoned among Salleting; and when likewise most seasonably to be eaten? But as
none of these do properly belong to our Catalogue of Herbs and Plants, to which
this Discourse is confined (besides what we may occasionally speak of
hereafter) there is a very useful Concerning the Use of Fruit (besides many
others) whether best to be eaten before, or after Meal^? Published by a
Physician of Rochel, and rendered out of French into English. Printed by T.
Basset in Fleetstreet.
Treatise on that Subject already publish^d. We hasten then in the next place
to the Dressing, and Composing of our Sallet: For by this time, our Scholar may
long to see the Rules reduced to Practice, and Refresh himself with what he
finds growing among his own Lactuceta and other Beds of the Kitchin-Garden.

DRESSING.
I Am not ambitious of being thought an excellent Cook, or of those who set up,
and value themselves, for their Skill in Sauces; such as was Mithacus a
Culinary Philosopher, and other Eruditae Gulae; who read Lectures of Hautgouts,
like the Archestratus in Athenaeus: Though after what we find the Heroes did of
old, and see them chining out the slaughtered Ox, dressing the Meat, and do the
Offices of both Cook and Butcher, (for so Achilles, Patroclus, Automedon.
Iliad. ix* and alibi.
Homer represents Achilles himself, and the rest of those Illustrious Greeks) I
say, after this, let none reproach our Sallet-Dresser, or disdain so clean,
innocent, sweet, and Natural a Quality; compared with the Shambles Filth and
Nidor, Blood and Cruelty; whilst all the World were Eaters, and Composers of
Sallets in its best and brightest Age.

The Ingredients therefore gathered and proportioned, as above; Let the Endive
have all its outside Leaves stripped off, slicing in the White: In like manner
the Sellery is also to have the hollow green Stem or Stalk trimmed and divided;
slicing-in the blanched Part, and cutting the Root into four equal Parts.

Lettuce, Cresses, Radish, etc. (as was directed) must be exquisitely picked,
cleans'd, washed, and put into the Strainer; swing'd, and shaken gently, and,
if you please, separately, or all together; Because some like not so well the
Blanched and Bitter Herbs, if eaten with the rest: Others mingle Endive,
Succory, and Rampions, without distinction, and generally eat Sellery by it
self, as also Sweet Fennel.

From April till September (and during all the Hot Months) may Guinny-Pepper,
and Horseradish be left out; and therefore we only mention them in the
Dressing, which should be in this manner.

Your Herbs being handsomely parcell'd, and spread on a clean Napkin before you,
are to be mingled together in one of the Earthen glazed Dishes: Then, for the
Oxolcon; Take of clear, and perfectly good Oyl-Olive, three Parts; of sharpest
Vinegar ( For so some pronounce it, V. Athenaeum Deip. Lib. II. Cap. 26. (...)
quasi (...), perhaps for that it incites Appetite, and causes Hunger, which is
the best Sauce.
sweetest of all Condiments) Limon, or Juice of Orange, one Part; and therein
let steep some Slices of Horseradish, with a little Salt: Some in a separate
Vinegar, gently bruise a Pod of Guinny-Pepper, straining both the Vinegars
apart, to make Use of Either, or One alone, or of both, as they best like; then
add as much Tewkesbury, or other dry Mustard grated, as will lie upon an
Half-Crown Piece: Beat, and mingle all these very well together; but pour not
on the Oil and Vinegar, 'till immediately before the Sallet is ready to be
eaten: And then with the Yolk of two new-laid Eggs (boiled and prepared, as
before is taught) squash, and bruise them all into mash with a Spoon; and
lastly, pour it all upon the Herbs, stirring, and mingling them 'till they are
well and thoroughly imbibed; not forgetting the Sprinklings of Aromaticks, and
such Flowers, as we have already mentioned, if you think fit, and garnishing
the Dish with the thin Slices of Horseradish, Red Beet, Berberries, etc.

Note, That the Liquids may be made more, or less Acid, as is most agreeable to
your Taste.

These Rules, and Prescriptions duly Observed; you have a Sallet (for a Table
of Six or Eight Persons) Dressed, and Accommodated secundum Artem: For, as the
Cratinus in Glauco,
Proverb has it,

(...). Non est* cujusvis recte condire. AND now after all we have advanced in
favor of the Herbaceous Diet, there still emerges a third inquiry; namely,
Whether the Use of Crude Herbs and Plants are so wholesome as is pretended?

What Opinion the Prince of Physicians had of them, we shall see hereafter; as
also what the Sacred Records of elder Times seem to infer, before there were
any Flesh-Shambles in the World; together with the Reports of such as are often
conversant among many Nations and People, who to this Day, living on Herbs and
Roots, arrive to incredible Age, in constant Health and Vigor: Which, whether
attributable to the Air and Climate, Custom, Constitution, etc. should be
inquired into; especially, when we compare the Antediluvians mentioned Genesis
1.29. -- the whole Fifth and Ninth Chapters, ver. 3. confining them to Fruit
and wholesome Sallets: I deny not that both the Air and Earth might then be less
humid and clammy, and consequently Plants, and Herbs better fermented,
concocted, and less Rheumatick, than since, and presently after; to say nothing
of the infinite Numbers of putrid Carcasses of Dead Animals, perishing in the
Flood, (of which I find few, if any, have taken notice) which needs must have
corrupted the Air: Those who live in Marshes, and Uliginous Places (like the
Hundreds of Essex) being more obnoxious to Fevers, Agues, Pleurisies, and
generally unhealthful: The Earth also then a very Bog, compared with what it
likely was before that destructive Cataclysm, when Men breathed the pure
Paradisian Air, sucking in a more ethereal, nourishing, and baulmy Pabulum, so
soully vitiated now, through the Intemperance, Luxury, and softer Education and
Effeminacy of the Ages since.

Custom, and Constitution come next to be examined, together with the
Qualities, and Virtue of the Food; and I confess, the two first, especially
that of Constitution, seems to me the more likely Cause of Health, and
consequently of Long-life; which induced me to consider of what Quality the
usual Sallet Furniture did more eminently consist, that so it might become more
safely applicable to the Temper, Humor, and Disposition of our Bodies;
according to which, the various Mixtures might be regulated and proportioned:
There Is no doubt, but those whose Constitutions are Cold and Moist, are
naturally affected with Things which are Hot and Dry; as on the contrary, Hot,
and Dry Complexions, with such as cool and refrigerate; which perhaps made the
Junior Gordian (and others like him) prefer the frigidae Mensae (as of old they
called Sallets) which, according to Cornelius Celsus, is the fittest Diet for
Obese and Corpulent Persons, as not so Nutritive, and apt to Pamper: And
consequently, that for the Cold, Lean, and Emaciated; such Herby Ingredients
should be made choice of, as warm, and cherish the Natural Heat, depure the
Blood, breed a laudable Juice, and revive the Spirits: And therefore my Lord
Not. Hist. IV. Cent. VII. 130. Se Arist. Prob. Sect. xx. Quaest. 36. Why some
Fruits and Plants are best raw, others boiled, roasted, etc, as becoming
sweeter; but the Crude more sapid and grateful.
Bacon shows what are best Raw, what Boiled, and what Parts of Plants fittest
to nourish. Galen indeed seems to exclude them all, unless well accompanied
with their due Correctives, of which we have taken care: Notwithstanding yet,
that even the most Crude and Herby, actually Cold and Weak, may potentially be
Hot, and Strengthening, as we find in the most vigorous Animals, whose Food is
only Grass. It Is true indeed, Nature has providentially mingled, and dressed a
Sallet for them in every Field, besides what they distinguish by Smell; nor
question I, but Man at first knew what Plants and Fruits were good, before the
Fall, by his Natural Sagacity, and not Experience; which since by Art, and
Trial, and long Observation of their Properties and Effects, they hardly
recover: But in all Events, supposing with Card. Contradicent. Med. l. iv.
Cant. 18. Diphilus not at all. Athenaeus.
Cardan, that Plants nourish little, they hurt as little. Nay, Experience tells
us, that they not only hurt not at all, but exceedingly benefit those who use
them; indu'd as they are with such admirable Properties as they every day
discover: For some Plants not only nourish laudably, but induce a manifest and
wholesome Change; as Onions, Garlic, Rochet, etc. which are both nutritive and
warm; Lettuce, Purselan, the Intybs, etc. and indeed most of the Olera, refresh
and cool: And as their respective Juices being converted into the Substances of
our Bodies, they become Aliment; so in regard of their Change and Alteration,
we may allow them Medicinal; especially the greater Numbers, among which we all
this while have skill but of very few (not only in the Vegetable Kingdom, but
in the whole Materia Medica) which may be justly called Infallible Specifics,
and upon whose Performance we may as safely depend, as we may on such as
familiarly we use for a Crude Herb Sallet; discreetly chosen, mingled, and
dressed accordingly: Not but that many of them may be improved, and rendered
better in Broths, and Decoctions, than in Oil, Vinegar, and other Liquids and
Ingredients: But as this holds not in all, nay, perhaps in few comparatively,
(provided, as I said, the Choice, Mixture, Constitution, and Season rightly be
understood) we stand up in Defense and Vindication of our Sallet, against all
Attacks and Opposers whoever.

We have mentione^ Season, and with the great Hippocrates, pronounce them more
proper for the Summer, than the Winter; and when those Parts of Plants used in
Sallet are yet tender, delicate, and impregnated with the Virtue of the Spring,
to cool, refresh, and allay the Heat and Drought of the Hot and Bilious, Young
and over- Sanguine, Cold, Pituit, and Melancholy; in a word, for Persons of all
Ages, Humors, and Constitutions whatsoever.

To this of the Annual Seasons, we add that of Culture also, as of very great
Importance: And this is often discovered in the Taste, and consequently, in the
Goodness of such Plants and Salleting, as are Raised and brought us fresh out
of the Country, compared with those which the Avarice of the Gardener, or
Luxury rather of the Age, tempts them to force and Resuscitate of the most
desirable and delicious Plants.

It is certain, says a Sir Tho. Brown's Miscel.
Learned Person, that about populous Cities, where Grounds are overforc'd for
Fruit and early Salleting, nothing is more unwholsom: Men in the Country look
so much more healthy and fresh; and commonly are longer lived than those who
dwell in the Middle and Skirts of vast and crowded Cities, environed with
rotten Dung, loathsome and common Lay-Stalls; whose noisome Steams, wafted by
the Wind, poison and infect the ambient Air and vital Spirits, with those
pernicious Exhalations, and Materials of which they make the Hot Beds for the
raising those Praecoces indeed, and forward Plants and Roots for the wanton
Palate; but which being corrupt in the Original, cannot but produce malignant
and ill Effects to those who feed upon them. And the same was well observed by
the Editor of our famous Roger Bacon's Treatise concerning the Cure of Old Age,
and Preservation of Youth: There being nothing so proper for Sallet Herbs and
other Edule Plants, as the Genial and Natural Mould, impregnate, and enriched
with well-digested Compost (when requisite) without any Mixture of Garbage,
odious Carrion, and other filthy Ordure, not half consumed and ventilated and
indeed reduced to the next Disposition of Earth it self, as it should be; and
that in Sweet, Caul suburbano qui siccis crevit in agris Dulcior. -- Hor. Sat.
l. 2.. 4.
Rising, Aerie and moderately Perflatile Grounds; where not only Plants but Men
do last, and live much longer. Nor doubt I, but that every body would prefer.
Corn, and other Grain raised from Marle, Chalk, Lime, and other sweet Soil and
Amendments, before that which is produced from the Dunghill only. Beside,
Experience shows, that the Rankness of Dung is frequently the Cause of Blasts
and Smuttiness; as if the Lord of the Universe, by an Act of visible Providence
would check us, to take heed of all unnatural Sordidness and Mixtures We
sensibly find this Difference in Cattle and their Pasture; but most powerfully
in Fowl, from such as are nourished with Corn, sweet and dry Food: And as of
Vegetable Meats, so of Drinks, it is observed, that the same Vine, according to
the Soil, produces a Wine twice as heady as in the same, and a less forced
Ground; and the like I believe of all other Fruit, not to determine any thing
of the Peach said to be Poison in Persia; because it is a Vulgar Error.

Now, because among other things, nothing more betrays its unclean and spurious
Birth than what is so impatiently longed after as Early Asparagus, etc.
Transact. Philos. Number. xxv.
Dr. Lister, (according to his communicative and obliging Nature) has taught us
how to raise such as our Gardiners cover with nasty Litter, during the Winter;
by rather laying of Clean and Sweet Wheat-Straw upon the Beds, super-seminating
and over-strowing them thick with the Powder of bruised Oyster-Shells, etc. to
produce that most tender and delicious Sallet. In the mean while, if nothing
will satisfy save what is raised Ex tempore, and by Miracles of Art so long
before the time; let them study (like the Adepti) as did a very ingenious
Gentleman whom I knew; That having some Friends of his accidentally come to
Dine with him, and wanting an early Sallet, Before they sat down to Table,
sowed Lettuce and some other Seeds in a certain Composition of Mould he had
prepared; which within the space of two Hours, being risen near two Inches
high, presented them with a delicate and tender Sallet; and this, without
making use of any nauseous or fulsome Mixture; but of Ingredients not
altogether so cheap perhaps. Honoratus Faber (no mean Philosopher) shows us
another Method by sowing the Seeds steeped in Vinegar, casting on it a good
Quantity of Bean-Shell Ashes, irrigating them with Spirit of Wine, and keeping
the Beds well covered under dry Matts. Such another Process for the raising
early Peace and Beans, etc. we have the like Number. xviii.
Accounts of: But were they practicable and certain, I confess I should not be
fonder of them, than of such as the honest industrious Country-man's Field, and
Good-Wife's Garden seasonably produce; where they are legitimately born in just
time, and without forcing Nature.

But to return again to Health and Long Life, and the Wholesomness of the
Herby-Diet, Thesaur. Sanit. c. 2.
John Beverovicius, a Learned Physician (out of Peter Moxa, a Spaniard)
treating of the extreme Age, which those of America usually arrive to, asserts
in behalf of Crude and Natural Herbs: Diphilus of old, as As Delcampius
interprets the Place.
Athenaeus tells us, was on the other side, against all the Tribe of Olera in
general; and Cardan of late (as already noted) no great Friend to them;
Affirming Flesh-Eaters to be much wiser and more sagacious. But this his
Scaliger ad Card. Exer^it. 213.
Learned Antagonist utterly denies; Whole Nations, Flesh-Devourers (such as the
farthest Northern) becoming Heavy, Dull, Unactive, and much more Stupid than
the Southern; and such as feed much on Plants, are more Acute, Subtle, and of
deeper Penetration: Witness the Chaldaeans, Assyrians, Egyptians, etc. And
further argues from the short Lives of most Carnivorous Animals, compared with
Grass Feeders, and the Ruminating kind; as the Heart, Camel, and the longaevous
Elephant, and other Feeders on Roots and Vegetables.

I know what is pretended of our Bodies being composed of Dissimilar Parts, and
so requiring Variety of Food: Nor do I reject the Opinion, keeping to the same
Species; of which there is infinitely more Variety in the Herby Family, than in
all Nature besides: But the Danger is in the Generical Difference of Flesh,
Fish, Fruit, etc. with other made Dishes and exotic Sauces; which a wanton and
expensive Luxury has introduced; debauching the Stomach, and sharpening it to
devour things of such difficult Concoction, with those of more easy Digestion,
and of contrary Substances, more than it can well dispose of: Otherwise Food of
the same kind would do us little hurt: So true is that of Cel. Lib. Cap. 4.
Celsus, Eduntur facilius; ad concoctionem autem materiae, genus, and modus
pertineat. They are (says he) easily eaten and taken in: But regard should be
had to their Digestion, Nature, Quantity and Quality of the Matter. As to that
of Dissimilar Parts, requiring this contended for Variety: If we may judge by
other Animals (as I know not why we may not) there is (after all the late
Contests about Comparative Anatomy,) so little Difference in the Structure, as
to the Use of those Parts and Vessels destined to serve the Offices of
Concoction, Nutrition, and other Separations for Supply of Life, etc. That it
does not appear why there should need any Difference at all of Food; of which
the most simple has ever been esteemed the best, and most wholesome; according
to that of the Plin. Not. Hist. l. 3. c. 12.
Naturalist, Hominis cibus utilissimus simplex. And that so it is in other
Animals, we find by their being so seldom afflicted with Men's Distempers,
derived from the Causes abovementioned: And if the many Diseases of Horses
seem to Hanc brevitatem Vitae (speaking of Horses) fortasse homini debet,
Verul. Hist Vit. and Mort. S^e th^^ thoroughly controverted, Macrob. Saturn. l.
vii. c. v.
contradict it, I am apt to think it much imputable to the Rack and Manger, the
dry and withered Stable Commons, which they must eat or starve, however
qualified; being restrained from their Natural and Spontaneous Choice, which
Nature and Instinct directs them to: To these add the Closeness of the Air,
standing in an almost continued Posture; besides the fulsome Drenches,
unseasonable Watrings, and other Practices of ignorant Horse-Quacks and surly
Grooms: The Tyranny and cruel Usage of their Masters in tiring Journeys, hard,
laboring and unmerciful Treatment, Heats, Colds, etc. which wear out and
destroy so many of those useful and generous Creatures before the time: Such as
have been better used, and some, whom their more gentle and good-natured
Patrons have in recompense of their long and faithful Service, dismissed, and
sent to Pasture for the rest of their Lives (as the Grand-Seignior does his
Meccha-Camel) have been known to live forty, fifty, nay (says Arist. Hist.
Animal. l. v. c. 14.
Aristotle, no fewer than sixty five Years. When once Old Par came to change
his simple, homely Diet, to that of the Court and Arundel-House, he quickly
sunk and dropped away: For, as we have showed, the Stomach easily concocts plain,
and familiar Food; but finds it an hard and difficult Task, to vanquish and
overcome Meats of (...).
different Substances: Whence we so often see temperate and abstemicus Persons,
of a Collegiate Diet, very healthy; Husbandmen and laborious People, more
robust, and longer lived than others of an uncertain extravagant Diet.

Hor. Sat. l. II. Sat. 2. Macr. Sat. l. VII.
-- Nam varioe res
Vt noceant Homini, credas, memor illius escae,
Quae simplex olim tibi sederit --
For different Meats do hurt; Remember how
When to one Dish confined, thou healthier wast than now:
was Osellus's Memorandum in the Poet.

Not that Variety (which God has certainly ordained to delight and assist our
Appetite) is unnecessary, nor any thing more grateful, refreshing and proper
for those especially who lead sedentary and studious Lives; Men of deep
Thought, and such as are otherwise disturbed with Secular Cares and Businesses,
which hinders the Function of the Stomach and other Organs: whilst those who
have their Minds free, use much Exercise, and are more active, create
themselves a natural Appetite, which needs little or no Variety to quicken and
content it.

And here might we attest the Patriarchal World, nay, and many Persons since;
who living very temperately came not much short of the Post-Diluvians
themselves, counting from Abraham to this Day; and some exceeding them, who
lived in pure Air, a constant, though course and simple Diet; wholesome and
uncompounded Drink; that never tasted Brandy or Exotic Spirits; but used
moderate Exercise, and observed good Hours: For such a one a curious Missionary
tells us of in Persia; who had attained the Age of four hundred Yea^s, (a full
Century beyond the famous Johannes de Temporibus) and was living Anno 1636, and
so may be still for ought we know. But, to our Sallet.

Certain it is, Almighty God ordaining Genesis ix.
Herbs and Fruit for the Food of Men, speaks not a Word concerning Flesh for
two thousand Years. And when after, by the Mosaic Constitution, there were
Distinctions and Prohibitions about the legal Uncleanness of Animals; Plants,
of what kind soever, were left free and indifferent for every one to choose
what best he liked. And what if it was held undecent and unbecoming the
Excellency of Man's Nature, before Sin entered, and grew enormously wicked, that
any Creature should be put to Death and Pain for him who had such infinite
store of the most delicious and nourishing Fruit to delight, and the Tree of
Life to sustain him? Doubtless there was no need of it. Infants sought the
Mother's Nipple as soon as born; and when grown, and able to feed themselves,
run naturally to Fruit, and still will choose to eat it rather than Flesh and
certainly might so persist to do, did not Custom prevail, even against the very
Dictates of Nature: Nor, question I, but that what the Heathen Metam. 1. Fab.
iii. and xv.
Poets recount of the Happiness of the Golden Age, sprung from some Tradition
they had received of the Paradisian Fare, their innocent and healthful Lives in
that delightful Garden. Let it suffice, that Adam, and his yet innocent Spouse,
fed on Vegetables and other Hortulan Productions before the fatal Lapse; which,
by the way, many Learned Men will hardly allow to have fallen out so soon as
those imagine who scarcely grant them a single Day; nay, nor half a one, for
their Continuance in the State of Original Perfection; whilst the sending him
into the Garden; Instructions how he should keep and cultivate it; Edict, and
Prohibition concerning the Sacramental Trees; the Imposition of Genesis xi. 19.
Names, so apposite to the Nature of such an Infinity of Living Creatures
(requiring deep Inspection) the Formation of Eve, a meet Companion to relieve
his Solitude; the Solemnity of their Marriage; the Dialogues and Success of the
crafty Tempter, whom we cannot reasonably think made but one Assault: And that
they should so quickly forget the Injunction of their Maker and Benefactor;
break their Faith and Fast, and all other their Obligations in so few Moments.
I say, all these Particulars considered; Can it be supposed they were so soon
transacted as those do fancy, who take their Measure from the Summary Moses
gives us, who did not write to gratify Men's Curiosity, but to transmit what
was necessary and sufficient for us to know.

This then premised (as I see no Reason why it should not) and that during all
this Space they lived on Fruits and Sallets; it is little probable, that after
their Transgression, and that they had forfeited their Dominion over the
Creature (and were sentenced and exiled to a Life of Sweat and Labor on a
cursed and ungrateful Soil) the offended God should, regale them with Pampering
Flesh, or so much as suffer them to slay the more innocent Animal: Or, that if
at any time they had Permission, it was for any thing save Skins to cloth
them, or in way of Adoration, or Holocaust for Expiation, of which nothing of
the Flesh was to be eaten. Nor did the Brutes themselves subsist by Prey (though
pleased perhaps with Hunting, without destroying their Fellow Creatures) as may
be presumed from their long Seclusion of the most Carnivorous among them in the
Ark.

Thus then for two thousand Years, the Universal Food was Herbs and Plants;
which abundantly recompensed the Want of Flesh and other luxurious Meats, which
shortened their Lives so many hundred Years; the Genesis ix.
(...) of the Patriarchs, which was an Emblem of Eternity as it were (after the
new Concession) beginning to dwindle to a little Span, a Nothing in Comparison.

On the other side, examine we the present Usages of several other Heathen
Nations; particularly (besides the Egyptian Priests of old) the Indian
Bramins, Relicts of the ancient Gymnosophists to this Day, observing the
Institutions of their Founder. Flesh, we know was banished the Platonic Tables,
as well as from those of Pythagoras; (See Porphyr. de Abstin. Proclum,
Jambleum, etc.
Porphyry and their Disciples) though on different Accounts. Among others of the
Philosophers, from Xenocrates, Polemon, etc. we hear of many. The like we find
in Strom. vii.
Clement Alexand. Praep. Ev. passim.
Eusebius names more. Zeno, Archinomus, Phraartes, Chiron, and others, whom
Laertius reckons up. In short, so very many, especially of the Christian
Profession, that some, even of the ancient Tertul. de Jejun. cap. iv. Hieron.
advers. Jovin.
Fathers themselves, have almost thought that the Permission of eating Flesh to
Noah and his Sons, was granted them no otherwise than Repudiation of Wives was
to the Jews, namely, for the Hardness of their Hearts, and to sati^fie a
murmuring Generation that a little after loathed Manna it self, and Bread from
Heaven. So difficult a thing it is to subdue an unruly Appetite; which
notwithstanding Sen. Epist. 108.
Seneca thinks not so hard a Task; where speaking of the Philosopher Sextius,
and Socion's (abhorring Cruelty and Intemperance) he celebrates the Advantages
of the Herby and Sallet Diet, as Physical, and Natural Advancers of Health and
other Blessings; whilst Abstinence from Flesh deprives Men of nothing but what
Lions, Vultures, Beasts and birds of Prey, blood and gorge themselves withal.
The whole Epistle deserves the Reading, for the excellent Advice he gives on
this and other Subjects; and how from many troublesome and slavish
Impertinencies, grown into Habit and Custom (old as he was) he had Emancipated
and freed himself: Be this applied to our present excessive Drinkers of Foreign
and Exotic Liquors. And now

I am sufficiently sensible how far, and to how little purpose I am gone on
this Topic: The Ply is long since taken, and our raw Sallet decked in its best
Trim, is never like to invite Men who once have tasted Flesh to quit and
abdicate a Custom which has now so long obtained. Nor truly do I think
Conscience at all concerned in the Matter, upon any Account of Distinction of
Pure and Impure; though seriously considered (as Sextius held) rationi magis
congrua, as it regards the cruel Butcheries of so many harmless Creatures; some
of which we put to merciless and needless Torment, to accommodate them for
exquisite and uncommon Epicurism. There lies else no positive Prohibition;
Discrimination of Meats being 1 Cor. viii. 8. 1 Timothy iv. 1.3.14. Romans ii. 3.
condemned as the Doctrine of Devils: Nor do Meats commend us to God. One eats
quid vult (of every thing:) another Olera, and of Sallets only: But this is not
my Business, further than to show how possible it is by so many Instances and
Examples, to live on wholesome Vegetables, both long and happily: For so Has
Epulas habuit teneri gens aurea mundi,
Et coenae ingentis tunc caput ipsa sui.
Semideumque meo creverunt corpora succo,
Materiam tanti sanguinis ille dedit.
Tunc neque fraus nota est, neque vis, neque foeda libido;
Haec nimis proles saeva caloris erat.
Sit sacrum illorum, sit detestabile nomen,
Qui primi servae regna dedere gulae.
Hinc vitiis patefacta via est, morbisque secutis
Se lethi facies exeruere novae.
Ah, fuge crudeles Animantum sanguine mensas,
Quasque tibi obsonat mors inimica dapes.
Poscas tandem aeger, si sanus negligis, herbas.
Esse cibus nequeunt? at medicamen erunt.
Colci Plaut. lib. I. Lactuca.
The Golden Age, with this Provision blessed,
Such a Grand Sallet made, and was a Feast.
The Demigods with Bodies large and sound,
Commended then the Product of the Ground.
Fraud then, nor Force were known, nor filthy Lust,
Which Over-heating and Intemp'rance nursed:
Be their vile Names in Execration held,
Who with foul Glutt'ny first the World defiled:
Parent of Vice, and all Diseases since,
With ghastly Death sprung up alone from thence.
Ah, from such reeking, bloody Tables fly,
Which Death for our Destruction does supply.
In Health, if Sallet-Herbs you cannot endure;
Sick, you will desire them; or for Food, or Cure.


As to the other part of the Controversy, which concerns us, (...), and
Occidental Blood-Eaters; some Grave and Learned Men of late seem to scruple the
present Usage, whilst they see the Prohibition appearing, and to carry such a
Face of Antiquity, Genesis ix.
Scripture, Ancyra xiv.
Councils, Can. Apost. 50
Canons, Clem. Paedag. Lib 11. c 1. Vide Prudent. Hymn. (...): Nos Oloris Coma,
nos siliqua facta legumine multitudo paraveris innocuis Epulis.
Fathers; Imperial Constitutions, and Universal Practice, unless it be among us
of these Tracts of Europe, whither, with other Barbarities, that of eating the
Blood and Animal Life of Creatures first was brought; and by our Mixtures with
the Goths, Vandals, and other Spawn of Pagan Scythians; grown a Custom, and
since which I am persuaded more Blood has been shed between Christians than
there ever was before the Water of the Flood covered this Corner of the World:
Not that I impute it only to our eating Blood; but sometimes wonder how it
happened that so strict, so solemn and famous a Sanction not upon, a Ceremonial
Account; but (as some affirm) a Moral and Perpetual from Noah, to whom the
Concession of eating Flesh was granted, and that of Blood forbidden (nor to
this Day once revoked) and whilst there also seems to lie fairer Proofs than
for most other Controversies agitated among Christians, should be so generally
forgotten, and give place to so many other impertinent Disputes and Cavels
about other superstitious Fopperies, which frequently end in Blood and cutting
of Throats.

As to the Reason of this Prohibition, its savouring of Cruelty excepted, (and
that by Galen, and other experienced Physicians, the eating Blood is condemned
as unwholesome, causing Indigestion and Obstructions) if a positive Command of
Almighty God were not enough, it seems sufficiently intimated; because Blood
was the Vehicle of the Life and Animal Soul of the Creature: For what other
mysterious Cause, as happily its being always dedicated to Expiatory Sacrifices,
etc. it is not for us to enquire. It Is said, that Justin Martyr being asked,
why the Christians of his time were permitted the eating Flesh and not the
Blood? readily answered, That God might distinguish them from Beasts, which eat
them both together. It Is likewise urged, that by the Apostolical Synod (when
the rest of the Jewish Ceremonies and Types were abolished) this Prohibition
was mentioned as a thing xv Acts, 20, 29.
necessary, and rank 'd with Idolatry, which was not to be local or temporary;
but universally enjoined to converted Strangers Quaest. and Resp. ad Orthod.
Tho. Bartholinus, de ^su Sanguinis.
and Proselytes, as well as Jews: Nor could the Scandal of neglecting to
observe it, concern them alone, after so many Ages as it was and still is in
continual Use; and those who transgressed, so severely punished, as by an
Imperial Law to be scourged to Blood and Bone: Indeed, so terrible was the
Interdiction, that Idolatry excepted (which was also Moral and perpetual)
nothing in Scripture seems to be more express. In the mean time, to relieve all
other Scruples, it does not, they say, extend to that (...) of those few
diluted Drops of Extravasated Blood, which might happen to tinge the Juice and
Gravy of the Flesh (which were indeed to strain at a Gnat) but to those who
devour the Venal and Arterial Blood separately, and in Quantity, as a choice
Ingredient of their luxurious Preparations and Apician Tables.

But this, and all the rest will, I fear, seem but Oleribus verba facere, and
(as the Proverb goes) be Labour-in-vain to think of preaching down
Hogs-Puddings, and usurp the Chair of Rabby-Busy: And therefore what is
advanced in Countenance of the Antediluvian Diet, we leave to be ventilated by
the Learned, and such as Curcellaeus, who has borrowed of all the Ancient
Fathers, from Tertullian, Hierom, S. Chrysostom, etc. to the later Doctors and
Divines, Lyra, Tostatus, Dionysius Carthusianus, Pererius, amongst the
Pontificians; of Peter Martyr, Zanchy, Aretius, Jac. Capellus, Hiddiger,
Cocceius, Bochartus, etc. amongst the Protestants; and instar omnium, by
Salmasius, Grotius, Vossius, Blundel: In a Word, by the Learned of both
Persuasions, favorable enough to these Opinions, Cajetan and Calvin only
excepted, who hold, that as to Abstinence from Flesh, there was no positive
Command or Imposition concerning it; but that the Use of Herbs and Fruit was
recommended rather for Temperance sake, and the Prolongation of Life: Upon
which score I am inclined to believe that the ancient (...), and other devout
and contemplative Sects, distinguished themselves; whose Course of Life we have
at large described in Philo de Vit. Contemp. Joseph. Antiq. Lib. 13. Cap. 9.
Philo (who lived and taught much in Gardens) with others of the Abstemious
Christians; among whom, Clemens brings in St. Mark the Evangelist himself,
James our Lord's Brother, St. John, etc. and with several of the devout Sex,
the famous Diaconesse Olympias, mentioned by Palladius (not to name the rest)
who abstaining from Flesh, betook themselves to Herbs and Sallets upon the
Account of Temperance, and the Virtues accompanying it; and concerning which
the incomparable Grotius declares ingenuously his Opinion to be far from
censuring, not only those who forbear the eating Flesh and Blood, Experimenti
Causa, and for Discipline sake; but such as forbear ex Opinione, and (because
it has been the ancient Custom) provided they blamed none who freely used their
Liberty; and I think he is in the right.

But leaving this Controversy (ne nimium extra oleas) it has often been
objected, that Fruit, and Plants, and all other things, may since the
Beginning, and as the World grows older, have universally become Effoete,
impaired and divested of those Nutritious and transcendent Virtues they were at
first endowed withal: But as this is begging the Question, and to which we have
already spoken; so all are not agreed that there is any, the least Hackwell.
Apolog.
Decay in Nature, where equal Industry and Skill's applied. It Is true indeed,
that the Ordo Foliatorum, Feuillantines (a late Order of Ascetic Nuns) amongst
other Mortifications, made Trial upon the Leaves of Plants alone, to which they
would needs confine themselves; but were not able to go through that thin and
meagre Diet: But then it would be inquired whether they had not first, and from
their very Childhood, been fed and brought up with Flesh, and better Sustenance
till they entered the Cloister; and what the Vegetables and the Preparation of
them were allowed by their Institution? Wherefore this is nothing to our Modern
Use of Sallets, or its Disparagement. In the mean time, that we still think it
not only possible, but likely, and with no great Art or Charge (taking Roots
and Fruit into the Basket) substantially to maintain Men's Lives in Health and
Vigor: For to this, and less than this, we have the Suffrage of the great
Hippoc. de vetere Medicina, Cap. 6, 7.
Hippocrates himself; who thinks, ab initio etiam hominum (as well as other
Animals) tali victu usum esse, and needed no other Food. Nor is it an
^nconsiderable Speculation, That since all Flesh is Grass (not in a Figurative,
but Natural and Real Sense) Man himself, who lives on Flesh, and I think upon
no^ Earthly Animal whatsoever, but such as feed on Grass, is nourished with
them still; and so becoming an Incarnate Herb, and Innocent Canibal, may truly
be said to devour himself.

We have said nothing of the Lotophagi, and such as (like St. John the Baptist,
and other religious Ascetics) were Feeders on the Summities and Tops of Plants:
But as diverse of those, and others we have mentioned, were much in times of
Streights, Persecutions, and other Circumstances, which did not in the least
make it a Pretense, exempting them from Labor, and other Humane Offices, by
ensnaring Obligations and Vows (never to be useful to the Public, in whatever
Exigency) so I cannot but take Notice of what a Learned L. C. Annot. in Coloss.
c. 2.
Critic speaking of Men's neglecting plain and Essential Duties, under Color of
exercising themselves in a more sublime Course of Piety, and being Righteous
above what is commanded (as those who seclude themselves in Monasteries) that
they manifestly discover excessive Pride, Hatred of their Neighbor, Impatience
of Injuries; to which add, Melancholy Plots and Machinations; and that he must
be either stupid, or infected with the same Vice himself, who admires this
(...), or thinks they were for that Cause the more pleasing to God. This being
so, what may we then think of such Armies of Hermits, Monks and Friars, who
pretending to justify a mistaken Zeal and meritorious Abstinence; not only by
a peculiar Diet and Distinction of Meats (which God without Distinction has
made the moderate Use of common and 2 Timothy iv. 3.
indifferent amongst Christians) but by other sordid Usages, and unnecessary
Hardships, wilfully prejudice their Health and Constitution? and through a
singular manner of living, dark and Saturnine; whilst they would seem to
abdicate and forsake the World (in Imitation, as they pretend, of the Ancient
Eremites) take care to settle, and build their warm and stately Nests in the
most Populous Cities, and Places of Resort; ambitious doubtless of the Peoples
Veneration and Opinion of an extraordinary Sanctity; and therefore flying the
Deserts, where there is indeed no use of them; and flocking to the Towns and
Cities where there is less, indeed none at all; and therefore no Marvel that
the Emperor Valentinian banished them the Cities, and Constantine Copronymus
finding them seditious, obliged them to marry, to leave their Cells, and live
as did others. For of these, some there are who seldom speak, and therefore
edify none; sleep little, and lie hard, are clad nastily, and eat meanly (and
oftentimes that which is unwholsom) and therefore benefit none: Not because
they might not, both for their own, and the Good of others, and the Public;
but because they will not; Custom, and a prodigious This, with their prodigious
Ignorance. See M^b. des Etudes Monast. Part. 2. c. 17.
Sloth accompanying it; which renders it so far from Penance, and the
Mortification pretended, that they know not how to live, or spend their Time
otherwise. This, as I have often considered, so was I glad to find it justly
perstring'd, and taken notice of by a Dr. Lister's Journey to Paris. See L'
Apocalypse de Meliton, ou Revelation des Mysteres Cenobitiques.
Learned Person, amongst others of his useful Remarks abroad.

These, says he, willingly renouncing the innocent Comforts of Life, plainly
show it to proceed more from a chagrin and morose Humor, than from any true
and serious Principle of sound Religion; which teaches Men to be useful in
their Generations, sociable and communicative, unaffected, and by no means
singular and fantastic in Garb and Habit, as are these (forsooth) Fathers (as
they affect to be called) spending their Days in idle and fruitless Forms, and
tedious Repetitions; and thereby thinking to merit the Reward of those Ancient,
and truly pious Solitaries, who, God knows, were driven from their Countries
and Repose, by the Incursions of barbarous Nations (whilst these have no such
Cause) and compelled to Austerities, not of their own choosing and making, but
the public Calamity; and to labor with their Hands for their own, and others
necessary Support, as well as with their Prayers and holy Lives, Examples to
all the World: And some of these indeed (besides the Solitaries of the Thebaid,
who wrought for abundance of poor Christians, sick, and in Captivity) I might
bring in, as such who deserved to have their Names preserved; not for their
rigorous Fare, and uncouth Disguises; but for teaching that the Grace of
Temperance and other Virtues, consisted in a cheerful, innocent, and profitable
Conversation.

And now to recapitulate what other Prerogatives the Hortulan Provision has
been celebrated for, besides its Antiquity, Health and Longaevity of the
Antediluvians; that Temperance, Frugality, Leisure, Ease, and innumerable other
Virtues and Advantages, which accompany it, are no less attributable to it. Let
us hear our excellent Botanist Plantarum usus latissime patet, and in omni
vitae part occurrit, sine illis laute, sine illis commode non vivitur, ac nec
vivitur omnino. Quaecunque ad victu necessaria sunt, quaecunque ad delicias
faciunt, e locupletissimo suo penu abunde subministrant: Quanto ex eis mensa
innocentior, mundior, salubrior, quam ex animalium caede and Laniena! Homo
certe natura animal carnivorum non est; nullis ad praedam and rapinam armis
instructum; non dentibus exertis and serratis, non unguibus aduncis: Manus ad
fructos colligendos, dentes ad mandendos comparati; nec legimus se ante
diluvium carnes ad esum concessas, etc. Raii Hist. Plant. Lib. 1. cap. 24.
Mr. Ray.

The Use of Plants (says he) is all our Life long of that universal Importance
and Concern, that we can neither live nor subsist in any Plenty with Decency,
or Convenience or be said to live indeed at all without them: whatsoever Food
is necessary to sustain us, whatsoever contributes to delight and refresh us,
are supplied and brought forth out of that plentiful and abundant store: and
ah, how much more innocent, sweet and healthful, is a Table covered with these,
than with all the reeking Flesh of butchered and slaughtered Animals! Certainly
Man by Nature was never made to be a Carnivorous Creature; nor is he armed at
all for Prey and Rapin, with gagged and pointed Teeth and crooked Claws,
sharpened to rend and tear: But with gentle Hands to gather Fruit and
Vegetables, and with Teeth to chew and eat them: Nor do we so much as read the
Use of Flesh for Food, was at all permitted him, till after the Universal
Deluge, etc.

To this might we add that transporting Consideration, becoming both our
Veneration and Admiration of the infinitely wise and glorious Author of Nature,
who has given to Plants such astonishing Properties; such fiery Heat in some to
warm and cherish, such Coolness in others to temper and refresh, such pinguid
Juice to nourish and feed the Body, such quickening Acids to compel the
Appetite, and grateful Vehicles to court the Obedience of the Palate, such
Vigor to renew and support our natural Strength, such ravishing Flavor and
Perfumes to recreate and delight us: In short, such spirituous and active Force
to animate and revive every Faculty and Part, to all the kinds of Human, and, I
had almost said Heavenly Capacity too. What shall we add more? Our Gardens
present us with them all; and whilst the Shambles are covered with Gore and
Stench, our Sallets escape the Insults of the Summer Fly, purifies and warms the
Blood against Winter Rage: Nor wants there Variety in more abundance, than any
of the former Ages could show.

Survey we their Bills of Fare, and Numbers of Courses served up by Athenaeus,
dressed with all the Garnish of Nicander and other Grecian Wits: What has the
Roman Grand Sallet worth the naming? Parat Convivium, The Guests are named
indeed, and we are told, -- Mart. lib. x. Epig. 44.
Varias, quas habet hortus opes?
How richly the Garden's stored!
In quibus est Luctuca sedens, and tonsile porrum,
Nec deest ructatrix Mentha, nec herba salax, etc.
A Goodly Sallet!


Lettuce, Leeks, Mint, Rocket, Colewort-Tops, with Oil and Eggs, and such an
Hotch-Pot following (as the Cook in Plautus would deservedly laugh at) But how
infinitely outdone in this Age of ours, by the Variety of so many rare Edules
unknown to the Ancients, that there is no room for the Comparison. And, for
Magnificence, let the Sallet dressed by the Lady for an Entertainment made by
Jacobus Catsius (described by the Poet Barl. Eleg. lib. 3.
Barloeus) show; not at all yet out-doing what we every Day almost find at our
Lord Mayor's Table, and other great Persons, Lovers of the Gardens; that sort
of elegant Cookery being capable of such wonderful Variety, though not altogether
wanting of old, if that be true which is related to us of Athen. Deip. l. 1.
Nicomedes a certain King of Bithynia, whose Cook made him a Pilchard (a Fish
he exceedingly longed for) of a well dissembled Turnip, carved in its Shape,
and dressed with Oil, Salt, and Pepper, that so deceived, and yet pleased the
Prince, that he commended it for the best Fish he had ever eaten. Nor does all
this exceed what every industrious Gardener may innocently enjoy, as well as
the greatest Potentate on Earth.

Vitellius his Table, to which every Day
All Courtiers did a constant Tribute pay,
Could nothing more delicious afford
Than Nature's Liberality.
Helped with a little Art and Industry,
Allows the meanest Gardeners Board,
The wanton Taste no Fish or Fowl can choose,
For which the Grape or Melon she would lose.
Though all the Inhabitants of Sea and Air.
Be listed in the Glutton's Bill of Fare;
Yet still the Sallet, and the Fruit we see
Placed the third Story high in all her Luxury.
So the Sweet Cowley, Garden. Stanz. 6.
Poet, whom I can never part with for his Love to this delicious Toil, and the
Honor he has done me.

Verily, the infinite Plenty and Abundance, with which the benign and bountiful
Author of Nature has stored the whole Terrestrial World, more with Plants and
Vegetables than with any other Provision whatsoever; and the Variety not only
equal, but by far exceeding the Pleasure and Delight of Taste (above all the
Art of the Kitchen, than ever Hence in Macrobius Sat. lib. vii. c. 5. we find
Eupolis the Comedian in his Aeges, bringing in Goats boasting the Variety of
their Food, (...), etc. After which follows a Banquet of innumerable sorts.
Apicius knew) seems loudly to call, and kindly invite all her living
Inhabitants (none excepted) who are of gentle Nature, and most useful, to the
same Hospitable and Common-Board, which first she furnished with Plants and
Fruit, as to their natural and genuine Pasture; nay, and of the most wild, and
savage too ab origin: As in Paradise, where, as the Evangelical Esa. lxv. 25.
Prophet adumbrating the future Glory of the Catholic Church, (of which that
happy Garden was the Antitype) the Wolf and the Lamb, the angry and furious
Lion, should eat Grass and Herbs together with the Ox. But after all, latet
anguis in herba, there is a Snake in the Grass; Luxury, and Excess in our most
innocent Fruitions. There was a time indeed when the Garden furnished
Entertainments for the most Renowned Heroes, virtuous and excellent Persons;
till the Blood-thirsty and Ambitious, overrunning the Nations, and by Murders
and Rapine rifl'd the World, to transplant its Luxury to its new Mistress,
Rome. Those whom heretofore Bina tunc jugera populo Romano satis erat, nullique
majorem modum attribuit, quo servos paulo ante principis Neronis, contemptis
hujus spatii Viridariis, piscinas juvat habere majores, gratumque, si non
aliquem and culinas. Plin. Hist. Not. lib. xviii. c. 2.
two Acres of Land would have satisfied, and plentifully maintained; had
afterward their very Kitchens almost as large as their first Territories: Nor
was that enough: Entire Interea gustus elementa per omnia quaerunt. Juv. Sat. 4.
Forests and Parks, Warrens and Fish Ponds, and ample Lakes to furnish their
Tables, so as Men could not live by one another without Oppression: Nay, and to
show how the best, and most innocent things may be perverted; they changed
those frugal and inemptas Dapes of their Ancestors, to that Height and
Profusion; that we read of Cicero. Epist. Lib. 7. Ep. 26. Complaining of a
costly Sallet, that had almost cost him his Life.
Edicts and Sumptuary Laws, enacted to restrain even the Pride and Excess of
Sallets. But so it was not when the Pease-Field spread a Table for the
Conquerors of the World, and their Grounds were cultivated Vomere laureato, and
triumphali aratore: The greatest Princes took the Spade and the Plough-Staff in
the same Hand they held the Scepter; and the Noblest Valeriana, That of
Lectucini, Achilleia, Lysimachia. Fabius, Cicero, Lentulus, Piso, etc. a Fabis,
Cicere, Lent, Pisis been serendis dicti, Plin.
Families thought it no Dishonor, to derive their Names from Plants and
Sallet-Herbs: They arrived, I say to that Pitch of engrossing all that was but
green, and could be varied by the Cook (Heu quam prodiga ventris!) that, as
Pliny tells us ( non sine pudore, not without blushing) a poor Man could hardly
find a Thistle to dress for his Supper; or what his hungry Mirum esset non
licere pecori Carduis vesci, non licet plebei, etc. And in another Place,
Quoniam portenta quoque terrarum in ganeam vertimus, etiam quae refugeant
quadrupedes consciae, Plin. Hist. Not. l. xix. c. 8.
Ass would not touch, for fear of pricking his Lips.

Verily the Luxury of the East ruined the greatest Monarchies; first, the
Persian, then the Grecian, and afterward Rome her self: By what Steps, see
elegantly described in Old Gra. Falisc. Cyneget. Was. See concerning this
Excess Macr. Sat. l. 2. c. 9. and sequ.
Gratius the Faliscian, deploring his own Age compared with the former: O
quantum, and quoties decoris frustrata paterni!
At qualis nostris, quam simplex mensa Camillis!
Qui tibi cultus erat post tot, serrane, triumphos?
Ergo illi ex habitu, virtutisque indole priscae,
Imposuere orbi Romam caput: --
Neighboring Excesses being made thine own,
How art thou fallen from thine old Renown!
But our Camilli did but plainly fare,
No Port did often triumphant Serran bear:
Therefore such Hardship, and their Heart so great
Gave Rome to be the World's Imperial Seat.


But as these were the Sensual and Voluptuous, who abused their Plenty, spent
their Fortunes and shortened their Lives by their Debauches; so never did they
taste the Delicaces, and true Satisfaction of a sober Repast, and the infinite
Conveniences of what well-stor'd Garden affords; so elegantly described by the
Horti maxim placebant, quia non egerent igni, parcerentque ligno, expedita
res, and parata semper, unde Acetaria appellantur, facilia concoqui, nec
oneratura sensum cibo, and quae minime accenderent desiderium panis. Plin.
Hist. Not. Lib. xix. c. 4. And of this exceeding Frugality of the Romans, till
after the Mithridatic War, see Athenaeus Deip. Lib. 6. cap. 21.
Naturalist, as costing neither Fuel nor Fire to boil, Pains or time to gather
and prepare, Res expedita and parata semper: All was so near at hand, readily
dressed, and of so easy Digestion; as neither to offend the Brain, or dull the
Senses; and in the greatest Dearth of Corn, a little Bread sufficed. In all
Events, Horat. Sermon. Sat. 1.
Panis ematur, Olus, Vini Sextarius add
Queis humana sibi doleat natura negatis.
Bread, Wine, and wholesome Sallets you may buy,
What Nature adds besides is Luxury.


They could then make an honest Meal, and dine upon a Sallet, without so much
as a Grain of Exotic Spice; And the Potagere was in such Reputation, that she
who neglected her Kitchen-Garden (for that was still the Good-Woman's Province)
was never reputed a tolerable Huswife: Si vespertinus subito te oppresserit
hospes, she was never surpised, had all (as we said) at hand, and could in a
Trice set forth an handsome Sallet: And if this was Happiness, Convictus
facilis sine art mensa (as the Poet reckons) it was here in Perfection. In a
Word, so universal was the Sallet, that the Nequam esse in domo matrem familias
(etenim haec cura Foeminae dicebatur) ubi indiligens esset hortus.
Un-bloody Shambles (as Pliny calls them) yielded the Alterum succidium. Cic.
in. Catone.
Tiberias had a Tribute of Skirts paid him.

Roman State a more considerable Custom (when there was little more than honest
Cabbage and Worts) than almost any thing besides brought to Market.

They spent not then so much precious time as afterward they did, gorging
themselves with Flesh and Fish, so as hardly able to rise, without reeking and
reeling from Table.

Hor. Sat. l. 2. Vix prae vino sustinet palpebras, eunti in consilium, etc. See
the Oration of C. Titius de Leg. Fan. Mac. Sat. l. 2. c. 12.
-- Vides ut pallidus omnis
Coena desurgat dubia? quin corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis, animum quoque praegravat una,
Atque affigit humo divinoe particulam aurae.
See but how pale they look, how wretchedly,
With Yesterday's Surcharge disturbed they be!
Nor Body only suffering, but the Mind,
That nobler Part, dulled and depressed we find.
Drowsy and unapt for Business, and other nobler Parts of Life.

Time was before Men in those golden Days: Their Spirits were brisk and lively.

-- Vbi dicto citius curata sopori
Membra dedit, Vegetus praescripta ad munera surgit.
With shorter, but much sweeter Sleep content,
Vigorous and fresh, about their Business went.
And Men had their Wits about them; their Appetites were natural, their Sleep
molli sub arbore, sound, sweet and kindly: That excellent Emperor Tacitus
being used to say of Lettuce, that he did somnum se mercari when he eat of
them, and called it a sumptuous Feast, with a Sallet and a single Pullet, which
was usually all the Flesh-Meat that sober Prince eat of; whilst Maximinus (a
professed Enemy to Sallet) is reported to have scarce been satisfied, with
sixty Pounds of Flesh, and Drink proportionable.

There was then also far less expensive Grandeur, but far more true State; when
Consuls, great Statesmen (and such as achieved the most renowned Actions)
supped in their Gardens; not under costly, gilded, and inlaid Roofs, but the
spreading Platan; and drank of the Crystal Brook, and by Temperance, and
healthy Frugality, maintained the Glory of Sallets, Ah, quanto innocentiore
victu! with what Content and Satisfaction! Nor, as we said, wanted there
Variety; for so in the most blissful Place, and innocent State of Nature, See
how the first Empress of the World Regal's her Celestial Guest: Milton 's
Paradise, l. v. ver. 228.
With sav'ry Fruit of Taste to please
True Appetite, -- and brings
Whatever Earth's all-bearing Mother yields
-- Fruit of all kinds, in Coat
Rough, or smooth-Rind, or bearded Husk, or Shell.
Heaps with unsparing Hand: For Drink the Grape
She crushes, inoffensive Moust, and Mea^hes
From many a Berry, and from sweet Kernel pressed,
She tempered dulcid Creams. --
Then for the Board.

-- Raised of a grassy Turf
The Table was, and Mossy Seats had round;
And on the ample Square from Side to Side,
All Autumn pil'd: Ah Innocence,
Deserving Paradise!
Thus, the Hortulan Provision of the At victus illa aetas cui fecimus aurea
nomen
Fructibus arboreis, and quas humus educat herbis
Fortunata fuit. -- Met. xv.

Golden Age fitted all Places, Times and Persons; and when Man is restored to
that State again, it will be as it was in the Beginning.

But now after all (and for Close of all) Let none yet imagine, that whilst we
justify our present Subject through all the Topics of Panegyric, we would in
Favor of the Sallet, dressed with all its Pomp and Advantage turn Mankind to
Grass again; which were ungratefully to neglect the Bounty of Heaven, as well
as his Health and Comfort: But by these Noble Instances and Examples, to
reproach the Luxury of the present Age; and by showing the infinite Blessing
and Effects of Temperance, and the Virtues accompanying it; with how little
Nature, and a Been moratus venture.
Civil Appetite may be happy, contented with moderate things, and within a
little Compass, reserving the rest, to the nobler Parts of Life. And thus of
old, Hoc erat in votis, modus agri non ita magnus, etc. He that was possessed
of a little Spot of Ground, and well-cultivated Garden, with other moderate
Circumstances, had TAB. II.
Haeredium. All that a modest Man could well desire. Then, Foelix, quem misera
procul ambitione remotum,
Parvus ager placide, parvus and hortus, alit.
Praebet ager quicquid frugi natura requirit,
Hortus habet quicquid luxuriosa petit,
Caetera sollicitae speciosa incommoda vitae
Permittit stultis quaerere, habere malis.
Cowley, Pl. lib. iv.
Happy the Man, who from Ambition freed,
A little Garden, little Field does feed.
The Field gives frugal Nature what is required;
The Garden what is luxuriously desired:
The specious Evils of an anxious Life,
He leaves to Fools to be their endless Strife.
O Fortunatos nimium bona si sua norint
Horticulos!


FINIS.
APPENDIX.
THOUGH it was far from our first Intention to charge this small Volume and
Discourse concerning Crude Sallets, with any of the following Receipts: Yet
having since received them from an Experienced Housewife; and that they may
possibly be useful to correct, preserve and improve our Acetaria, we have
allowed them Place as an Appendant Variety upon Occasion: Nor account we it the
least Dishonor to our former Treatise, that we kindly entertained them; since
(besides diverse Learned Physicians, and such as have ex professo written de Re
Cibaria) we have the Examples of many other Plin. Athenaeus, Macrobius, Bacon,
Boil, Digby, etc.
Noble and Illustrious Persons, both among the Ancient and Modern.

Artichoak. Clear it of the Leaves and cut the Bottoms in pretty thin Slices or
Quarters; then fry them in fresh Butter with some Parsley, till it is crisp,
and the Slices tender; and so dish them with other fresh melted Butter.

How a Poiverade is made, and the Bottoms preserved all the Winter, See
Acetaria. p. 8, 9.

Ashen-keys. See Pickle. Asparagus. See Pickle. Beets. See Pickle. Broom. See
Pickle. Buds. See Pickle. Capers. See Pickle. Carrot. See Pudding. Champignon.
See Mushroom.
2. Chessnut. Roasted under the Embers, or dry fried, till they shell, and quit
their Husks, may be slit; the Juice of Orange squeezed on a Lump of hard Sugar
dissolved; to which add some Claret Wine.

Collyflower. See Pickle. Cucumber. See Pickle. Elder-flowers. See Pickle.
Flowers. See Pickle. Gilly-flowers. See Pickle. Herbs. See Pudding and Tart.
Limon. See Pickle.
3. Mushroom. Choose the small, firm and white Buttons, growing upon sweet
Pasture Grounds, neither under, or about any Trees: strip off the upper Skin,
and pare away all the black spungy Bottom part; then slice them in quarters,
and cast them in Water a while to cleanse: Then Boil them in fresh Water, and a
little sweet Butter; (some boil them a quarter of an hour first) and then
taking them out, dry them in a Cloth, pressing out the Water, and whilst hot,
add the Butter; and then boiling a full Hour (to exhaust the Malignity) shift
them in another clean Water, with Butter, as before till they become
sufficiently tender. Then being taken out, pour upon them as much strong Mutton
(or other) Broth as will cover them, with six Spoonfuls of White Wind, twelve
Cloves, as many Pepper-Corns, four small young Onions, half an Handful of
Persly bound up with two or three Spriggs of Thyme, an Anchovy, Oysters raw, or
pickled; a little Salt, sweet Butter; and so let them stew. See Acetar. p. 39.

Another.
Prepared, and cleans'd as above, and cast into Fountain Water, to preserve
them from growing black; Boil them in fresh Water and Salt; and whilst on the
Fire, cast in the Mushrooms, letting them boil till they become tender: Then
stew them leisurely between two Dishes (the Water being drained from them) in a
third Part of White Wind and Butter, a small Bundle of sweet Herbs at
discretion. To these add Broth as before, with Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Anchovies
(one is sufficient) Oysters, etc. a small Onion, with the green Stem chopped
small; and lastly, some Mutton-Gravy, rubbing the Dish gently with a Clove of
Garlic, or some Rocombo Seeds in its stead. Some beat the Yolk of a fresh Egg
with Vinegar, and Butter, and a little Pepper.

In France some (more compendiously being peeled and prepared) cast them into a
Pipkin, where, with the Sweet Herbs, Spice, and an Onion they stew them in
their own Juice, without any other Water or Liquor at all; and then taking out
the Herbs and Onion, thicken it with a little Butter, and so eat them.

In Poiverade.
The large Mushrooms well cleansed, etc. being cut into quarters and strewed
with Pepper and Salt, are broiled on the Grid-iron, and eaten with fresh Butter.

In Powder.
Being fresh gathered, cleans'd, etc. and cut in Pieces, stew them in Water and
Salt; and being taken forth, dry them with a Cloth: Then putting them into an
Earth-Glazed Pot, set them into the Oven after the Bread is drawn: Repeat this
till they are perfectly dry; and reserve them in Papers to crumble into what
Sauce you please. For the rest, see Pickle.

4. Mustard. Procure the best and weightiest Seed: cast it into Water two or
three times, till no more of the Husk arise: Then taking out the sound (which
will sink to the Bottom) rub it very dry in warm course Cloths, showing it also
a little to the Fire in a Dish or Pan. Then stamp it as small as to pass
through a fine Tiffany Sieve: Then slice some Horse-Raddish, and lay it to soak
in strong Vinegar, with a small Lump of hard Sugar (which some leave out) to
temper the Flower with, being drained from the Radish, and so pot it all in a
Glazed Mug, with an Onion, and keep it well stopped with a Cork upon a Bladder,
which is the more cleanly: But this Receipt is improved, if instead of Vinegar,
Water only, or the Broth of powdered Beef be made use of. And to some of this
Mustard adding Verjuice, Sugar, Claret Wine, and Juice of Limon, you have an
excellent Sauce to any sort of Flesh or Fish.

Note, that a Pint of good Seed is enough to make at one time, and to keep
fresh a competent while. What part of it does not pass the Sarse, may be beaten
again; and you may reserve the Flower in a well closed Glass, and make fresh
Mustard when you please. See Acetaria, p. 59. 103.

Nasturtium. Vide Pickle.

Orange. See Limon in Pickle.

5. Parsnip. Take the large Roots, boil them, and strip the Skin: Then slit
them long-ways into pretty thin Slices; Flower and fry them in fresh Butter
till they look brown. The Sauce is other sweet Butter melted. Some strew Sugar
and Cinnamon upon them. Thus you may accommodate other Roots.

There is made a Mash or Pomate of this Root, being boiled very tender with a
little fresh Cream; and being healed again, put to it some Butter, a little
Sugar and Juice of Limon; dish it upon Sippets; sometimes a few Corinths are
added.

Peny-royal. See Pudding.

Pickles.
Pickled

6. Artichoaks. See Acetaria, p. 9.

7. Ashen-keys. Gather them young, and boil them in three or four Waters to
extract the Bitterness; and when they feel tender, prepare a Syrup of sharp
White Wind Vinegar, Sugar, and a little Water. Then boil them on a very quick
Fire, and they will become of a green Color, ^it to be potted so soon as cold.

8. Asparagus. Break off the hard Ends, and put them in White Wind Vinegar and
Salt, well covered with it; and so let them remain for six Weeks: Then taking
them out, boil the Liquour or Pickle, and scum it carefully. If need be, renew
the Vinegar and Salt; and when it is cold, pot them up again. Thus may one keep
them the whole Year.

9. Beans. Take such as are fresh young, and approaching their full Growth. Put
them into a strong Brine of White Wind Vinegar and Salt able to bear an Egg.
Cover them very close, and so will they be preserved twelve Months: But a Month
before you use them, take out what Quantity you think sufficient for your
spending a quarter of a Year (for so long the second Pickle will keep them
sound) and boil them in a Skillet of fresh Water, till they begin to look
green, as they soon will do. Then placing them one by one, (to drain upon a
clean course Napkin) range them Row by Row in a Jarr, and cover them with
Vinegar, and what Spice you please; some Weight being laid upon them to keep
them under the Pickle. Thus you may preserve French-Beans, Harico's, etc. the
whole Year about.

10. Broom-Buds and Pods. Make a strong Pickle, as above; stir it very well,
till the Salt be quite dissolved, clearing off the Dregs and Scum. The next Day
pour it from the Bottom; and having rubbed the Buds dry pot them up in a
Pickle-Glass, which should be frequently shaken, till they sink under it, and
keep it well stopped and covered.

Thus may you pickle any other Buds. Or as follows:

11. Of Elder. Take the largest Buds, and boil them in a Skillet with Salt and
Water, sufficient only to scald them; and so (being taken off the Fire) let
them remain covered till Green; and then pot them with Vinegar and Salt, which
has had one Boil up to cleanse it.

12. Collyflowers. Boil them till they fall in Pieces: Then with some of the
Stalk, and worst of the Flower, boil it in a part of the Liquor till pretty
strong: Then being taken off, strain it; and when settled, clear it from the
Bottom. Then with Dill, Gross Pepper, a pretty Quantity of Salt, when cold, add
as much Vinegar as will make it sharp, and pour all upon the Collyflower; and
so as to keep them from touching one another; which is prevented by putting
Paper close to them.

Cornelians are pickled like Olives.

13. Cowslips. Picked very clean; to each Pound of Flowers allow about one Pound
of Loaf-Sugar, and one Pint of White Wind Vinegar, which boil to a Syrup, and
cover it scalding-hot. Thus you may pickle Clove-gillyflowers, Elder, and other
Flowers, which being eaten alone, make a very agreeable Salletine.

14. Cucumbers. Take the Gorkems, or smaller Cucumbers; put them into
Rape-Vinegar, and boil, and cover them so close, as none of the Vapor may
issue forth; and also let them stand till the next day: Then boil them in fresh
White Wind Vinegar, with large Mace, Nutmeg, Ginger, white Pepper, and a little
Salt, (according to discretion) straining the former Liquor from the Cucumbers;
and so place them in a Jarr, or wide mouthed Glass, laying a little Dill and
Fennel between each Rank; and covering all with the fresh scalding-hot Pickle,
keep all close, and repeat it daily, till you find them sufficiently green.

In the same sort Cucumbers of the largest size, being peeled and cut into thin
Slices, are very delicate.

Another.
Wiping them clean, put them in a very strong Brine of Water and Salt, to soak
two or three Hours or longer, if you see Cause: Then range them in the Jarr or
Barrellet with Herbs and Spice as usual; and cover them with hot Liquor made of
two parts Beer-Vinegar, and one of White-VVine Vinegar: Let all be very well
closed. A Fortnight after scald the Pickle again, and repeat it, as above: Thus
they will keep longer, and from being so soon sharp, eat crimp and well tasted,
though not altogether so green. You may add a VValnut-Leaf, Hysop, Costmary, etc.
and as some do, strew on them a little Powder of Roch-Allom, which makes them
firm and eatable within a Month or six VVeeks after.

Mango of Cucumbers.
Take the biggest Cucumbers (and most of the Mango size) that look green: Open
them on the Top or Side; and scooping out the Seeds, supply their Place with a
small Clove of Garlic, or some Roccombo Seeds. Then put them into an Earthen
Glazed Jarr, or wide-mouthed Glass, with as much White Wine Vinegar as will
cover them. Boil them in the Vinegar with Pepper, Cloves, Mace, etc. and when
off the Fire, as much Salt as will make a gentle Brine; and so pour all
boyling-hot on the Cucumbers, covering them close till the next Day. Then put
them with a little Dill, and Pickle into a large Skillet; and giving them a
Boil or two, return them into the Vessel again: And when all is cold, add a
good Spoonful of the best Mustard, keeping it from the Air, and so have you an
excellent Mango. When you have occasion to take any out, make use of a Spoon,
and not your Fingers.

Elder. See Buds.

Flowers. See Cowslips, and for other Flowers.

15. Limon. Take Slices of the thick Rind Limon, Boil and shift them in several
Waters, till they are pretty tender: Then drain and wipe them dry with a clean
Cloth; and make a Pickle with a little VVhite-VVine Vinegar, one part to two of
fair Water, and a little Sugar, carefully scum'd. When all is cold, pour it on
the peeled Rind, and cover it all close in a convenient Glass Jarr. Some make a
Syrup of Vinegar, White Wind and Sugar not too thick, and pour it on hot.

16. Melon. The abortive and after-Fruit of Melons being pickled as Cucumber,
make an excellent Sallet.

17. Mushrom. Take a Quart of the best White Wind Vinegar; as much of
White Wind, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg a pretty Quantity, beaten together: Let the
Spice boil therein to the Consumption of half; then taken off, and being cold,
pour the Liquour on the Mushroms; but leave out the boiled Spice, and cast in
of the same sort of Spice whole, the Nutmeg only slit in Quarters, with some
Limon-Peel, white Pepper; and if you please a whole raw Onion, which take out
again when it begins to perish.

Another.
The Mushroms peeled, etc. throw them into Water, and then into a Sauce-Pan,
with some long Pepper, Cloves, Mace, a quartered Nutmeg, with an Onion,
Shallot, or Roccombo-Seed, and a little Salt. Let them all boil a quarter of an
hour on a very quick Fire: Then take out and cold, with a pretty Quantity of
the former Spice, boil them in some White Wind; which (being cold) cast upon
the Mushroms, and fill up the Pot with the best White Wind, a Bay-Leaf or two,
and an Handful of Salt: Then cover them with the Liquour; and if for long
keeping, pour Sallet-Oil over all, though they will be preserved a Year without
it.

They are sometimes boiled in Salt and Water, with some Milk, and laying them
in the Colender to drain, till cold, and wiped dry, cast them into the Pickle
with the White Wind, Vinegar and Salt, grated Nutmeg, Ginger bruised, Cloves,
Mace, white Pepper and Limon-Peel; pour the Liquor on them cold without boiling.

18. Nasturtium Indicum. Gather the Buds before they open to flower; lay them
in the Shade three or four Hours, and putting them into an Earthen Glazed
Vessel, pour good Vinegar on them, and cover it with a Board. Thus leting it
stand for eight or ten Days: Then being taken out, and gently pressed, cast
them into fresh Vinegar, and let them so remain as long as before. Repeat this
a third time, and Barrel them up with Vinegar and a little Salt.

Orange. See Limon.
20. Potato. The small green Fruit (when about the size of the Wild Cherry)
being pickled, is an agreeable Sallet. But the Root being roasted under the
Embers, or otherwise, opened with a Knife, the Pulp is buttered in the Skin, of
which it will take up a good Quantity, and is seasoned with a little Salt and
Pepper. Some eat them with Sugar together in the Skin, which has a pleasant
Crimpness. They are also stewed and baked in Pyes, etc.

21. Purselan. Lay the Stalks in an Earthen Pan; then cover them with
Beer-Vinegar and Water, keeping them down with a competent Weight to imbibe,
three Days: Being taken out, put them into a Pot with as much White Wind
Vinegar as will cover them again; and close the Lid with Paste to keep in the
Steam: Then set them on the Fire for three or four Hours, often shaking and
stirring them: Then open the Cover, and turn and remove those Stalks which lie
at the Bottom, to the Top, and boil them as before, till they are all of a
Color. When all is cold, pot them with fresh White Wind Vinegar, and so you
may preserve them the whole Year round.

22. Radish. The Seed-Pods of this Root being pickled, are a pretty Sallet.

23. Sampier. Let it be gathered about Michaelmas (or the Spring) and put two
or three Hours into a Brine of Water and Salt; then into a clean Tin'd Brass
Pot, with three parts of strong White Wind Vinegar, and one part of Water and
Salt, or as much as will cover the Sampier, keeping the Vapor from issuing
out, by pasting down the Pot-lid, and so hang it over the Fire for half an Hour
only. Being taken off, let it remain covered till it be cold; and then put it
up into small Barrels or Jars, with the Liquor, and some fresh Vinegar, Water
and Salt; and thus it will keep very green. If you be near the Sea, that Water
will supply the place of Brine. This is the Dover Receipt.

24. Walnuts. Gather the Nuts young, before they begin to harden, but not
before the Kernel is pretty white: Steep them in as much Water as will more
then cover them. Then set them on the Fire, and when the Water boils, and
grows black, pour it off, and supply it with fresh, boiling it as before; and
continuing to shift it till it become clear, and the Nuts pretty tender: Then
let them be put into clean Spring-VVater for two Days, changing it as before,
with fresh, two or three times within this space: Then lay them to drain, and
dry on a clean course Cloth, and put them up in a Glass Jar, with a few VValnut
Leaves, Dill, Cloves, Pepper, whole Mace and Salt; strowing them under every
Layer of Nuts, till the Vessel be three quarters full; and lastly, replenishing
it with the best Vinegar, keep it well covered; and so they will be fit to
spend within three Months.

To make a Mango with them.
The Green Nuts prepared as before, cover the Bottom of the Jar with some Dill,
an Handful of Bay Salt, etc. and then a Bed of Nuts; and so stratum upon
stratum, as above, adding to the Spice some Roccombo-Seeds; and filling the
rest of the Jar with the best VVhite-VVine Vinegar, mingled with the best
Mustard; and so let them remain close covered, during two or three Months time:
And thus have you a more agreeable Mango than what is brought us from abroad;
which you may use in any Sauce, and is of it self a rich Condiment.

Thus far Pickles.

25. Potage Maigre. Take four Quarts of Spring Water, two or three Onions stuck
with some Cloves, two or three Slices of Limon-Peel, Salt, whole white Pepper,
Mace, a Raze or two of Ginger, tied up in a fine Cloth (Lawn or Tiffany) and
make all boil for half an Hour; Then having Spinach, Sorrel, white Beet-Chard,
a little Cabbage, a few small Tops of Cives, washed and picked clean, shred
them well, and cast them into the Liquor, with a Pint of blue Pease boiled soft
and strained, with a Bunch of sweet Herbs, the Top and Bottom of a French Roll;
and so suffer it to boil during three Hours; and then dish it with another
small French Roll, and Slices about the Dish: Some cut Bread in slices, and
frying them brown (being dried) put them into the Pottage just as it is going
to be eaten.

The same Herbs, clean washed, broken and pulled asunder only, being put in a
close covered Pipkin, without any other Water or Liquor, will stew in their own
Juice and Moisture. Some add an whole Onion, which after a while should be
taken out, remembering to season it with Salt and Spice, and serve it up with
Bread and a Piece of fresh Butter.

26. Pudding of Carrot. Pare off some of the Crust of Manchet-Bread, and grate
off half as much of the rest as there is of the Root, which must also be
grated: Then take half a Pint of fresh Cream or New Milk, half a Pound of fresh
Butter, six new laid Eggs (taking out three of the Whites) mash and mingle them
well with the Cream and Butter: Then put in the grated Bread and Carrot, with
near half a Pound of Sugar, and a little Salt; some grated Nutmeg and beaten
Spice; and pour all into a convenient Dish or Pan, buttered, to keep the
Ingredients from sticking and burning; set it in a quick Oven for about an
Hour, and so have you a Composition for any Root-Pudding.

27. Pennyroyal. The Cream, Eggs, Spice, etc. as above, but not so much Sugar
and Salt: Take a pretty Quantity of Peny-royal and Marigold Flower, etc. very
well shred, and mingle with the Cream, Eggs, etc. four Spoonfuls of Sack; half
a Pint more of Cream, and almost a Pound of Beef Suet chopped very small, the
Gratings of a Two-penny Loaf, and stirring all well together, put it into a Bag
flowered and tie it fast. It will be boiled within an Hour: Or may be baked in
the Pan like the Carrot-Pudding. The sauce is for both, a little Rose Water,
less Vinegar, with Butter beaten together and poured on it sweetened with the
Sugar Caster.

Of this Plant discreetly dried, is made a most wholesome and excellent Tea.

28. Of Spinach. Take a sufficient Quantity of Spinach, stamp and strain out
the Juice; put to it grated Manchet, the Yolk of as many Eggs as in the former
Composition of the Carrot-Pudding; some Marrow shred small, Nutmeg, Sugar, some
Corinths, (if you please) a few Carroways, Rose, or Orange-flower Water (as you
best like) to make it grateful. Mingle all with a little boiled Cream; and set
the Dish or Pan in the Oven, with a Garnish of Puff-Paste. It will require but
very moderate Baking. Thus have you Receipts for Herb Puddings.

29. Skirret-Milk Is made by boiling the Roots tender, and the Pulp strained
out, put into Cream or new Milk boiled, with three or four Yolks of Eggs,
Sugar, large Mace and other Spice, etc. And thus is composed any other
Root-Milk. See Acetar. p. 65.

30. Tansie. Take the Gratings or Slices of three Naples-Biscuits, put them
into half a Pint of Cream, with twelve fresh Eggs, four of the Whites cast out,
strain the rest, and break them with two Spoonfuls of Rose Water, a little Salt
and Sugar, half a grated Nutmeg: And when ready for the Pan, put almost a Pint
of the Juice of Spinach, Cleaver, Beets, Corn-Sallet, Green Corn, Violet, or
Primrose tender Leaves, (for of any of these you may take your choice) with a
very small Sprig of Tansie, and let it be fried so as to look green in the Dish
with a Strew of Sugar, and store of the Juice of Orange: some affect to have it
fried a little brown and crisp.

31. Tart of Herbs. An Herb-Tart is made thus: Boil fresh Cream or Milk, with a
little grated Bread or Naples-Biscuit (which is better) to thicken it; a pretty
Quantity of Chervile, Spinach, Beete (or what other Herb you please) being
first par-boil'd and chopped. Then add Macaron, or Almonds beaten to a Paste, a
little sweet Butter, the Yolk of five Eggs, three of the Whites rejected. To
these some add Corinths plump'd in Milk, or boiled therein, Sugar, Spice at
Discretion, and stirring it all together over the Fire, bake it in the Tart-Pan.

32. Thistle. Take the long Stalks of the middle Leaf of the Milky-Thistle,
about May, when they are young and tender: wash and scrape them, and boil them
in Water, with a little Salt, till they are very soft, and so let them lie to
drain. They are eaten with fresh Butter melted not too thin, and is a delicate
and wholesome Dish. Other Stalks of the same kind may so be treated, as the Bur,
being tender and disarmed of its Prickles, etc.

33. Trufles, and other Tubers, and Boleti, are roasted whole in the Embers;
then sliced and stewed in strong Broth with Spice, etc. as Mushroms are. Vide
Acetar. p. 42.

34. Turnep. Take their Stalks (when they begin to run up to seed) as far as
they will easily break downwards: Peel and tie them in Bundles. Then boiling
them as they do Sparagus, are to be eaten with melted Butter. Lastly,

35. Minced, or Sallet-all-sorts.
Take Almonds blanched in cold Water, cut them round and thin, and so leave
them in the Water; Then have pickled Cucumbers, Olives, Cornelians, Capers,
Berberries, Red-Beet, Buds of Nasturtium, Broom, etc. Purslan-stalk, Sampier,
Ash-Keys, VValnuts, Mushrooms (and almost of all the pickled Furniture) with
Raisins of the Sun stoned, Citron and Orange-Peel, Corinths (well cleansed and
dried) etc. mince them severally (except the Corinths) or all together; and
strew them over with any Candy'd Flowers, and so dispose of them in the same
Dish both mixed, and by themselves. To these add roasted Maroons, Pistachios,
Pine-Kernels, and of Almonds four times as much as of the rest, with some
Rose Water. Here also come in the Pickled Flowers and Vinegar in little China
Dishes. And thus have you an Universal Winter-Sallet, or an All sort in
Compendium, fitted for a City Feast, and distinguished from the Grand-Sallet:
which should consist of the Green blanched and unpickled, under a stately
Pennash of Sellery, adorned with Buds and Flowers.

And thus have we presented you a Taste of our English Garden Housewifry in the
matter of Sallets: And though some of them may be Vulgar, (as are most of the
best things;) Yet she was willing to impart them, to show the Plenty, Riches
and Variety of the Sallet-Garden: And to justify what has been asserted of the
Possibility of living (not unhapily) on Herbs and Plants, according to Original
and Divine Institution, improved by Time and long Experience. And if we have
admitted Mushroms among the rest (contrary to our Intention, and for Reasons
given, Acet. p. 43.) since many will by no means abandon them, we have
endeavored to preserve them from those pernicious Effects which are attributed
to, and really in them: We cannot tell indeed whether they were so treated and
accommodated for the most Luxurious of the Caesarean Tables, when that Monarchy
was in its highest Strain of Epicurism, and engrossed this Haugout for their
second Course; whilst this we know, that it is but what Nature affords all her
Vagabonds under every Hedge.

And now, that our Sallets may not want a Glass of generous Wine of the same
Growth with the rest of the Garden to recommend it, let us have your Opinion of
the following.

Cowslip-Wine. To every Gallon of Water put two Pounds of Sugar; boil it an
Hour, and set it to cool: Then spread a good brown Toast on both Sides with
Yeast: But before you make use of it, beat some Syrop of Citron with it, an
Ounce and half of Syrup to each Gallon of Liquor: Then put in the Toast whilst
hot, to assist its Fermentation, which will cease in two Days; during which
time cast in the Cowslip-Flowers (a little bruised, but not much stamped) to
the Quantity of half a Bushel to ^wo Gallons (or rather three Pecks) four
Limons sliced, with the Rinds and all. Lastly, one Pottle of White or Rhenish
Wine; and then after two Days, tun it up in a sweet Cask. Some leave out all
the Syrup.

And here, before we conclude, since there is nothing of more constant Use than
good Vinegar; or that has so near an Affinity to all our Acetaria, we think it
not amiss to add the following (much approved) Receipt.

Vinegar. To every Gallon of Spring Water let there be allowed three Pounds of
Malaga-Raisins: Put them in an Earthen Jarr, and place them where they may have
the hottest Sun, from May till Michaelmas: Then pressing them well, Tun the
Liquor up in a very strong Iron-Hoop'd Vessel to prevent its bursting. It will
appear very thick and muddy when newly pressed, but will refine in the Vessel,
and be as clear as Wine. Thus let it remain untouched for three Months, before
it be drawn off, and it will prove Excellent Vinegar.

Butter. Butter being likewise so frequent and necessary an Ingredient to
diverse of the foregoing Appendants: It should be carefully melted, that it turn
not to an Oil; which is prevented by melting it leisurely, with a little fair
Water at the Bottom of the Dish or Pan; and by continual shaking and stirring,
kept from boiling or over-heating, which makes it rank.

Other rare and exquisite Liquors and Teas (Products of our Gardens only) we
might superadd, which we leave to our Lady Housewives, whose Province indeed
all this while it is.

THE TABLE.
ABstemious Persons who eat no Flesh, 151. nor were under Vows, 161, 162, 165
Abstersives, 65 ACETARIA, Criticisms on the Word, how they differ from Olera,
etc. 2, 4, 5, 184 Achilles, 119 Acids, 98. 106. 124 Adam and Eve lived on
Vegetabls and Plants, 146. 148 Africans eat Capsi^um Indicum, 52 Aged Persons,
67. Sallet-Eaters, 124 132 Agues, 125 Air, 125, 124. 132 Alliarm, 29 Ale, 23
Alleluja, 73 Al^x^nders, 2 Allium, 27 Altar dedicated to Lettuce, 32 Anagallis,
13 Annaeus Serenus poisoned by Mushrooms, 41 Anatomy Comparative 139
Antecoenia, 115 Antediluvians eat no Flesh for 2000 years, 124. 149. 160
Aparine, 19 Aperitives, 15 Appetite, 20. 31. 47. 50: 55. 62. 63. 65. 144. How
to subdue, 151
Apician Luxury, 159 Apium, 54. Italicum, 63 (...), 5 Aromatics, 19. 29. 104 22
Artichoaks, 7, 8, 9 Arum Theophrasti, 74 Ascalonia, 63 Ascetics, 165 Asparagus,
66. Preferrable to the Dutch, 67. how to cover in Winter without Dung,
Asphodel, 35. 73 Astringents, 13. 15. 89 Ashmatical, 47 Assa foetida, 60
Atriplex, 49 Augustus, 32 Autumn, 110. 118. 130
B.
Barlaeus's Description Poetic of a Sallet Collation, 175 Basil, 10 (...), 79
Baulm 10 Beer, 23 Beet, 11. 122 Benzoin, 79 Bile, 55 Blite, 12 Blood to
purify, 13. 29 32. Eating it prohibited. 155. 156. 158 159, 160, 162, etc.
Boletus, 40 Books of Botany, 84 to be read with caution where they write of
Edule Plants, ib. Borrage, 13 Bowels, 89 Brain, 10. 19. 25. 60. 69. 88 Bramins,
150 Brandy and Exotic Liquors pernicious, 144 Bread and Sallet sufficient for
Life, 2. 3. 184 Made of Turnips, 71 Breast, 28 Broccoli, 16 Brook lime, 13
(...), 41 Broth, 29. 130 Brute Animals much healthier than Men, why, 140 Buds.
14 Buglos, 13 Bulho Castanum, 23 Buphthalmum, 22 Burnet, 54 Butter, 98
C.
Cabbage, 15 Capsicum Indicum, 52, 53 Cardialgia, 52 Carduus Sativus, 69. 7
Cardon Spanish, 10 Carnivorous Animals, 138 Carrots, 17 Cartel relish of their
Pasture and Food, 134. Vide Fowl. Cauly flower, 16 Cepae, 47. 64 Cephalics, 46.
61 Chaeriphyllum, 18 Champignons, 40. Vide Mushroms. Chastity, 18 Children
choose to eat Fruit before other Meat, 146 Christians abstaining from eating
Flesh, 151 161 Choler, 31 Church Catholics future Glory predicted, 179
Cibarium, 97 Cicuta, 74. 83 Cinara, 7 Clary, 18 Claudius Caesar, 41 Claver, 19
Cleansing, 68 Climate, 124 Cochlearia, 64. v. Scurvy Grass. Cooks, 119.
Physicians to Emperors and Popes, 84. v. Heroes. Collation of Sallet,
Extemporary, 114 Cold, 24 Cooling, 50 Complexion, 130 Composing, and Composer
of Sallets, 110. 120 Compotation, 116 Concession to eat Flesh, since which Men's
Lives shortened, 151 Concoction, 27. 46. 52. 89. 139 Condiments, 99. vide Sauce.
Conscience, 153 Consent: v. Harmony. Constitution of Body, 89 102. 125, 126,
127 130 Consuls and Great Persons supt in their Garden, 188 Contemplative
Persons, 161 Convictus facilis, 182 Cordials, 10. 13. 35. 66. 69. 105
Coriander. 76 Corrago, 14 Correctives, 127 Corn, what Ground most proper for
it, 132 Corn Sallet, 19 Corroboratives, 79 Corpulency, 127 Cowslips, 19
Cresses, 19 Crithmum, 61 Crudities, 39. 51 Cruelty in butchering Animals for
Food, 151 153 Cucumber, 20. 37. 77 Culture, its Effects, 65. 131 Custom, 126.
146. 153 156. Of Sallet Herbs, how great a Revenue to Rome, 186
D.
Daffadil, 73 Daisie, 22 Dandelion, 23 Dapes Inemptae, 180 Dauci, 17 Decay in
Nature, none, 165 Decoction, 29. 130 Deobstructions, 7. 28 Deorum filii, 39
Distinction of Meats abrogated, 145. 153 Detersives, 13 Dioscoride 's Opinion
of Mallows and Radish, 145. 153 Dishes for Sallets, 106. 121 Dissimilar Parts
of Animals require Variety of Food, 138, 139 Diuretics, 29. 46. 50. 54. 66
Dock, 23 Dogs-Mercury, 83 Domitian Emp. 115 Draco herba, 69 Dressing of
Sallets, vide Sallet. Dry Plants, 25. 51. 52. 54. 60. 65. 70. 126 Dung, 132.
Sallets raised on it undigested, 132, 133
E.
Earth, whether much altered since the Flood, 125. about great Cities, produces
rank and unwholesome Sallets, 131, 132, 133 Earth-Nuts, 23 Eggs, 105. 122 Elder,
24 Emollients, 23 Endive, 24 Epicurism, 153 Eremit's, vide Monks. Eruca, 60
Eructation, 58 Eruditae gulae, 119 Escalons, 48 Eternity, v. Patriarchs.
Eupeptics, 89 Euphrosyne, 14 Excess, 112 Exhilarate 10. 13. 18. 55 Exotic
Drinks and Sauces dangerous, 138, 139. 152 Experience, 128 Eyes, 10. 25. 47.
54. 60. 76. 112. v. Sight.
F.
Fabrorum prandia, 12 Fainting, 72 Families enobl'd by names of Sallet Plants,
31. 181 Farcings, 54 Fascicule, 109 Fevers, 31. 125 Felicity of the Hortulan
Life, 191 Fennel, 25 Flatulents, 51 Flesh, none eaten during 2000 years. Flesh
eaters not so ingenious as t eaters: unapt for Study and Business; shortens
Life; how all Flesh is Grass, 137. 145. 149. 152. 164. 186, 187. Flowers, 26
Foliatorum ordo, 165 Fowl relish of their Food, 134 Food. No Necessity of
different Food, 140. The simplest best, 142. Man's original Food, 145 Fools
unfit to gather Sallets contrary to the Italian Proverb, 94 Friars, vide Monks.
Frigidae Mensae, 126 Frugality of the ancient Romans, etc. 32. 180. 185 Fruit,
116. not reckoned among Sallets, 117. 125. not degenerated since the Flood,
where Industry is used, 162. 163 Fugaces fructus, 114 Fungus, 39. v. Mushroms
Fungus reticularis, 42 Furniture and Ingredients of Sallets, 94
G.
Galen Lover of Lettuce, 32. 36 Gardiner's happy Life, 176. Entertain Heroes
and great Persons, 179 Garlic, 27. 80 Garnishing, 12. 123 Gatherers of Sallets
should be skilful Herbarists, 109, 110 Gemmae, 14, v. Buds. Gerkems, 22. v.
Cucumber. Ginny-Pepper, 121, 122 Goats beard, 18 Golden Age, 154. 156. 190
Gordian Emp. 126 Gramen Amygdalosum, 74 Grand Sallet, 64 Grass, 128 Grillus, 86
Gymnosophists, 150
H.
Habits difficult to overcome, applied to Flesh-Eaters, 152 Haeredium of old,
191 Halimus, 56 Harmony in mixing Sallet Ingredients as Notes in Music, 92
Haugout, 119 Head, 79. 83. v. 61. 112. Cephalicks. Heart, 62. 65. v. Cordials.
Heliotrop, 75 Hemlock, 74. 83 Herbaceous Animals know by Instinct what Herbs
are proper for them better than Men, 87. and excel them in most of the Senses,
ib. Herbals, v. Books. Herbs crude, whether wholesome, 123. 128 152. What proper
for Sallets, 108. Their Qualities and Virtues to be examined, 127. Herby Diet
most Natural, 152 Heroes of old skilled in Cookery, 119 (...), 155 Hippocrates
condemns Radish, 75. That Men need only Vegetables, 164 Hipposelinum, 7
Holyhoc, 36 Honey, 22. 102 Hops, 28 Horarii fructus, 114 Horminum, 18, 19 Horses
not so diseased as Men, 140. Recompensed by some Masters for long Service, 141
Horseradish, 58. 56. 121, 122 Hortulan Provision most plentiful of any,
advantageous, universal, natural, etc. 170 171. 181. 183. 188 Hot Plants, 13.
25. 28. 126 Hot Beds, how unwholesome for Salleting, 132 133, 134 House-wife had
Charge of the Kitchen Garden, 185 Humors, 88. 126 Hypochondria, 13. 29, 62
Hysop, 29
I.
Jack-by-the-Hedge, 29 Ilander, 90. obnoxious to the Scorbute. ib. Indigestion,
58 Ingredients, 6. 108. v. Furniture, Insects, 43. 85 Intuba Sativa, 24 John
the Baptist, 165 Israelites Love of Onions, 49 Justin Martyr concerning the
eating of Blood, 158
K.
Knife for cutting Sallets, 105 Kitchen Garden, 185 v. Potagere.
L.
Lapathum, 37 Laserpitium, 79 Latet anguis in herba, 179 Laws, 180 Laxatives,
11. 15. 19. 36. 37. 89 Leeks, 30 Legumena, 113 Lettuce, 30. 97. 115. 116 120.
127. 13^ Limon, 35. 50. Liver, 20. 83. 55. 69 Longaevity, 126. 144. 145
Lotophagi, 165 Lungs, 30 Lupulus, 28 Luxury, 125. 138. 149. 159. 182 Lysimachia
Seliquosa glabra, 76 Lyster, Dr. 86. 133
M.
Macarons, 75 (...) of the Patriarchs, 149 Majoran, 29 Mallows, 35 Malvae
folium sanctissimum, ib. Man before the Fall knew the Virtues of Plants, 128.
Unbecoming his Dignity to butcher the innocent Animal for Food, 145. Not by
Nature carnivorous, 172. Not lapsed so soon as generally thought, 147, 148
Marygold, 29 Masculine Vigor, 79 Materia medica, 100 Materials for Sallets, v.
Furniture. Maximinus an egregious Glutton, Sallet-hater, 188 Meats commend not
to God, 153 Medals of Battus with Silphium on the Reverse, 78 Melissa, 10 Melon
how cultivated by the Ancients, 37 Memory to assist, 10. 60. 61 Mints, 39
Mithacus, a Culinary, Philosopher, 119 Mixture, 88. 130. 134 Moist, 13. 20. 28.
31. 126 Monks and Friars per-string'd for their idle unprofitable Life, 165 and
seqq. Morocco Ambassador, 66. Lover of Sow-thistles. Mortuorum cibi Mushroms,
30 Mosaical Customs, 145 Moses gave only a summary Account of the Creation,
sufficient for Instruction, not Curiosity, 158 Mushroms, 39. Pernicious
Accidents of eating them, 40. How produced artificially, 41 Mustard, 45. 59.
102. 103 Myrrh, 18 Myrtil-Berries, 53
N.
Napus, 70 Nasturtium, 19. Indicum, 36. 90 105 Nature invites all to Sallets,
173 Nepenthes, 14 Nerves, 83 Nettle, 46 Nigard, 94 Nourishing, 7. 17. 24. 28.
51. 56. 64. 74. 127. 129
O.
Obstructions, 25. 72. 54 Ocimum, 10 Olera, what properly, how distinguished
from Acetaria, 2, 3 Oluscula, 7 Onion, 47. 48. 129. What vast Quantities spent
in Egypt, 49 Opening, 24 Orach, 49 Orange, 35. 50 Ornithogallon, 73 Oxalis, 65
Oxylapathum, 23. 74 Oil, how to choose, 97. 98. 106. Its diffusive Nature, 107
P.
Painters, 76 Palpitation, 72. 83 Palsy, 46. 61 Panacea, 15 Paradisian
Entertainment, 189 Paralysis, 19 Parsnip, 50 Pastinaca Sativa, 17 Patriarchs,
144. 149. Their long Lives a Shadow of Eternity, 150
Peach said to be Poison in Persia, a Fable, 134 Peace, 51 Pectorals, 89 Pepper,
51. Beaten too small, hurtful to the the Stomach, 52. 104 Persly, 54. Sacred to
the Defunct, ib. Philosophers 87. 150. 151 Phlegm, 10. 25. 46. 47. 57 Pickle,
113. What Sallet Plants proper for Pickles, ib. v. Appendix. Pig-Nuts, 42
Pimpernel, 14. 54. 104 Plants, their Virtue, 87. 95. 173, 174. Variety, 178.
Nourishment, 128. 129. No living at all without them, 171, 172. Plants infect
by looking on 87. When in prime, 110. how altered by the Soil and Culture, 131,
132 Not degenerated since the Flood, 162. 164 Platonic Tables, 150 Pleurisy,
125 Poiverade, 10. 77 Poppy, 74 Porrum, 30. 47 Postdiluvians, 144 Potage, 7.
19. 24. 48. 50, 115 Potagere, 185 Pot Herbs, 29. 115 Poison, 27. 74. 77
Praecoce Plants not so wholesome artificially raised, 132. 135 Preparation to
the dressing, of Sallets, 16. 119 Prodigal, 94 (...), 4 Pugil, 109 Punishment,
27 Purslan, 55, 56 Putrefaction, 50. 65 Pythagoras, 150
Q
Quality and Virtue of Plants 81. See Plants.
R.
Radish, 56. of Gold dedicated at Delphi, 57. Moschius wrote a whole Volume in
praise of them, ib. Hippocrates condemns them, ib. Raphanus Rusticanus Horse
Radish, 58 Radix Lunaria, 74. Personata, 75
Ragout, 43 Rampion, 60 Rapum, 70 Ray, Mr. 84. 171 Refreshing, 20. 31. 38
Restaurative, 8, 11. 69. 79 Rocket, 60 Roccombo, 28 Roman Sallet, 174. Lux,
179, 180
Rosemary, 60 Roots, 57 Rhue, 75
S.
Saffron, 104 Sage, 61 Sallets, what, how improved, whence so called, 5.
Ingredients, 6. Variety and Store above what the Ancients had, 174, 175. Bills
of Fare, 176. Skill in choosing, gathering, composing and dressing, 74. 82. 83.
88. 90. 96. 107. 112. 119. found in the Crops of Foul, 96. what formerly in
use, now abdicated, 75. extemporary Sallets, 135, 136. Whether best to begin or
conclude with Sallets, 114 Salade de Preter, 19 Salt, 99. What best for
Sallets, 91. Salts Essential, and of Vegetables, 100. 102 Sambucus, 24 Sampier,
61 Sanguine, 55 Sarcophagists, 86 Sauce, 59. 120 Savoys, 16 Scallions, 63
Scorbute. v. Scurvy. Scurvy Grass, 63 Scurvy, 13. 14. 19. 56. 59. 65. 90
Season, 110. 130 Seasoning, 123. v. Sallet. Sedum minus, 70. v. Stone-Crop.
Sellery, 63. 120 Seneca, 151 Shambles, 120. 124. 145 173 Sight, 76. 83. v.
Eyes. Silphium, 77. How precious and sacred, 78 Simples, 75 Sinapi, 45 Sisarum,
64 Skirrits, ib. Sleep, to procure, 31 Smallage, 63 Smut in Wheat, 133 Syrenium
Vulgar, 7 Snails, safe Tasters, 85 Sonchus* 66: Sordidness, 135 Sorrel, 65
Sow-thistle, v. Sonchus. Specificks, few yet discovered, 129 Spleen, 14
Spinach, 18. 57 Spirits cherishing and reviving, 14. 46. 89 Spring, 110. 130
Stomach, 24. 30. 39. 47. 51. 52. 56. 58. 64. 70. 76. 83 Stone, 13 Stone-Crop,
67 Strowings, 104 Students, 13. 143 Succory, 68 Sugar 22 34. 38. 39. 102
Summer. 130 Sumptuary Laws, 180 Swearing per Brassicam, 17 Swine used to find
out Truffles and Earth-Nuts, 42
T.
Table of the Species, Culture, Proportion and dressing of Sallets, according
to the Season, 107. 108. 110. 130 Tacitus, Emp. Temperance, 32. 187 Tansie, 68
Tarragon, 63 Taste should be exquisite in the Composer of Sallets, 93. 95 Tea,
27. v. Appendix. Temper, 126 Temperance, 31. 142. 152. 161. 162. 188 Teeth, 56.
112 (...), 101 Theriacle, v. Garlic. Thirst, to assuage, 50. 55. 88 Thistle,
69 Thyme, 29. v. Pot Herbs. Tiberius Caes. 64 Tragopogon. 18. 72
Transmigration, 86 Tribute paid of Roots, 64 Truffles, 42 Tubera, 42 Tulip
eaten that cost 100 l. 73 Turiones, 14 Turnip, 70. Made a Fish, 176
V.
Vapors to repress, 31. 58. 88. 116 Variety necessary and proper, 143. 178
Ventricle, 30. v. Stomach. Vine, 71 Venegar, 98. 186. 121 v. Appendix.
Viper-Grass, 72 Virtues of Sallet Plants and Furniture, 88. 89 90. 111. Consist
in the several and different Parts of the same Plant, 75 Voluptuaria Venena, 43
Urtica, 46
W.
Welsh, prolifick, 30 Wind, 25. 51 Wine, 11. 13. 38. 55. 56 58. 60. v.
Appendix. Winter Sallets, 11. 51. 130. v. Appendix. Wood Sorrel, 73 Worms in
Fennel, and Sellery, 26 Wormwood, 75
Y.
Youth, to preserve, 132
APPENDIX. Containing Receipts for the Pickling, and other ways of accommodating
Winter-Sallets.
ARtichoks. Ashen-keys. Asparagus. Beans. Beet. Broom-Buds. Carrot.
Champignons. Chessnuts. Cauly-flowers. Cowslips. Cucumber. Elder-flowers.
Gilliflowers. Herbs. Limons. Melon. Mushrom. Mustard. Nasturtium. Orange.
Parsnip. Peny-royal. Potato. Purselan. Radish. Sampier. Skirret. Spinach.
Tansie. Thistle. Vinegar. Wine. Turnip. Walnuts. Butter.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page. Line. Read Title, 0 6 (...). Dedicat. 7 8 Nature Praeface, 8 penult.
inutilis Plan, Book 3 cap. 4. Gum Commessa Acetar. 5 10 dele accept 6 17 of
which 16 8 Halmyridia 18 20 are eaten 26 24 Sage 33 11 Oxelaeum 34 4 Coss
Lettuce 42 16 Pig-Nuts 48 14 dele Clove, read Seeds. 50 12 resist 62 15
Potagere 74 7 dele not 90 5 Ilanders 123 14 (...) 125 17 Cataclysm 158 Marg.
Esu sanguinis 162 13 dele and 166 18 Friars 183 20 a well-stor'd 186 M. ult.
Skirrits 189 19 Meaths.

In the APPENDIX, RECEIPTS.

Number 14. Cucumber. Note, That the Cucumbers and the Gerkems are not to be
boiled in either of the Vinegars; but poured scalding-hot upon them. -- And
line 7, r. next day, or longer.

26. Pudding of Carrots. Read thus: Pare of the Crust and tougher part of a
Two-peny White-Loaf, grating the ^est; as also half as much of the Root, a Pint
of fresh Cream, or etc.

In the Cowslip-Wine dele two; read ten Gallons.


