ENGLANDS Deplorable Condition: SHOWING The COMMONWEALTHS Malady, By
Sacrilege, and want of Duty in the People. Contention, want of Charity in the
Ministry. Perjury, and want of Truth in both.


And Its Remedy, By The Peoples Obedience and Liberality. The Ministers Love
and Unity. Both their Repentance, and Fidelity.


Briefly Declared in THREE TREATISES, Of The Ministers Patrimony, and Peoples
Duty. Proposals to reconcile such as are for Lordly Episcopacy, and Un-ordain'd
Presbytery; for Popular Independancy, and Upstart Antipaedobaptistry. And
against Perjury.


Also, a Petition for the JEWS.

As they that served at the Altar lived of it, so has the Lord ordained that
they which preach the Gospel should live of it, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Every Devoted
thing is most holy to the Lord; it shall be the Priests, it shall not be sold,
nor redeemed, Lev. 27. 21, 28. (...). Intention Dantis, Exodus 20. 2, 6.
Extentione Recipientis, 1 Cor. 16. 14. Impletione Mandatorum, Romans 13. 8.
Acceptatione Evangelii, Luke 10. 27, 28. Origin Obedientiae, 1 Cor. 13. 1,
etc. Operatione nullius mali, Romans 13. 10.


Who shall inherit heaven? He that swears to his own hurt, and changes not,
Psalm. 15. 4. That has not sworn deceitfully, Psalm. 24. 4.


I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back, Judge. 11. 35. Even
so has the Jews now not believed, that through your mercy, they also may
obtain mercy, Romans 11. 34. London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold
by Richard Skeleton or at the Hand and Bible in Duck-lane. 1659.

To all that tremble at Gods Word, and fear an Oath; Grace be to you, and Peace
from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ who is our Hope.
BELOVED,
AFfliction, the Rod God uses to correct us with, for he scourges every Son
he receives, Heb. 12. being laid on me, it made me in Jan. 8. 1651. to search
and try my ways, and to turn unto the Lord, and because no man as David says,
knows his errors, therefore I prayed in the words of Elihu, Job 34. 32. that
which I see not, show thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I will do so no
more; and knowing it a truth by experience formerly, which he spoke Job 33. 15.
That God speaks in a dream, in visions of the night, when deep sleep falls
upon men, in slumbring on the bed: then he opens the ears of men, and seals
their instruction, etc. (though I abhor those filthy Dreamers St. Jude speaks
of, and those Enthusiasts condemned by Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. Tripart. lib. 7.
cap. Epiphan. scholast. Interpr. Hi enim cujusdam Daemonis operationem
expectant, and hanc sancti spiritus presentiam arbitrantur: whose successors
most of our Ranters and Quakers are, who believe things contrary to the written
Word, and practice what the Scriptures condemn, as did these old Messalians,
Euchitae, for by all these three names they are called there. After which God
showed me (according to my Prayer) my not performing my Oath and Covenant in a
Sermon by accident I heard in Bathe, as I was traveling through that Town: and
shortly after moved me exceedingly in a Dream to write against the sin of
Perjury, and to add it to my former Tract in my first Book I delivered to the
King, 1647. against this sin, for since the Lord punished him for this sin; how
can he spare us unless we repent of it. And though I humbled my self for this
sin presently, yet was I not resolved to print it till in March following,
reading Ezekiel. 9. 4. that we ought not to mourn for our own sins only, but for
the sins of the Land: I bethought my self of them, and then was moved, (as I
conceive by Gods Spirit) for his glory* and his Churches good, and the
discharge of my duty, to mak^ a Vow to write against the sins in this Book
specified; and then I prayed for direction and assistance, for grace, wisdom,
and prudence, for strength, health, and means to effect it, so as it may
accomplish the ends desired, etc. And though Satan hitherto has much bindred
me, together with mine own infirmities, whilst I too much looked on the things
seen, and conferred with flesh and blood. Yet now Christian Reader, for he ends
alone above-specified, and to pay my Vow with fear and trembling at Gods Word,
and the judgments that hang over our heads, and not for any by-interest to any
Person, or malice, or hatred against any, or out of pride, prejudice, or
self-seeking have I imprinted this (as God is my Record, whom I serve in the
Spirit, I speak the truth, and lie not.) And therefore what is of God, and
agreeable to his Word, I desire thee only to hold fast, and practice; What has
not warrant thence, impute it to my ignorance and weakness, (which in Christ's
name I desire thee to pardon) but before thou judge any thing, prove it by the
Word to be an error, without partiality, or hypocrisy, self-love, interest, or
fear of Man; and the Lord grant us both the Spirit of Discerning, to know the
things that differ, and to approve the things that are most excellent, and to
walk in the light when we have it, without detaining the truth in
unrighteousness, lest the wrath of God be revealed from Heaven against us for
it: but grant that we may be sincere; and without offense now, and hereafter in
the day of Christ, which the Lord grant for Christ's sake. AMEN.

So wishes thy Souls Friend, E. F. de C. V.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 2. justly claim. p 3 l 4 Chemosh, and l 15 per, and l 37 chad: p 4
l 12 Nicephorus: p 5 l 16 the Maintenance, and l 22 he which, and l 27 de
fructibus: p 7 l 30 Judae, and l 24 in co^spectu: p 8 l 5 admoveat, and l 19
Areopagitae, and l 38 this: p 13 l 10 and to bring: p 14 l 15 ademi possit: p
20 l 26 clargiti: p 22 l 1 Haeres: p 26 l 4 Gal: 3 15: p 30 l 33 for their* p
31 l ^6 (...), and l 20 (...). p 37 l 35 ab authore: p 38 l 38 Advowsons: p 40
l 9 Clinici, and l 36 another: p 47 l 21 Alfred: p 56 l 35 fraus: p 58 l 11
yet: p 60 l 28 dele they.

THE MINISTERS OF THE Gospels Patrimony. AND THE Saints Duty.
THE Earth is Iehovaehs, and the plenty thereof the World, Ps. 24. 1, 2. Deuteronomy.
10. 14.
and they that sit therein, both by right of Creation, for he has founded it
on the Seas, and established it on the Rivers, and by right of conservation, for
as all things were made by him, so he upholdeth all things by the word of his
power. Heb. 4. 1. Psalm 50. 12.
In him we live, move, and have our being. Acts 17. 26
And he has made of one blood all Nations of men, for to dwell on the face of
the whole earth, and has determined the times appointed, and the bounds of
their habitations, for he has divided inheritances unto the Nations, when he
separated the Sons of Adam, at the confusion of Languages, and set the bounds
of the people, according to the number of the Sons of Israel. Deuteronomy. 32. 8 Genesis
10 31.
Thirdly, by Inheritance and Redemption, the World, and all therein are the
Lord Jesus Christ's, by whom the Father has reconciled all things unto himself,
Col. 1. 20,
and whom he has appointed to be heir of all things. Heb. 1. 2.
Therefore whatever Title, or Interest, or Propriety any man can claim to any
part of the earth, or the fruit thereof, or the Cattle therein, or any profit
that comes by Sea or Land it must come from God the Father, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the grand Landlord, and Lord paramount over all other
Lords, and things, 1 Timothy 1. 17 and 6. 15. Rev. 19. 16. and 17. 14.
all which are the godly man's, Quoad usum, non quoad possessionem, 1 Cor. 3. 21
they shall serve for their good, though they be not their servants to command.

Now there are four ways whereby Lands or Goods become proper to any man. By
which he may justly lay claim to them (for I omit all unlawful and pretended
Titles) as his proper Goods, or Land.

First, by Gods immediate Donation or Gift, for this is most ancient; thus God
gave to Adam the Earth, and all the Creatures in it, with the Fruits thereof,
for him to subdue it, and to have dominion over it, Genesis 1. 28.
and after Adam his Sons were to enjoy it. Psalm 115. 16.
And thus,

Secondly, by Inheritance, Children may enjoy their Parents Estates belonging
to them, as the Land of Canaan was given to Abraham and his Seed, for them to
inherit the same, as Heirs to their Father of the Promise Heb. 11. 8, 9.
made Genesis 12. 7, and 15. 18. and 26. 3. and Numb. 27. 8. 12 yea the
Inheritance was to pass unto the Daughters where heirs Male faild; the Twelve
Tribes had their Inheritances by Lot assigned them, which was by the
disposition of the Lord Prove. 16. 3^.
as Solomon shows.

Thirdly, By Purchase Land becomes a man's own, when he buys it with his money,
or Goods; Thus Abraham with money bought the field of Ephron, which was in
Machpelah, and the Cave therein, and all the Trees that were in the Field, and
in all the Borders round about, for a possession to him and his heirs for ever,
Genesis 23. 17
for four hundred sheckles of Silver. And so Iac^b bought a parcel of a Field
for an hundred Lambs, or pieces of money on which the Images of Lambs were
stamped, Genesis 33. 19 Josh. 24. 32.
for 'twas an ancient custom to buy things by Exchange, as among the Greeks;
Homers Iliad. 8.
both these ways are intimated. 1 Kings 21. 3.


Fourthly and lastly, Lands or Goods becomes a man's own by conquest, or mediate
gift of men; by Conquest, when men by his command, or according to his will,
invade any Land or Nation; Thus by Conquest the Israelites at Gods command
invaded the Land of Sih^n King of the Amorites Deuteronomy. 2. 31.
and they conquered them, and God is said to give their Cities and Lands to
them, as Iephthah p^eads, Judge. 11 2 2, 23.
and this seems then as well as afterward to be the Law of Nations, as
appears in that following, will thou not possess that which Cheimosh thy God
gives thee? because victory in battle is the Lords? 2 Chronicles. 14. 11.
and he gives it to whom he will, and hereby destroys utterly sometimes, and
displanteth Nations, as the Zuzims, and Emims, and Raphaims out of Canaan by
Chederlaomer. Genesis 14. 5.
The Chorits, and others dwelling in Mount Seir by Esau and his Sons. Deeu. 2.
21
Or 2ly God immediately by men's will and disposition gives unto men Lands and
Goods as Abram gave Goods to his Sons by Keturah, Genesis 25. 6.
but his Lands, and the chief of his Estate he gave to Isaac and his posterity
Genesis 24. 36
and so the Eleven Tribes at Gods command gave Cities to the Tribe of Levy
Josh. 21. 3,
and paid their Tithes and Offerings, Levit. 27. pro totum.
so those who to acknowledge their homage and thankfulness to God in a singular
way to honor him, and to maintain his Worship and Ministers, and the poor
sanctified houses or fields, or the prices of them, or else devoted persons,
and redeemed them, as in the place before quoted: so also Barnabas under the
New Testament sold his Land, devoted and brought the money, and laid it down at
the Apostles feet, Acts 4. 3^.
so did many others that had possession of Lands and sold them, Houses, and
brought the prizes of the things sold, Acts 4. 34.
which also Ananias pretended to do out of vain glory. Acts 5. 1.
Now this belonged to the Apostles and poor in the primitive Church, verse 35.
and they accordingly distributed unto every man as he had need; it was before
it was sold their own, as Peter plainly tells Ananias, and after that was sold,
the money was in his own power to dispose of it as pleased him, but after it
was devoted, then it was not in his power to keep back part of it; here^n he
betrayed his covetousness and d^ffidence: his hypocrisy and The application of
what was spoken before.
sacrilege; and telling a Lie to the Holy Ghost, he became a spectacle of
divine vengeance.

In the times of the Apostles the Brittons were without question the lawful
possessors of this Isle, God having given the same to them to inhabit, as he
did Mount Seir to the Ed^mites, Deu. 2. 5. Ar to the Moabites Deuteronomy. 2. 9.
and having brought the Brittons from Troy, as he did the Philistines from
Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir Amos 9 7.
as the B^ittish Chronicles generally agree. Brute who was their King having
reigned there four and twenty years before Saul's Death. Cnadderions third age
of the world, Gildas and others


This Nation as well as other Gentiles when Christ suffered, ( h) Fox Acts and
Monum. 1 part, page 95. printed 1610.
worshipped dumb Idols, and offered Sacrifice to Devils. But about the years
of our Lord (68) Joseph of Arimath^a after the disperson of the Jews was sent
by Philip the Apostle from France into this Island, who here remained during
his life, and He with his companions if Gildas may be credited, laid the first
foundation of Christian Faith among the Brittons, who afterward were confirmed,
and Believers increased by other Preachers Goodwin of Bishops Initio libri.
and Teachers that came over. To him and his Associates was given in the Reign
of King Arniragus, Glacenbury, with (12) Hidelands adjacent to it, for their
maintenance in the Is^e then called A valon, (i) although I rather approve of
Nicephorus his testimony, Nicepsorum libr. secun^o, cap. 4.
who says that Simon Zelotes did spread the Gospel of Christ to the West
Ocean, and brought the same to the Isle of Britain.

Now God bearing witness to the testimony of his Gospel in this Land as
elsewhere, and confirming the word spoken both with signs and wonders, and
diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will, of
which King Lucius (Son of Coilus that builded Colch^ster in this Land) hearing,
about the year (180) he sent to Elutherius the Bishop of Rome to receive of him
the Christian Faith, and to be Baptized, who rejoicing to hear the request of
thi^ King, and to see the godly forwardness of his well disposed mind,
presently sent him Faganus and Damianus Preachers to him, who preaching to the
King, his Court and people, converted many, and Baptized them, and so they
subverted the Idol Temples, and all other monuments of ( l) Fox Acts and Monum.
1 Part, page 96 printed 1610.
Gentility, and embraced the Christian Faith. And whereas before there were
amongst the Gentiles eight and twenty head priests called Flamins, and three
Arch-Priests called Arch-Flamins, these they turned into eight and twenty
Bishops, and three Archbishops, taking away the means which formerly was
given to Satan and his Ministers, for to maintain the worship of Devils, and
cons^crating it unto Jesus Christ, and his Ministers, for to maintain the true
worship of God, of which its probable Tithes were a part; for so the Gentiles
paid Tyth to their Flamines, as well as the Jews did to the Priests and
Levites. So Pisistratus Tyrant of Athens info^ms Solon that all the Athenians
did separa^e the Tithes of their Fruits, not to spend them on private use, but
for the public Sacrifices, and common profits. L^crtiue in vita solonis:
So amongst the Latins they used to pay Tithes to Hercules. P^mpon. Lat. de
sacer. Macrob. Saturn. lib. 3. cap. 12.
And Cyrus his Soldiers by the advice of Craesus were staid from spoiling the
Lydians City that the Tithe might first be paid to Jupiter. Herod in Clio.
However certain it is that this good King Lucius founded many Churches, gave
great riches and liberties to the same, as Fox confesses Fox Acts and Mon. ut
supra, p. 97.
so did many other christian Kings converted to the Faith, as Ethelbert gave
Lands and Revenues to Austin that converted him at Canterbury, Sigibert gave to
Melitus at London; also Quicelinus gave the ^ity of Dorchester to Berinus, and
after to the Bishop of Winchester seven miles compass of Land, to build there
the Bishops Sea, which was accomplished and finished by Kenwalkus his Son, Fox
ut supra pagin, 110.
as our Fox relates.

And that Tithes as now they are pa^d were given by Lucius and his people, is
more than probable, since they were governed in Religion and the discipline of
the Church, and maintenance thereof, was after the example of the R^mish Church
which then was in its purity, or very little swa^ving from the Apostolic
Faith. Fox ut supra pagin. 96.
And at that time Tithes were paid at Rome, for all Christians are bound both
by the Law of nature, and institution of the Church to pay Tithes, Aquinas 2da:
2da: q. 87. A. 1.
and St. Augustine says Tithes are required of due debt, and the which will
not give them, invades another man's goods; Aug in Sermon 1. Domin. post T. in. 12
and in Ser. de tempore 219. Decimas de tructibus vestris redditae, ille vero
Christianus est qui decimus annis ^ngulis erogandas pauperibus reddit.
and again, he which gave he the whole requires again the Tenth of thee, not
certain to profit himself but us. In the National Council of Calehuth, anno
785, as Spelman relates in the Reigns of King Oswald, and Offa, there on good
grounds specified, Tithes were commanded to be paid as a special gift and
tribute we ow t^ God, Spel. Council. page 292
for so indeed paying of Tithes was a sign of Homage, and subjection we owe to
God, as also of thankfulness, which therefore was given to Gods M^nisters, and
Priests before the Law, G^n. 14. 29 and 28 21.
and under the Law, Lev. 27. and Numb. 18. and Deuteronomy. 14. 22.
and under the Gospel. Romans 15. 27. and 1 Cor. 9. 13 Gal. 6. ^.
King Ethelstane in his Land gave Tithe of his proper Goods, as well in living
Cattle, as in Corn and Fruits of the g^ound, and the same charge and command he
gave to all his Officers throughout his Realm to pay the same, which was about
n^ne hundred years after Christ, and the ground of it was from the example of
the godly who paid Tyths before the Law, and by the words of our S^viour, and
by the terrible threats denounced in other Books, which told them that if they
would not pay their Tenth, their nine parts should be taken from them, and they
should enjoy only the Tenth: also it appears in the Reign of Egbert almost two
hundred years before, Fox ut supra, page 135, and 136, and 149, and 150.
for in the beginning of his Reign Cutheart Arch Bishop of Canterbury with his
Synod of Bishops and Prelates concluded that the Congregation in every place
should be constituted after the ability of their Goods, which had been to no
purpose had not Tithes been paid out of them. Afterward in the Reign of K.
Edmond C^. Anno 940. the King with the advice of his Lords and Bishops Enacted
a Law that Tithes should be paid by every christian man: Fox ut supra page 136.
And this was after confirmed by the Saxon, Danish, and Norman Kings that
succeeded, as appears in that Oath they usually took at their Coronations, to
preserve and defend the rights and privileges of the Church, as is manifest in
the description of a King by King Edward the Confessor. Fox ut supra page 149,
150.
The King of right and by his office ought to conserve fully and wholly in all
ampleness without diminution the Holy Church, according to the const^tution of
his Ancestors and Predecessors, and to defend the same against all foes: And
these Tithes has been ratified and confirmed on the Ministers of the Church,
by sundry Acts of Parliament since the Conquest, as by Magna Charta of King
Henry the First, and King John, and Henry the Third, and 37. times since
confirmed in Parliament, Vide Mr. Prin's Gospel Plea in his Preface to the
Christian Reader.
and the last Parliament called 1640. has confirmed the same by their
Ordinance, 1644. Vide the Ordinance of Parliament made November 1644. for the
better payment of Tithes.
nor were ever any of those acts repealed, but are in force still. Therefore I
humbly conceive that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to live of those things
that are given, and by devout men consecrated to Gods service, according to the
Laws of God and man, and that their maintenance ought to be according to the
greatness of their employment, and to the number of Wife and Children in their
Families, which they are obliged to provide for Acts 4. 37. and 6. 2. 1 Timothy ^.
8. Lev. 22. 11, 12
as the Priests and Levites did of old with their Families; And the Civil
Magistrates if there be disorder in the dividing of the Churches Goods, or
ignorance, and sloth in the Ministers, or obstinacy and neglect in those that
should pay their* Tithes and Offerings, may command the same to be rightly
divided, and see it be done as did Hezekias, 2 Chronicles. 31. 45, etc:
who is said to do that which is good and right, and truth before God, verse
20. and they may punish or remove those Ministers that are ignorant, or
profane, even the chiefest of them, as David and Solomon did of old, 1 King.
2. 26. and 35.
and C^nstantine the Great, and Theodosius, and other Christian Princes under
the New Testament, Theod Eccles* Hist. lib. 1. c. 20. and lib. 5. c. 19:
and cause the Tithes to be paid to the Ministers, as Nehemiah did, Nehem 13.
10, 11, etc.
who caused the portions of the Levites to be given, and so did the pious
Magistrates in our Land, who made those Laws above specified, requiring all
sorts of persons to pay their Tithes, on penalty, as being due to Christ's
Ministers, both by the Law of God and man. Well they knew it was not in man's
power to detain, or take from God that which God required, or by the motion of
his Spirit was devoted to him and his Service; such Houses, Lands, Goods, under
the Law was not to be sold, or redeemed, it was holy to the Lord; Levit. 27. 28.
or as it is in the Original, it was holiness of holiness, that is most holy in
respect of them that devoted them, and therefore not to be sold, detained, or
denied, God would not suffer them to redeem it, to teach them constancy in all
good purposes and words, that so in them we may be unchangeable as God is,
Ainsw. Annot. in loc.
no part of it may be held or kept back without theft, that I say not
Sacrilege, the property being altered after it is devoted, as St. Peter told
Ananias, Acts 5. 1, 4.
both before he sold 'twas his own, and after he had sold and received the
money, 'twas in his own power to dispose of it, but when he had devoted the
whole money to the free use and benefit of the Church, to be distributed by the
Apostles, for him then, to keep back part of it, and to lay down the residue as
the whole, and to confirm it to be the whole with a wilful lie, for this the
Apostle sharply reproved him, for thereby he tempted God, and lied to the Holy
Ghost, and therefore God made him a spectacle of divine vengeance for his
detaining the truth in unrighteousness, and for his Sacrilege, for such a sin
there is under the Gospel, Rom 2 22.
as well as there was under the Law, which is theft in the highest degree,
which St. Austin compares to Judas treachery, Ideoque Ananias and Saphira in
cons^etu Ecclesi^e mortui sunt, ut Apostolica Atthoritas quanta esset
ostenderetur and quam magnum peccatum esset, quod oblatum iterum ab Ecclaesia
retraheretur, monstraretur and caeteri exemplo hujus castigarentur Aug. lib. 3.
de Mirab. Sacr. Script.
for if he be accounted a Thief that steals goods from a private man, how much
more is a sacrilegious person a th^ef, who dares to steal from God and his
Church, Qui aliquid de Ecclesia furatur Jurae perdito comparatur: He which
steals from the Church is to be compared with cursed Judas, Aug. in Evang. John
tract p. 50.
the Heathens abhord this sin: therefore we read that Joseph when in the Famine
in Egypt, he bought with Corn all the Land of the Egyptians, yet the Land of
the Priests he bought not, for they had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, nor
sold they their Land; Genesis 47. 22.
whence Theodoret says, if wicked men so much reverenced those gods which were
not gods, so that their Priests Lands given to them for the worship of those
gods, were not sold nor taken from them, what impiety do those commit under the
Gospel, who will not suffer the Ministers of the living God to enjoy this
liberty, Theodor. quest. in Gen: cap. 27.
that so his service may be preserved, and continue with them?

The Heathen to preserve their gifts devoted, from the hands of profane
sacrilegious persons, engraved on them these words, Sunt bona Decrum, ad h^c ne
quis manum admoliretur, Valcrius max. lib. 1. cap. 2.
and the Jews called their devoted things chosen, in Greek (...) Levit. 27. 28.
Luke 21. 5 (...).
wishing and judging them accursed, that turned them to any other use than to
that they were devoted unto; and so amongst us Christians, the most of the
Lands in this Island they were given to God and the Church, with an execration
on those to be separated from Christ, and given to the Devil, that should alter
them, or employ them to any other use than by the Donors, they were at first
devoted unto, which in general was the service of God, (although many in the
times of Popery faild in the superstitious observing and requiring of many
things which might have been Reformed, and the deceased devout persons wills
been observed inviolably in the general, though not in that specifical service
required, 'Twas so high a crime in the eyes of those that saw only by the light
of nature that the Areopagit condemned Aelians boy for this sin. Aelian: Hist:
lib. 5 cap: 16. Var: Hist.
God almost miraculously killd King Rufus See Hoywoods History of the death of
King Rufus.
by an Arrow shot by Sir Walter Tirrel at a Deer; He was wont to call that got
from the Church sweetbread, but it proved bitter to him at the last, when he
was slain in his sports in the new Forest, which for his pleasure he had made,
thereby depriving seventeen Churches of their Revenues, and the Ministers of
the Churches, and also the people of dwellings, depopulating those Parishes,
God had warned him Prove: 20 5.
that it was a snare to devour that which was holy, and after vows to make
enquiry. He had at that time also in his hand three great Bishoprics, viz.
Canterbury, Winchester, Sarum, and twelve Abbeys in Farm, his Brothers Son also
was slain there. Fox Acts and Mon: 1 Part, page 171, and printed 1610.


Idolaters of old conferred Lands and Riches, yea much of their Goods on their
Idols service, and Priests, witness these Scriptures H^s: 218. Ezel: 16. and 1
Kings 18, 19
and the wisest of them were afraid for fear of death to commit Sacrilege, or
to take away any Lands or Goods devoted to their gods, such they reputed
Atheists, Valor Max. lib: 1, cap. 2
as Dionysius Senior, Nero, Julian, the Apostate, and others, and the living
God to show his detestation of his Sin, has accordingly plagued the same. As
Swanus the first Danish King in England that wasted and spoiled the Land of St.
Edmond, devoted to Gods service; shortly after, says Fox, he died suddenly,
crying and yelling among his Knights; some say he was stricken with the Sword
of St. Edmond, of which he died the third day, Fox ut supra page 145.
which caused his Son Canutus after his death, to grant them their Freedom and
Liberties, and to enlarg their Possessions, building a Church and Abbey there:
after which it was used that the Kings of England, when they were Crowned, sent
their Crown for an Offering to St. Edmonds shrine, and after redeemed the same
at a dear rate. Fox ut supra page 146.
Julians Uncle, and Faelix the Kings Treasurer, who took Theod Eccles. Hist. l.
3. c. 11, 12.
away the Silver and Gold Constantine had Dedicated, by fearful Plagues
perished; the one Vomited at his mouth his Ordour till he died, and the other,
Blood. Many yet alas in these Iron days which are mixed with Clay, Dan. 2. 42
without fear or shame, have attempted to devour things Consecrated, and have
effected wicked devices as the Psalmist says: Psalm. 37. 7.
but they have been cut off, and are not what they were: Do but diligently
consider, (there) where their place stood, and they are not, I mean the
Parliament that first sold the Bishops Lands, and those after them that sold
the Dean and Chapters Lands; and what may be the end of those that have bought
these, and retain these to their own use, without Repentance, may be
conjectured by what happened to HENRY the Eighth, and his Favorite, the Earl of
ESSEX, who sold and alienated the Land and Revenues of the Monastries; i Mal:
3. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Non remitti^ur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum. Aug.
Circuit totum mundum non reperietis tam effrenem licentiam in gentibus qualis
inter vos grassatur. Illi enim obsequium aliquod reddunt diis suis and
sacrilegium illis est ahominabile vos autem me fraudatis. Calvin in locum
prelect.
they were cut off, and their Posterity is not known. And truly I think, this
was not the least sin that stuck too, and devoured like the Eagles feathers,
the Crown Land. Gods Revenues wrung from him by violence, or stolen away under
any specious pretense, proving like the Gold of Toulouse, that prejudiced still
the owners of it, or like Acans Wedge (which was indeed devoted Gold) that
kindled a fire on himself, his Family, and the rest of his goods, which proved
his utter destruction Josh. 7
: And yet though divine vengeance sleeps not, nor spares the greatest
Delinquents in this sin, yet such has been the profaneness and Atheism of
some, the ignorance and blind zeal of others, to Petition to have all the
Chu^ches Revenues sold, and to have a Law confirmed for the taking away of
Tithes, See the Resolution on the Question by the Parl: April 29. 1652.
and some other competent Maintenance to be settled in lieu of it. But what is
this, but as if men under pretense of Liberty, should desire Property to be
taken away, and that it may be lawful for any man to steal from his Neighbor,
nay, from his God, (under pretense of given them satisfaction for it another
way) for so the Lord of Hosts by his Statute Law, by which all shall be judged,
accounts it, Ye have robbed me in Tithes and Offerings: And to terrify those
of that age from this sin, he sets down the punishments to be infl^cted on
them, unless they repented of it, and restored the Goods taken, by making
satisfaction for the Sacri^edge, and forsaking afterward the sin, and hereupon
he promises Mat. 3. 9.
a blessing on them when they should so do. God needs not our Offerings,
Gifts, nor Tithes, but his poor Members do; and what is done to any of them, is
done to himself, and his Ministers wants these, that helped by these, they
might attend on his Service and Worship, and therefore well may he call these
his, which are destinated for things so dear unto him, as are the poor who are
his Children, as dear to him as the apple of his eye, and his Worship and
Glory, which he will not give to another; Suum Deus merit^ vocat ac censet quod
destinat in cultum suum. Ideo sacrilegi sumus quoties non reddimus fratribus
nostris quod Deus jubet. Calv. ut supra.
therefore without doubt (says one) God is wronged of his Right, and
Sacrilege is committed (which the very Heathen abhord) when either Christ's
Ministers, or the Poor, are defrauded of their due. Now God challenges the
Tyth for his due; Levi^. 27. 30, 31.
All the Tyth was Jehovahs, Holiness to him: nor was it to be redeemed or
changed, and that by the Law of Nations, for 'twas allowed of, and approved,
and practiced long before the Ceremonial Law was given by Moses, as Genesis 14.
20. and 28. 21, 22.
in Abraham and Jacobs days who paid their Tithes. Genesis 14. 20. and 28. 21, 22.
Yea, this seems to be a positive Law of God, given unto Adams Sons from the
beginning, for both Cain and Abel brought their Oblations Genesis 4. 3, 4.
and first Fruits of the Corn, and of the Beast: and God required of the
Soldiers that fought against Midian (before the Israelites had any Land to pay
their Tithes out of it) to pay the Tenth of their Spoils: Numb. 31. 28, etc.
yea, the first City on this side Jordan, which the Israelites took in Canaan
by War, was by Jesus Christ himself devoted to the maintenance of the Priests,
and to his own Service; I mean the Silver, Gold, vessels of Brass and Iron in
Jericho, they were all to come in into the Troas^^y of the Lord; Josh. 6. 17,
19.
yea, he was so careful for his own portion, the Achan having taken of the
devoted thing by stealth, and dissembling it, hiding the 200 sheekles of
Silver, and the Wedge of Gold in his Tent under the Earth, that God is
displeased with all Israel for it, and would not go forth with their Armies
until this accursed thing, with Achan and his Family were consumed by fire:
Josh. 7. 26.
And truly we shall find that the Devil who is Gods ape, set his Children and
servants about this work of old. You know what honor and means the Priests of
the Egyptians had in Joseph's days, insomuch that a Priest and Prince of On are
words Synonomous: The Septuag. translates it, Priest of Heliopolis, or he may
be the President and Prince of it; perhaps he was both, as was the manner of
those times and places. Ainsw. Annot. in Genesis 41.
One man in those days enjoying both Offices, as Melchizedec was King of
Salem, and Priest of the most High God. Genesis 14. 18.
For among the Egyptians, Priests were learned men, and Doctors (...), (...),
Diodor. Siculus, lib. 2.
though here he seems to be the chief Priest amongst them who was the next in
honor to their King; for to this Helicpolis, or City of the Sun, the people
used to resort once a year to do honor unto the Sun by Sacrifice. Herod. in
Euterpe.
The Magi also amongst the Persians and Chaldeans had little less honor or
maintenance. Just in Hist.
Amongst the Greeks they used to Sacrifice the Fruits of the Earth. Hom. Iliad.
1.
So Numa, the famous Lawgiver, ordained the like amongst the Romans; Plin.
lib. 18. cap. 2. See the Law of the 12. Tables, De Rolig. tit. 1. lex 4.
and the like was for their offering of Beast, and paying of Tithes. The
Priests of Baal had Courtly Provision and Attendants at Jezabels table: 1 King.
18. 19
And without question those Priests of Jeroboams making, who waited on the
service of the Idols at Dan and Bethel, had the Tithes belonging to Gods
Priests given them, and other r^ch Offering besides, otherwise they would not
have so eagetly have coveted that Office as they did, 1 King. 13. 33.
which God calls their Hires Micah 1. 7.
they gave when they committed Spiritual Adultery. The Athenians also, as I
showed before, separated the Tithes for their Idol-service. D. Laert. in vita
Solonis.
So did the Latins to Hercules: Pompon. let. de sacerd. Macrob. saturn. lib. 3.
cap. 12.
nor did the Devils, whom they worshipped, hinder his servants in this service,
but moved them to it, and commended them when they were most lavish therein,
and then gave their Answers, when they would not before, as in the Laconian
Hecatombs: and in Craesus and Julian Gifts and Sacrifices, before they fought
with their Enemies, both which the Devil deceived with his equiv^cal Oracles.

And no marvel Satan approved of these Tithes and Offerings: Since that hereby
God is wronged of his Right* and his Honor is given to his Enemy, and his
kingdom hereby was advanced, his Worship maintained, and men's souls destroyed:
For as the godly by payment of their Tithes acknowledge their subjection and
thankfulness to God, (the payment of these being a token of subjection) Heb. 7.
4, 5, 6, 7.
and a grateful confession that 'twas Gods blessing made them fruitful, and
gave them that increase, by which they honored God, and maintained his
Ministers and Worship. So Idolaters by the payment of their tithes to the
Idolatrous Priests The giving of the Tenth Beast to the Lord was (besides the
acknowledgment of their Obedience, Subjection, and thankfulness to him for the
other Nine) A confession that the beginning of all propagation and increase was
from God, without whose blessing all Creatures are barren and fruitless, Genesis
1. And the giving of the Ten^hs of the Trees and Corn, was an acknowledgmen
that Gods blessing made them plentious in the fruit of their Trees and Ground.
Ains. Expos. on Levit. 27.
as the Brittons of old did to their Flamins, thereby they acknowledged Satan
their Lord, who is therefore called the God of this world, gave thanks to him,
honored him, and maintained his service; and therefore Satan could not endure
that men should pay their Tithes to Gods Priests and Ministers, neither under
the Law, nor Gospel, Nehem. 13. 10, 12. Mal. 3. 8. Luke ^1. 41, 42 1 Cor 9. 6,
7, etc.
well-knowing that Sacrilege it strikes at the root of Religion, and of the
true Worship of God: and therefore as of old, so now he tempts men to it,
(though now more craftily) under the specious pretense of Piety, [and though by
withholding these, they starve and kill Christ's Ministers] yet many (as the
pharisees of old) think herein they do God good service, when indeed by those
that truly fear God, and by experience in other Countries, it is known it is a
means to introduce Popery, or Barbarism, to destroy Learning and Piety, and to
remove our Angels, and Gods service together: Nehem. 13. 10, 12
As it came to pass in Israel before Nehemiahs second Reformation, when the
Tithes and Portions of the Levites were not given them (although their Lands,
Gleabs, Fields were not sold, nor let out, for thither they retired for food:
See ver. 11, 13
This is (as is conceived) the reason why the Devil is so busy (seeing A
Reformation and purgation of Gods service and Ministers is now in agitation, to
cleanse us from Romish and other superstitious dregs) to cry down the Ministers
of Christ, and their Maintenance too, as Popish and Antichristian* that so he
may draw us from abhoring Idols to commit Sacrilege, which is indeed the
greater sin; Romans 2. 22.
which the Apostle inveighs against, with a bitter Interrogation, Thou that
abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? For this sin will serve well his
turn to overthrow not only the begun Reformation, but also the professed
Protestant Religion from amongst us, that so he may hereby make our Reformers
the destroyers of our Religion; for by this means he knows our Ministry will
become poor, illiterate, and contemptible, wanting B^oks to provide, or time to
study, and so there will not be found as heretofore, (such as Ridley, Latimer,
Cranmer, Willet, Fox, Jewel) able men to convince the gainsayers, to encounter
either by Dispute, or Dying, with our equivocating and sophisticated Jesuits,
or with our cunning Socinians, Arrians, Pelagians, Nestorians, and such like
Wolves and Foxes this age has produced, whilst the golden reins of Discipline
have hung loose. This was the old plot he set Julian the Apostate about, to
extirpate the Name and Faith of Christianity, whilst he hindered Christians from
training up their Children in Schools of Learning, Theod. l. 3. c. 7 in his
Eccles. H.
and 'twas Pharoahs design to keep them poor, and over-burden them with work,
that so they might not hearken to Moses Message, but refuse Gods service, as
they did some of them Ezod. 5. 6, 7, 9, 21. Vide Newcomen's Sermon before the
house of Parliament.
. Also the Princes of Midian had such a divilish intention, that they might
keep Israel in subjection, and subvert the true Religion that was amongst them,
and so bring them over to their Idolatry, Psalm. 83. 12
viz. by taking away the Levites Cities and Lands in the Land of Canaan which
the Eleven Tribes had given Josh. 21.
by Gods appointment Numb. 33 2
unto the Levites, for so the Levites and Priests houses are called, The houses
of God, which they resolved to take into their possession, (there being no
houses of God built till Solomon's time) which proved both a snare and ruin to
them all: Judge. 7. 22 and 8. 11, 21
and the like success the Prophet by the Spirit imprecateth on such
sacrilegious persons for the future whom he calls Gods enemies, for they had,
and did herein consult against God, Psalm. 83. 2, 5, 10
because 'twas against his hidden ones, viz. The Saints that are hidden by God
in his Tabernacle in the day of Evil, from the strife of tongues, Psalm. 27 4.
and 31. 20
and who are hidden in the world, for that knows them not. And lastly, because
their life is hid with Christ in God, Colos. 3. 3
nay, he desires more fearful Curses on these oppressors of the Church than
happened unto them Psalm. 83. 13, 14, to the last.
. The very Turks and Papists abhor this sin: And yet notwithstanding it is to be
feared, these Three Nations are greatly guilty of it, in devouring things
devoted: What our Pious and Devout Predecessors gave to the Ministers and
maintenance of Gods service and poor, out of a zeal to Gods house, devoting it
to Gods service, these have out of a fiery zeal, laid waste and consumed; yet
we their Children, after their vows do make enquiry which God abhors, Prove. ^0.
25.
yet some in authority out of a blind zeal, have sold most of the Gleabs of the
Land, and so devoured devoted things, notwithstanding the will of the Donors
forbidding it, and the Oaths of our Princes heretofore made to the givers of
them: as Saul endeavored to destroy the Gibeonites, notwithstanding the Oath
of the Princes made of old to them on the contrary, which caused a Famine in
King David's days: 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2.
And I pray God there follows not a Famine in England as it did on Israel for
this sin: Ut supra
And if the Gle^bs given to maintain Gods service in this Isle, may not be
alienated from God, nor withheld from his Ministers whom he has appointed to
receive them, then much less may the Tithes of Grounds, Trees, Cattle, be
snatched from them without injustice, if not sacrilege, Mat^h. 10. 10 Gal. 6 6
they being theirs who are true and lawful Ministers of Christ; and accordingly
execute their Office by as good Law of the Land as any man holds his Freehold
or Inheritance in this Land, which were confirmed to them by Magna Charta of
Henry the First, King John, and Henry the Third, and 37 times since by Acts of
Parliaments and Ordinances, See Mr. Pryns Gospel-Plea for Ty^hes
and many times long before, as has been showed; they being most of them the
Gifts and Legacies of devout Saints deceased, and given with diref^l
imprecations on such who should alter their Wills, whose Testament cannot be
revoked without injustice, Gal. 3. 15 If it be but a man's Testament, yet if it
be confirmed by the Seal and Death of the Testator, no man disannulleth or
adds thereunto. Nihil addi velademi mipossit secundum omnia jura. Lutheri
Comment in loc
Vltima voluntas est vice legis, sic juri consulti: no reasonable men will do
it, either despise it, reject it, or make it void, or add to it, as
Theophilact renders it; (...). Vide Gagneus in loc. Gal. 3. 15
therefore whosoever does attempt or effect it, shows himself unreasonable.

And if it be oppression, injustice, and theft, for any persons under heaven,
to make a Law to take away the Freehold and Inheritance of an innocent man, or
to disanul and alter the Testament of a Pious man deceased, who before he died
bequeathed his Lands and Goods to whom he pleased; then certainly the sin is
aggravated in any persons that shall establish iniquity by a Law, to take away
the Tithes, Gleabs, and Lands given to God, which were the Gifts and Legacies
of holy men devoted to God for the maintenance of his service and Ministers out
of a zeal to Gods glory, being moved thereunto by the Spirit of God, Ainsw
Annot. on Levit. 27. 1. The Lord concludes this law touching Vows and voluntary
Services which his people should honor him with of their own ^ccord, through
the working of his Spirit in them.
or to deprive the Ministers of their Freehold and Inheritances, which not
only by Gods Law, but by so many Laws and Acts of Parliament by our Ancestors
through many ages is confirmed unto them: And though it be objected, That many
of these Lands were given for Superstitious Uses, as to say Mass, Pray for the
De^d, etc. To this I Answer, That it is not lawful to employ these to those
Sup^rstitious ends which perhaps the Testators in those blind times of Popery,
seduced by Antichrists Ministers, allotted them for: Yet the main Intention of
these Zealous persons is to be respected, which was Gods glory, and the
maintenance of Gods service, and Ministers: For the Abuse of any thing, taken
not away the right Use of it: nor the aberration ^n some circumstance make the
Design fr^strate. The censors ^f Chorah, Dathan, and Abiram, and t^eir company,
were to ^e taken up out of the burning, because they were hallowed, Numb. 16.
37, 38, 39. Unlawful for common uses, because they had made them for vessels to
minister unto God withal. Ainsw. in loc.
though now ill employed, and turned afterward to an holy Use, even for broad
Plates to cover the Alter. Many Gifts and Ornaments of the Temple which had
been conferred on it, though by disobedient and superstitious Persons as Christ
intimates Mat. 15. 5. for they are called Anathemata. Luke 21 5
for ^l ends, yet Christ though he condemns the sin, and reprehends ^he
persons offending, never gave any o^der for the selling of those Gifts, or
converting them to another Use, for they were holy; as were the Gifts given by
Artaxerxes and his Coun^ellors Ezra 8 28 So were al gifts given to God and his
Ministers, Lev. 27. 9
long before; The vessels of the Temple which Nebuchad ^ezzar brought forth out
of Jerusalem, and put them in the house of his God, which Belshazzar also
abused to Idolatry and Excess, Dan. 5. 2. 3
are by Cyrus rest^red Ezra 1. 7, 8. 11.
and carried up to Jerusalem by Shezbazzer, and were brought into the* Temple
and put every one of them in his place. Ezra 6. 5
Darius also gave great Gifts and Maintenance for the Service of God and his
Ministers, although he were a Heathen Prince, and failed in the circumstance,
giving the same not for Gods glory, and in Faith of Christ typified in those
Sacrifices, nor for the obtaining pardon of his sins thereby, but rather out of
serv^le fear of Gods Judgments, or self-love, for the preservation of his life
and his Children, Ez. 6. 10, 11, 12
yet ^his being given with a direful Execration, the same fell on those that
took away these Gifts, as on Jason, Antiochus. Menelaus, Apollonius, and
others, who took the holy vessels with pol^uted hands, and with profane hands
pulled down the things that were dedicated by other Kings to the augmentation,
and glory, and honor of the place In Simon, and Jason, and Antiochus, Menelaus,
Apollonius, and others, vide Rawl. hist. lib 5 c 6. 2 Mac 5. 16. and 9.* 28
Heliodorus.
* these Antiochus gave away, and he ^ook out of the Temple no less than one
thousand and eight hundred Talents, for which shortly after the Lord smote him
so that he died miserably. ^ Mac 9. 5, 6, 7. and 28. so 2 Mac. 3 chapter and ch 4.
in Andronico.
Now as it was lawful for those under the law by Vows, or Gifts, to Consecrate
and Devote persons Money, Houses, and Lands to Gods service, and the
maintenance of the Priests and Levites, and no devoted thing was to be sold, or
redeemed, but was most holy unto the Lord: Levi. 27, 28, 2^. Haemin. in Romans 9.
2.
So also under the Gospel it was Prophesied, That the godly should
anathematize, or devote with a Curse their substance and desirable things
Micah 4. 13* Isa. 60. 5, 6. and 61. 6, Rev 21. 24
unto the Church for the Maintenance of the Ministers* and poor Saints therein,
which also in fact was performed Acts 2. 45. and 4. 32, 34, 35, 36. and 5. 1,
2, etc. and 11. 29. 30. Romans 15. 26
by the Gentiles.

To Conclude, The Apostle gives the Reasons of it, proving these Gifts,
Offerings, and Devoted things belonged to the Ministers by way of Debt and
Duty, Cor. 6 11. and Rom 15* 27
for if the people have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their
duty also is to Minister unto them in carnal things; therefore says he by way
o^ command, Gal. 6. 6 (...).
Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that teaches him in
every good thing; or as in the Original* in all good things which they enjoy
Now how can this be done* without communicating a part of all they possess unto
them, a^ Christ commands his Disciples to do, viz. Give alms of all tha^ ye
possess, or of such things as you have, Luke 11. 41
and then behold all things are clean unto you. Alms they are, in regard of
the Poor tha^ enjoy them; and Debts and Honor, in regard of the Ministers that
deserve them, and of God who requires them, who accounts himself paid and
honored, when they are duly and truly given to his Ambassadors. Now what part
was that under the Law but the tenth? And under the Gospel it must needs be a^
large a part as it was under the Law* according to Christ's Ordinance; 1 Cor. 9.
13, 14. Non est si^ut similitudinis sed aequalitatis.
For so has the Lord ordained, That they that Preac^ the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel, as they that waited at the Altar, did live of the Altar, which,
(...), as, is of equality, not similitude.

Therefore I cannot see how either Christians can obey this Ordinance of
Christ, or pay their Debt, or show their Duty, unless they pay their Tithes, or
what is equal thereunto: For 'ti^ not a pecuniary Stipend short of the Tenth,
nor an Alms give^ half worth the Tenth, that will pay the Debt, or perform the
Duty, much less obey Christ's Ordinance which is made in Justic^ and Truth to
continue to the end of the world. Those Priest^ that served at the Altar, lived
partly by Oblations, free-wi^ Offerings, and Sacrifices, and by Devoted things,
and Tyth^ which were brought into Gods house to feed them, and so the are said
to live of it, 2 Chronicles. 3 1. 5, etc.
although they had Estates, and House^ and C^ties of their own, as its plain
Levit 6. 26. and 7. 31, 34 Neh. 13. 12 Josh. 21. 4 etc. Numb. 35. 2
by Gods command a^ lot^ed them for a part of their livelihoods: The equity of
which Law, says holy Ainsworth, who was no friend neither to Bishops, nor
Tithes, both for honoring the Lord with our substanc^ Prove. 3. 9. Gal. 6 6.
A^sw. Anno* in* Numb 35. 1.
and for maintaining of his Ministers, ^s perpetual. Therefo^ seaking of the
Church under the Gospel according to these le^l figures, Ezekiel. 45. 1. 4, 5,
etc. and 48. 9, 10, 13. which Houses, Gleabs Lands, once given as a portion to
God, might not be sold, changed, nor altered, nor alienated by the Priests
themselves, much less by any other. See Mr. Prynns Gospel Plea, p. 98.
he says, When ye shall divide the Land by inheri^nce, ye shall offer an
Oblation unto the Lord, an holy portion of the ^ and, etc. which shall be for
the Priests, the Ministers of the San^uary, who shall come near to minister
unto the Lord; and it shall ^e a place for their houses, etc. For so has the
Lord ordained, that ^hey which preach the Gospel, should live of it, viz. By
those ^oluntary Alms and Offerings which the people should give them, and by the
Tithes they should pay to them, although they have ^leabs and Houses of their
own to live in. The Ministers are to ^ave as free, bountiful, and certain Means
to maintain them for ^reaching of the Gospel, as the Priests had that served at
the Altar ^or their attendance thereon: Christ afforded food and raiment
^ufficient to his Apostles when he sent them to preach, and therefor would not
have them to provide before hand for things ne^essary, Mat. 10. 9, 10.
and gives a reason grounded in equity for it, because z Luke 10. 7. (...).
^he labourer is worthy of his meat, or of his hire, as St. Luke styles ^t, or
reward as the word signifies: Intimating that as it is op^ression and cruelty in
men not to allow their Servants meat that ^abour for them, and wages for their
work; so it is no less sin amongst Christians not to allow their spiritual
laborers the same: Nay, the Apostle proves it an unnatural and an unreasonable
sin ^or men guided only by the light of Nature and Reason, allow their Horses
and Oxen meat, that do their work; and the like belongs ^o the Ministers of
Gods Word who tread out the corn according to Gods ancient Law, Thou shall not
muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn. Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
Spiritually this figured the labor of the Ministers of the Word, preparing
the bread of life for the Soul, as the Apostle shows 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. So the
Hebrew Rabbis write; A beast is to eat all the while that he works, and he
is not to be musled by string or voice, thereby staying him from eating; for
whosoever does so, is to be beaten: or if he put a gag in his mouth, or keep him
from water, or use any other means to hinder him from eating. Maimon. tom. 4.
cap. 13 sect. 1, 2, 3. of hired things
twice to confirm Ministers maintenance. 1 Cor. 9 9
And therefore by word or deed, or any other way, to hinder them from receiving
of these is a transgression of Gods Law, St. Paul himself being Expositor of
it. To keep back the Hire of the Laborers is a crying sin in the ears of the
Lord of Hosts; says another Apostle, It sounds high, and enters soon: James 5.
4
And will not the keeping back and detaining of the spiritual laborers hire
cry as loud, and as soon pierce Gods ears, as that of the temporal ^abourers;
when they are his Ambassadors, and stars in his right hand, and the glory of
Christ; and he has in a special manner ^eproved Kings for their sakes, and
commanded all men not to touch his Anointed, nor do his Prophets no harm,
Psalm. 105. 15. Nor is their hire to be small, but honorable; and therefore
styled by the name of Honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17
because Christians honor both God and them in giving and paying the same.
Prove. 3. 9, 10 Divitiis non naturalibus ut aurum and argentum and ejusmodi, Et
fecundo naturalibus quus terra perfert. vide Mercerus in locum.
Honor the Lord with thy Riches, and with the first Fruits of all thy
increase; To which Duty is annexed a large Promise of temporal and spiritual
good things: Mat. 21. 34.
For as Tenants honor their Lords and Stewards they send, in paying their Rents
and Tributes due; so do these honor God and his Stewards, in paying that which
he requires of them, and is due to him, and to be paid to them: for their meat
should be so largly provided for them, that they should not have only
sufficient to provide for themselves and Families as had the Priests of old,
(neglecting which, they should be worse than Infidels) 1 Timothy 5. 8
but they should also have to entertain strangers, and to be Hospitable to
those that visit them: and therefore its a Gospel-Precept given to them, which
I find was not given to the Priests under the Law, That they be lovers of
hospitality. Titus 1. 8 Although the Priests were so rich and honorable that
they were chief of their princes.
To conclude, if Soldiers are worthy of their pay, (which God forbid any
should deny to such as are faithful and good) if Tradesmen that truck or
merchandise are to have money or an equal value of other Commodities from those
they trade withal: if Shepherds are to be paid for keeping their Sheep; then
also ought the Ministers of the Gospel to be paid, who are Christ's Soldiers,
and commanded to endure hardness, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
attending only and wholly on this Warfare. It Is fit these spiritual Merchants
that communicate to men the heavenly treasure of the Gospel, should receive at
least earthly things for it; for if their Auditors have been made partakers of
their spiritual things, the Apostle says, it is their Auditors duty to minister
to them in carnal things, Romans 15. 27
it is fit these spiritual Shepherds should be liberally fed and clothed by the
Flocks they feed, as the same Apostle proves 1 Cor. 9 7 Ne videretur Apostolus
gravare ae quum esse quod facer^nt ostendit, a comparatis, quum and milites
stipendiis acceptis, and Agricolae suorum fructibus laborum and Pastores sui
gregis proventu viv^nt. Beza in loc.
from equity.

And indeed without this the Ministers cannot in humane judgment so well rebuke
with all Authority as they ought* Tit. 2. 15. and 1 Timothy 4 11
nor perform their Office of giving themselves always to Prayer and Preaching
as the Apostles did. Acts 6. 4
It Is too well known by experience, That the poorer sort of the Minist^y are
despised, even by those that profess Godliness, how much more will profane men
contemn them? poor men and their counsel are always lightly esteemed. 1 Samuel
18. 23 Prove. 18. 23. and Eccles: 9. 15. and James 2. 2, 3
But a liberal maintenance as it will cause their persons to be reverenced, so
also will their Doctrine by the world be sooner hearkened unto, and they
themselves be freed from those temptations which usually accompany poverty, as
of flattery, time-serving, men-pleasing; yea, and wrenching the Scriptures for
their own profit, as most of the poor Vicars and Curats in the late Bishops
times did, and at this day most of your poor Friars and Monks do. And this
generally did the inferior Clergy of old, as when the Arian Heresy prevailed,
they turned Arian, and so did they who lived in Queen Mary's days; as did
Balaam of old, and those St. Jude speaks of, that run greedily after his Error
Jude 11. and 16 and 2 Pet. 2. 14 Sicut lucri causa maladicturus Israelitis
venerat Balaam. ita lucri and quaestus gratia, perversa annunc^ant dogmata.
Gagneu^ Scolia in Epist. Judae.
for reward, having men's persons in admiration because of advantage, for they
changed themselves and their peoples opinions according to those that were in
power, and so maintained them; as too many lately have done from an Argument
drawn from their Wives-bellies, and Childrens-backs, just as Jeroboams Priests
who were of the lowest of the people, who for maintenance upheld his
Calvish-worship: 1 King 13. 13
And as the Priests of Baal served at that Idol-service to be fed at Jezabels
Table, 1 King. 18. 19
to prevent which let them quietly enjoy what is already by Gods and man's Laws
settled on them; and if that be not sufficient, let more be added to make it an
honorable and blessed Maintenance, that so they may not (as those of old)
sophisticate as hucksters the Word of God, but may preach it, as of sincerity
as of God, in the sight of God the Gospel of Christ. 2 Cor. 2. 17.
Aaron and his Sons when they were called to the Office of Priesthood, had
Garments put on them of Honor and Glory before the whole Congregation, that so
they might be the more reverenced and obeyed. Ex. 18. 2^. 2 For these two, viz.
honor and glory, signify the highest degree of dignity. Honor inwardly in the
heart and affections, Glory outwardly in the appearance and carriage: Their
garments were to be new and* fair, like the garments of great men: every
polluted old or dirty garment were for threads and weak for the Candlesticks,
Ainsw. in loc.
And God to honor Elisha the Prophet, who had been but servant to Elias, when
he was to succeed in his room, had not only the internal Gifts of the Spirit
conferred on him, (the Spirit of Eliah being redoubled on him) but had even a
Miracle wrought for him, to procure honor and obedience to him from the rest,
both of the Prophets and People: 2 King. 2. 14, 15, etc.
And if this were necessary for the Priests and Prophets under the Law to
procure obedience to their word; how much more should it be under the Gospel to
the Ministers thereof, whose ministration is far more glorious, than that under
the Law: 2 Cor. 3. 11
That the Ministers and Prophets should have honor and glory put on them,
which can never be, so long as they be poor, mean, and contemptible, as before
has been said: Therefore that the people may obey and submit unto them, that
are over them in the Lord, and that the Ministers may wait for their souls, and
so be able to give an account of them with joy, and not with grief; which will
be unprofitable for the people, either in their Prayers when they give account
of them to God, or at their Hour of Death* or day of Judgment, when they are to
give an account of their Steward-ship, if they have not been honored both with
Reverence and Maintenance, or not obeyed and submitted to as his Stewards. Heb
13 7


All the Apostles though Christ freely gave them power and ability immediately
from Heaven to Preach the Gospel and work Miracles, Acts 2.
yet had they Hire for their labor sufficient to cloth and feed them, and to
provide all things needful for them, so that they l^cked nothing by their own
confessions; Luke 22 35*
nor were they only to be provided for, but also their Wives were to be
provided for, and maintained at the charge of those they taught, this power God
gave them: And St. Paul challenges it as belonging to other Ministers of the
Gospel as well as to Peter and the rest of the Apostles: 1 Cor. 9. 5
and though he and Barnabas had not made use of that power, yet he pleads it
belonged to him, and that he took wages of other Churches to do service to the
Church of Corinth; 2 Cor. 11. 7, 9
for he was supplied by the Brethren that came from Macedonia, which made that
Church of Philippi which thus liberally contributed to the Apostles, to be more
honorable than that of Corinth, Phil. 4. 14 Rationem accepti fecerunt quia
spiritualia ex me, receperunt rationem dati non fecerunt quia nihil contra mihi
pro illis* sunt clargit, Gagn. in locum scol.
and this of Corinth to be inferior to other Churches for neglecting this Duty
of providing for them, 2 Cor. 12. 13
for they wanted Fruit to abound to their account, and did not offer that
Incense which gave an odor of sweet smell, that Sacrifice which was acceptable
and well pleasing to God as the Church of Phillippi had done, Phil. 4. 18
which made the Apostle St. Paul to rejoice, and to be encouraged in his
Ministry, they being his dearly beloved, and longed for, his joy and crown:
Phil. 4. 1
and to encourage other Christians to imitate them, he praised God for this
work of his Spirit in them, for it would redound not only to their spiritual
account, and to their eternal happiness, but also God seeing them faithfully
distributing his talents, he would increase these temporal blessings also,
supplying all their wants according to his Promises, verse 19, and Prove. 3. 9.
10 2 Kings 4. 8 Haggai 2. 19 Mal. 3. 10, 1^ Mat. 10. 41, 42 Mark 9. 41 2 Cor.
9. 6 Gal. 6. 6, 7, 8
both in the Old and New Testament.

On the other side, If any person or persons, though never so great or many,
shall detain or withdraw, or fraudulently keep back any thing Devoted or
Consecrated to his Ministers maintenance, they will bring a Curse on
themselves, and all others that partake with them in this sin, as its plain in
Achans case, Josh. 7. 25
it brought a consuming fire on him, his Sons and Daughters, his Oxen and
Asses, his She^p and Tent* and all that he had, which were burned with fire
after they had been stoned. This with other sins annezed to it, brought sudden
death on Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5. 5* 10
it brought severe judgments on the whole Nation of Israel in the Prophet
Malachy's days, Mal. 3. 19, 10
especially on the sacrilegious persons, Hag. 1. 9. 10 compared with Nehem. 13.
10.
Sir Henry Spilman shows at large how God has wonderfully plagued this sin
in our fore fathers days, vide Spilman.
and of late in the last Three Princes Reigns, God who is just and holy in his
ways, who is the Fear, cutting off the Sprii^s of Princes, and being terrible
to the Kings of the earth, on Psa. 76. 12
destroying utterly the Family of Henry the 8th. that great Tyrant and
Church-robber, in the Death of Queen Elizabeth, who was the first that sold
away openly the Revenues of the Church devoted to Gods service, changing the
Consecrated Lands for others, with diverse honorable and generous Families in
this Nation (only in this Fact degenerating from true P^ety and Charity) whose
Posterity have felt the smart of Gods justice, and they inheriting their
Fathers sins with those devoted Lands, and not restoring them, they have also
inherited their plagues. Queen Elizabeth her self (though I hope a Saint with
God) yet one of the last and worst works she did, by the flattery and
persuasion of her Favorites, was the passing over the Manor of Sherbourne
belonging to the Cathedral of Sarum, (of which Revenue Bishop Jewel that great
Champion of our Religion had made good use) unto Sir Walter Rawleigh, who was
as I am informed by a Reverend D. of that Church warned to desist from that
enterprise, foretelling him of the sad sequel would follow thereon; but his
ambitious and Covetous Wife over-swayed the wise man, as Solomon's Wives did
him; 1 Kings 11 4* He was by Dr. Hide, Cannon of the Church of Sarum, dissuaded
from desiring the Dean and Chapter to ratify the Gift of the Queens: and
though that Sir Walter was by the old man's Arguments overcome, and contented to
surcease the enterprise: yet his Wife would not suffer him to be quiet until
the business was ended, as one of the Walters related to me.
But the Donor lived not long after, but lost her life and Crown together,
leaving it to a Foreign Prince: and though the Gift was sweet to those who for
a while enjoyed it, yet it filled the belly with gravel, and raised him such
foes, that burdened him so heavy, till they brought him to the block: and
truly divine Vengeance attended all the owners of it ever since, As the Earl
of Sommerset, Prince Henry, the Earls of Bristol, etc.
and has not the like fate happened to the Crown, that was adorned with these
precious stones, which were on the breast plate or shoulder of our Priests, vix
gaudet ter^ius h^rts, that I say no more; I could tell you strange things: and
yet God is my witness I speak but truth, concerning the alienation of Tithes in
the place where I live, even in the memory of man: A Knight, a Nobleman, a
Justice of the Peace, a Gentleman, and his Widow, after they were once
possessors of them, did all decay in their Estates, and died some of them
strange and unnatural deaths; I need not particularize in others: no Shire in
England but yields plentiful examples: And truly I fear the first long
Parliament that sold the Bishops Lands, and the second that sold the Dean and
Chapters, felt the reward of this sin. The Lord preserve that to come, from
selling the Gleabs that is behind, and taking away the devoted Tithes, lest
they drink of the same Cup, for the sins of Sacrilege and injustice. But if
Tithes which have been devoted and is most holy unto the Lord, be occasion of
offense to tender Consciences, these may be redeemed with money, but he that
will do so by Gods Law, must add thereto the value of them, the fifth part
thereof Levit. 27 31 If he would redeem it for himself, viz. his own private
use, for otherwise if he dwelt far off he might redeem it. Deuteronomy 14. 23, 25.
more then they are valued at by the Ministers, which I suppose few will do, as
the Israelites were to do under the Law. For though Christians are not obliged
to pay Tithes according to that manner and form as was paid to the Priests, and
Levites; the Priesthood ceasing, the Law is changed with it, Heb 7. 12 Simul
autem and lex. and sacerdotium iustituta sunt: si ergo tranfertur sacerdotium
legem, quoque tra^sserri oportet. Gagn. in loc.
as the Apostle shows the necessity of it: yet seeing the Tithes and Gleabs
were by our Religious Predecessors in the Primitive timts devoted to God, and
to the maintenance of his service and Ministers, as the Primitive Christians in
Judaea devoted the Money of their Possessions and Houses they sold Acts 4. 34,
37, and 5. 1. 2. Signif^c^t hoc verbum (...). callide quidpiam surripere and
quasi essicere ne quidpiam ad Do^inum perveniat. Tit. 2. 10. sic Ananias and
S^pphira cum hoc praedium Domino consecrassent, etc.
it is no more lawful for us (who do succeed in their Land and Houses, who never
bought these Tithes and Gleabs, nor ever were they given us by our Ancestors,
or by God immediately) to withhold or retain them, or part of them, than it was
for Ananias to keep back part of the price for which he sold his Possession:
And therefore I wish that such as have Impropriations, and Gleabs, and Lands
formerly devoted, would now tremble at this fearful example, and not expose
themselves to Gods wrath, or their Ministers to poverty, or want, by their
Usurpations on them: And therefore let them with Zacheus either make
Restitution to the Church, or at least allow their Ministers an honorable and
settled maintenance in lieu thereof, otherwise they have gone beyond and
defrauded their Brother, and God will avenge all such. 1 These. 4. 6
It Is the golden Rule left us all, Whatever ye would that men should do unto
you, the same do ye unto them; for this is the Law and the Prophets. Matthew. 7.
12 Haec est regula aurea, non lesbi^ pro omnibus communis.
Now what Shepherd is it that would not be paid his Wages, and live of his
flock? What Soldier would not have his Pay for himself, and his Family, to
live comfortably on it? What Tradesmen is there that would not have exchang of
Wares or Money for those things he trades in? What Countryman expects not to
reap what he sows? Or, What Labourer, Attourny, Schoolmaster, would not have
Wages and Pay for their work and pains? This is true in all Arts, Manufactors,
Labors, Professions; and Christ approves of it, That the Labourer is worthy of
his hire: And shall only the spiritual Husbandman, the spiritual Shepherd,
Merchant, Builder, Teacher, Soldier, Labourer, have no wages nor reward for
his pains, who best deserves it of all others, it being longer ere they can
perform this work aright, and it costing them more charge usually than other
Works or Professions do, it requiring the most able Souls, 2 Cor. 2. 16. (...).
for who is sufficient for those things) it being the most difficult,
laborious, and perilous work of all others, as perilous as Soldiers, 2 Timothy
2. 3
as labourious as Shepherds or Husbandmen, 2 Cor. 4. 8. and 2 Cor. 11. 22. to
the 33 verse, and 1 Cor. 9. 4 7. to the 15 verse.
or as Merchants, as the Apostle shows: And it is as profitable to have such
sort of Laborers as any other for all sorts of persons; Therefore Christ
commands his Disciples to pray the Lord of the Harvest to send forth such
Laborers. Man. 9. 38
They being necessary in an ordinary way for the conversion and salvation of
Souls; Faith coming by Hearing, and the Gospel preached being Gods power to the
salvation of as many as believe: Romans 1. 16 and 10, 14, 17. absolutely
necessary, necessitate medii. Aquin.
for so it has pleased God in his wisdom to dispose of things, that by the
foolishness of Preaching (as the world accounts it) he will save them that
believe. 1 Cor 1 21. and 2. These. 1. 10.
And their Calling and Power committed to them is more honorable than the
highest Callings are amongst men, they being the Courtiers and menial Servants
of the great King of the whole earth, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, they being all of his privy Council, and Stewards of
his Mysteries, Psalm. 134. 1 1 Cor 4. 1
co-workers together with God; 1 Cor. 3. 9
yea, they are all his Ambassadors sent in the weightest Message that ever
was, viz. To reconcile men to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20
being instrumental with Christ herein, who is the efficient, material, and
meritorious cause thereof, called therefore Saviors, Obad. ult.
they being employed by God in Christ's stead, and Name, to make known the
infinite love of God in sending his Son for to save sinners, and the
unsearchable riches of Christ which belongs unto those that receive him, whilst
Christ in heaven is employed in his Regal and Priestly Office chiefly, and to
prepare Mansions of Glory for them that believe through their word, as Christ
prayed for it, Joh. 17. 20, 24, etc.
and ascended to effect it, Joh. 14. 2, 3
as on the Cross by his Death he had merited the same: for though they be
sinful men, subject to the like passions and frailties with others, yet they
have heavenly treasure contained in them, 2 Cor. 4. 7
they being sent to turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that so they may receive remission of their sins, and an
inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus, Acts 26. 18
they are called Angels for their power and honor, Rev. 1.
and can do more with their Keys than the greatest Kings of the earth with
their Swords, for they only can cut off men from the earth, and destroy the
body, Mar. 10. 28
but these can exclude men from heaven, and deliver their Souls over to Satan;
1. Tim. 1. ult.
which even Theodosius the Emperor confessed when he was Excommunicated by St.
Ambrose; Theod. hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 17 Mihi autem non modo ad Templum verum
etiam ad Coetum ipsum accessus perclusus est, etc.
And St. Paul exercised upon Hyminaeus and Alexander that they might learn not
to blaspheme. As the Priests pronouncing a person unclean, the people were to
put him out of the Congregation: Numb. 5. 2
So the Ministers of Christ pronouncing a person unclean, the Congregation is
to put away from their Society such a person 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 13.
till the Minister does Absolve him. 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, etc.
In a word, Christ speaks with their tongues from Heaven, Heb. 12. 25
they are w 1 Timothy 1. 20
placed by Christ and the Holy Ghost to feed the flock Christ has purchased
with his blood, Acts 20. 28
they are Rulers of the Churches, Heb. 13. 7
and the glory of Christ. 2 Cor. 8. 23
Now if their Calling be more laborious and perilous, more profitable and
honorable than all other Professions, Offices, and Callings, there is no
reason nor Conscience but that their Persons should be Reverenced, then Wages
and Maintenance should be proportionable in some sort thereunto, that so their
Doctrine may be esteemed, and they themselves may have sufficiency both to keep
Hospitality (which they of all others are obliged to do) Tit. 1. 8 A Bishop or
Elder ought to be (...).
for they are to belovers of Hospitality and of good men) and to buy Books,
Food, and Clothing for themselves, and their Families, by which means they may
be the better able to perform well their Callings, and with the more joy and
cheerfulness endure their perils and hardship, and may with the more gravity,
reverence, and honor, and success preach the Word, and administer the
Sacraments and Censures of the Church, to the glory of God and honor of our
Lord Jesus Christ who has sent them, and to the greater benefit and comfort of
his Churrh to whom they are sent; lastly to the et^^nal salvation both of the
preachers, and of them that are taught by them, who are free and bountiful in
giving to them in the name of Prophets, for they shall receive the Prophets
reward, Mat 10. 41 Q^i Prophetam sua largi^ate sustentat, quam vis ipse
Propheti^m non habet, apud Deum tamen prophetis praemium habebit August Ex. loc
Ma^th. 10. For hereby they shall be fellow-helpers to the truth of God, 2 John
8
and by sowing these temporal things to the Spirit, they shall of the Spirit
reap life everlasting. Gal 6. 8 Arguit eos qui falso paupe tatem pretendebant
ne doctores suos alerent, nolite inquite e^rarare novit Deus vestras facultates
neque irr^detur tanquam ludibrio dcceptus haberi potest, hic enim Gr^ci
irrid^ri profalli sumunt. Gagnes in loc.


Now then since the Lands, Houses, Gleabs, and Tithes are the Ministers of the
Gospel in this Land, by Donation, and Gift, God having given them to them, by
our Ancestors Wills, who devoted them, as they were moved by his Spirit, and
they being confirmed to them, and their successors, for so many hundreds of
years for ever; and Ratified by many Parliaments both in the Saxon, Danish, and
Norman Kings Reigns: and some of them in the Britains days when they were
Lords of the Land. And since they have as good shewings, Evidences, Charters,
Deeds, and Conveyances, for the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of them, as any
other Persons have for the enjoyment of their Manors, Lordships, Honors, or
Free-holds.

Lastly, Since they are theirs by the Law of Nature, and Nations, and by the
Command and Ordinance of Christ under the Gospel, whose Law is irrepealable by
man, (he being Lord paramount) since they are theirs by the Common, and Civil
Law, which confirms the Wills and Testaments of dead men deccased, since they
are the Hire for their Labor, their Wages for their Work, the honor due to
them from the people they teach; I cannot see how any person, or persons on
earth (without destroying Property, and committing injustice and Sacrilege,
can sell these away from them, or alienate them to any other profane, or
common use, or prohibit the people to pay them to those that te^ch them.
Hearken what the Apostle says, Be not deceived, neither by thine own heart
which is naturally full of self. love, and adict^d to covetousness; yea,
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, Jer. 17. 9 Tam varium est
cor versipelle insidiosum quod aestus suos multis i^^olueris convolvat, ac
tegat ut ne homo quidem ipse fibi abunde notus esse vix unquam queat Ecol in
loc.
nor by others, who for self interests, or by-ends, persuades thee this is no
sin, out of Pride, prejudice, mal^ce, hypocr^sie, or love of the world; for God
is not mocked, nor will he be, by carnal reasons and pretenses. But look in
th^s particular, what a man sows, that shall he reap. If men will impiously
make void the Wills and Laws, not only of men, but of God, they cannot free
themselves from the guilt of prophanness and Sacrilege, and of more than
Pagan^sh injustice, as the Apostle intimates, Heb. 9. 17. and Gal. 3. 11
for the Heathen abhorred to do it to their Priests, though they were employed
in a false Worship: And therefore Joseph in Egypt durst not buy the Priests
Lands, lest he should have been accused of Sacrilege by the Nobility, or
Comminalty Genesis 47. 22 And they had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and so
had no need to sell them as others had
: I have heard it reported of certainty, That when a Turkish Ambassador came
into Spain, and was by some Agents from the Pope, solicited to embrace the
Christian Faith: He beholding the gallantry of the Spanish Court, and the rich
garments and Robes they wore, but withal espying the mean Habit of the Priests,
and how contemptible they were whom they styled Christ's Ambassadors, that he
cried out, Surely that Religion cannot be true, where the Professors of it are
so brave and rich, and their Teachers so poor, and beggarly, whom they so much
undervalue and contemn, as not to allow them food and clothes convenient to
maintain them. 'Twas otherwise with the Galatians who were converted by St.
Paul, they received him as an Angel of God, yea, as Jesus Christ himself; and
were willing not only to impart their goods, but if it had been possible, they
would have plucked out their eyes and have given them to him, Gal. 4. 14, 15
such was the true zeal of the godly in the primative times, so sincere and
servent their love, that they not only parted with the Tenth to their Teacher,
but sold all the Lands and Possessions they had, and laid down the Money they
received for them, at their Teachers feet, desiring them to employ it for their
own, and the Churches necessities Acts 4. 34* 3, etc.
: but this fire is almost quenched, this love (as Christ foretold) Mat. 24. 12
waxes cold in these last uncharitable and worst days, in which, as the
Apostle also predicted, men should be lovers of themselves, more than lovers of
God 2 Timothy 3. 4
, and pr^fer their pleasures, profits, honors, before him, and his service,
and Ministers, although concerning them Christ has said it (who will not lie,
nor can he repent) That he that hears them, hears Christ; and he that
despises them, despises Christ Luke 10 16 Si legatum principum in terra
contemptus ^rimen habet nefas est illo^ despicere quos misit omnium nostrum
redemp tor Christus rex regum and index principum.
: And truly what do men do by not receiving their words, but put from them the
Word of Life, and judge themselves unworthy of it Acts 13. 46
; as the Jews at Antioch did: or by not giving double honor to their persons,
who deliver their Embassage, but ren^er themselves subject to the greatest
plagues, even to be in a worse condition than Sodom and Gomorah Man. 10. 14
.

Therefore let all Kings, Magistrates, Princes, Rule^s, and Judges of the Earth
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling, and kiss the
Lord Jesus Christ lest he be angry (by way of reverence, love, homage, and
obedience) for if his anger be kindled never so little, they only are blessed
that trust in him Psalm. 2. 11, 12 etc.
, and receive his Ministers testimony here 2 These. 1. 8. and the 10 verse.
compared.
, and obey his Gospel whom they preach* and take heed what they do, either in
putting down the godly successive Ministry whom God in his goodness,
long-suffering, and mercy, has placed amongst us, and continued to us, (which
he has not done to many other Nations) which has been the design of Satan and
Erronous persons always) although this Ministry ordained by Christ, shall
continue to the end of the world, as Christ promised, and St. Paul related it
Mat. 28. 20, 21 and Ephesians 4 11, 12, etc.
, and was of old prophesied Jer. 3. 15. and 23. 4, and Isa. 30 20, 21 Docet
Deus se nunquam suos relictarum esse orphanos quin A doctoribus and ministris
Dei assidue corrigantur informentur, etc. Trem. Annot. in loc:
, or in taking away the oil which should maintain these lights; fot if they,
and the means belonging to them be of God (as has been proved) it will stand,
as hitherto above 1000 years it has, and whoever thou art, or ye are, that
have sold their Means away, and endeavor to do the same with the residue, ye
cannot overthrow it, nor perfect the intended work. O refrain therefore from
attempting such a thing, lest ye be found even to fight against God, as
Gamaliel told the Council Acts 5. 38 Non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur
ablatum, Aug.
.

Let me advise rather all such who themselves or their predecessors have had a
hand in the foregoing Sacrilege, and stiil possess devoted things, viz.
Manors, Gleabs, Lands, Tithes, or Impropriate Parsonages, or the like; repent
of this their sin, and make restitution to the Ministers wronged: For I will
tell them what devout Augustine says, That the sin is not pardoned, unless
restitution be made, viz. according to the ability of the person guilty. And
indeed where true sorrow is, it has these Two effects, which is Clearing, and
Revenge 2 Cor. 7 10 Quienim dolor asficitur cavet ne alieni peccati reus fiat,
and inscipsum pro peccatis sumei ultionem, atque alios peccantes in ab errore
revocari conatur: Haeming. in loc
. which cannot in this sin be manifest, where that before-nominated be not
performed. Otherwise if this my Counsel be slited (which in Christ's name I give
to you, desiring you to hear what the Spirit says to the Church) it is to be
feared, That as heretofore the Curse of God has seized on Sacriledgious
persons in former times, (who were made examples for us on whom the ends of the
world are come 1 Cor. 10. 11
, may also seize on these: For our God is Jehovah, and changes not Mal. 3. 6
, a consuming fire into whose hands to fall, it is a fearful thing Heb. 10 31
: And truly, unless such do repent, they shall all perish as Christ tells them
twice Luk 13 3. 5
, for he is no respecter of persons, but be the persons guilty of this sin
never so rich, wise, great, many, the Lord Jesus Christ, whose Ministers and
Ambassadors they are, is richer, wiser, greater, and above them all Eccles 5 8
: He has rebuked Kings for their sakes Psalm. 10^. 15
: and he reputes what is done unto them, as done unto himself Mat. 25, 45
; and he will render to every man shortly according to what he has done in the
flesh, whether it be good or evil 2 Cor. 5. 10
; then the Lord will be the avenger of those Ministers of his who have been
oppressed and defrauded 1 These. 4. 6
; those Riches then they have gotten by fraud or oppression, shall be a witness
against them, and eat their flesh as fire, Jam. 5. 3
: yea, God may for it severely plague you here as he has dealt with thousands
in this Land; for some men's sins go before to judgment for to terrify and
admonish others, and some men's follow after 1 Timothy 5. 24
: then they that have given to Christ's Prophets and Saints in his Name, shall
receive to their eternal comfort that blessed sentence, Come ye blessed, etc.
Mat. 25. 34 Ad sinem.
. But they that have done evil, shall hear to their eternal torment that
direful sentence of, Go ye cursed, etc. for their Sacrilege and unmercifulness
to them; for those shall go away into everlasting punishment. O consider this
ye that hitherto for profits sake have persisted in this sin, and forgotten
God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, and confess
and forsake your sin, then shall you obtain mercy, Prove. 28. 13. Having food
and raiment, be ye therewith content, for he has said, He will not leave thee,
nor in any wise forsake thee Heb* 13. 5 Mat. 22. 21
; Render thou to Caesar the things that be Caesar's, and unto God the things
that be Gods, and owe nothing to any man but this, That ye love one another
Romans 13. 8
: and whatever ye would, were you in the Ministry, that others should do unto
you, the same do ye unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets Mat. 7. 12
: But he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong he has done; and there
is no respect of persons with God Col. 3. 2*
.

The Lord open the eyes of those that have been blinded with self-love, and
with the love of the world, or been deceived with humane laws, customs, and
evil examples of the mulitude that have been guilty of this sin, that they may
see it and repent of it; remembering Christ's saying, It will profit a man
nothing to gain the World, and lose his own soul Mark 8. 36
: Now that I have showed you the light do not walk in darkness and hate the
light because your deeds are evil; for to him that knows to do well, but does
it not, to him it is sin with a vengeance Jam. 4. 17
. The wrath of God being revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness of
men who detain the truth in unrighteousness Rom 1. 18
: And if you shall not speedily repent, the same judgment may befall you which
befell Ananias, Sapphira, or Simon Magus, for their covetousness and sacrilege;
for such impenitent persons are in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity
Acts 8. 23
, as they were by reason of those sins. And the Lord avert his wrath from this
Land and Nation which has been horribly guilty of this sin, to that end let
the Magistrates find out some way or means for the Reformation of this sin, as
Nehemiah did in his Reformation Neh. 13. 10, 11, 12
, who caused the portions of the Levites to be given to them, and the Tithes to
be paid to the Priests and Levites, for their service in their Churches,
according to their Courses: As also zealous Hezekiah ordered it 2 Chronicles. 31 12,
13, etc.
, and appointed Officers to see them faithfully distributed; which thing was
good, and right, and truth before the Lord his God verse 20, For the Lord had
blessed his people, Mal. 3. 10, 12 Deuteronomy. 26. 10, 12 Prove 3. 9, 10 Mat. 10. 40
Psalm. 4. 18
, and brought a blessing on the Land and people z.

Secondly, Let those Impropriations, whose heard-hearted Owners tremble not at
Gods Word, nor fear his threatening, be bought in at the Wisdom and Discretion
of the Honorable House of Parliament, which I conceive in a short time may be
effected by the Revenue coming into the Honorable Trustees for Bishops and
Dean and Chapters Lands, over and above what they now pay, for Augmentations.

Lastly, for the right ordering of Ministers in every Church for to receive
these Tyths, and devoted Lands and Goods, and to perform the work of the
Ministry, and for the gathering and building up of Gods Church; Let these
proposals be considered by them.

To the Magistrates of England, E. F. on the Jews behalf. Humbly D^clareth,
THat si^h its apparent by the Scriptures, That the Jews. Gods ancient People,
shall be converted to the Faith, as these Scriptures testify, Romans 11. 25, 26.
Psalm 5^ 6 and 67. 5. 6 and 69. 35, 36. Isa. 1. 25, 26 and 11 1. Zeph. 3 9 etc.
And being converted, they shall be a blessing unto the Godly amongst whom they
live, they ministering to them exceeding cause of joy; for if their Fall be the
Riches of the world* and their Diminution is the riches of the Gentiles, how
much more their fullness? For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of
the world, what will their Assumption be, but life from the dead, Romans 11. 12.
Zach. 8. 13. And since by our mercy they shall obtain mercy, Rom 11. 31. And
many shall seek their favor, as its prophesied Z^ch. 8. 23. And God will
execrate and destroy th^se Nations that have been enemies to them, as the
Prophets foretell, Isa. 11. 13. Genesis 12. 3. Jer. 3. 16. Zeph. 3. 19, 20. Isa.
51. 21, 22. and 47 6. Jer. 2. 3. Zach. 1. 12, 15. And since in our Directory
made by the late reverend Assembly, and confirmed by the High Court of
Parliament, the Ministers of the Gospel were commanded to Pray for their
conversion, and so to use all means to effect the same, unless we will
flatteringly m^ck God in our Prayers, especially since they are beloved
according to the Election for their Fathers sake, of our heavenly Father, wh^m
we are to imitate, and whose gifts and callings are without repentance, Romans
11. 28. and wh^m we are to follow as dear Children, since from them came the
Adoption, and the Glory; f^^m them we received the Covenants and the Law, the
Worship of God, and the Promises; for theirs were the Fathers, and from them
Christ came, who is ^od ^ver all, b^^ssed for ever, Romans 9. 4, etc. Lastly,
Since they abound in Wealth, Arts, and Sciences, and excel in ingenuity and
Tongues, and God is able to graft them in again, and the Redeemer shall come to
Zion to turn away iniquity in Jacob, and the time of fulfilling this is by the
common suffrage of the Godly at hand, Romans 11. 26.

Therefore to hasten their Conversion, and to procure the Blessing and life to
us and our Posterity, to have the honor and glory to be happy instruments of
their Conversion, through out mercy spread toward them, to get to us and our
Posterity deliverance from the evil threatened to fulfill the Prophesies, avert
all Judgments, and to obtain our Petitions for ingrafting and Salvation:
Therefore your Petitioner humbly prays, That they may have Liberty (as well
as other Nations) to Trade and Traffic in our Commonwealth without peril of
their lives: To that end, let the Statutes of Bannishing them be Repealed: And
if the Parliament think fit, let them (on good Cautions and Conditions as shall
seem meete^t to their wisdom) be suffered here to Continue and Dwell amongst
us, as formerly before the Conquest, that so living with us, they may with the
Sweetness and Fatness of our Land, receive into their Souls the wholesome and
saving knowledge of the Gospel, which in no Country under Heaven (blessed be
God, and continued still be this Mercy to us and ours till Christ come) is so
purely and powerfully preached and held forth as in this Commonwealth: To
effect which;

Your Petitioner shall always Pray, etc.

The Proposals.
1. Since by the Word of God (the touchstone of all truth, the best judge of all
Controversies) it appears there were no ecclesiastical Bishops, or Elders in
the Church of Christ, in the Apostles days, but such as were either
extraordinarily Called and sent by Christ, as were the Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Workers of Miracles, and such as had the gifts of healing, or
speaking with, or interpreting of diverse Tongues; 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29, etc.
Ephesians. 4. 11.
: or else such as were ordinarily called and sent by these, or by the
Presbytery of ordained Elders, who imposed their hands on them with Fasting and
Prayer. Titus 1. 5 7. Acts 14. 23. and 13. 2. etc. 1 Timothy 3. 10. and 4. 14. and
5. 22.


2 Since in each Congregation or Church we read of in Scripture there were more
than one ordained Bishop or Elder in the Primitive Church, placed there
according to the bigness of the City, or Church, by the first Planters. Acts
14. 23. (...) Acts 20. 12. Phil: 1. 1. Titus 1. 5, 7. (...)


3 Since many were given by Christ to the Church, Ephesians. 4 11. and placed there
by the Holy Ghost, Acts 20. 28. and 1 Cor. 12. 28. and by the Apostles, Acts
14. 23. Titus 1. 5, 7. yea Christ, when he sent forth his Apostles, paired
them, which also the Holy Ghost confirms, in sending Paul and Barnabas (after
they had been separated or ordained by the E^ders of Antioch) for the work
whereunto God had called them; Acts 13. 1, 2.
: yea when these two holy men differed in judgment, yet singly they went not
alone to plant, or water the Churches; for Paul chose Silas, and Barnabas Mark,
both which were teaching Elders. Acts 15. 39, 40. and 16. 13.


4 Since we read of one Elder of a Church absent, and so detained by St. Paul,
Phil: 2. 30.
: who had other Elders to feed them, Phil* 1. 1. C^l: 1. 7.
: and of Epaphras at Coloss Minister, who was with the Apostle at Rome, whilst
the Church had Archyppus to teach them, Colos. 4. 12. 17.

5 Since its inconvenient, if not hurtful to have but one Bishop, or Elder in a
Congregation to feed and rule the people therein, who being sick, as was
Epaphroditus of Philippi, or otherwise lawfully employed as was Epaphras of the
Church of Coloss. Phil: 2. 25. Col: 4. 13.
: the Congregation in the mean time may starve, or want food, at least be
neglected and exposed to danger, as sheep without a Shepherd; Ezekiel: 34. 8.
: and the public Ordinances of Christ be omitted on the Sabbath day, or at
least not be so seasonably and perfectly performed as they ought to be (as is
evident by daily experience in many places) and therefore its necessary, at
least convenient that there should be more than one ordained Elder in every
Church: otherwise how can he aright receive the Lords Supper, when there is no
Elder in Christ's name authoritatively to bid him take and eat, and to represent
Christ's person, to command him to do it, as Christ gave it to his Apostles, and
they distributed each to other, and so to the Church as they had received of
the Lord, Luke 22. 17 1 Cor: 11. 23, 24. Vt in prima coenae institutione
discipuli oculos habuere, intentos ad Dominum qui ad mensam sedens porrexit
discipulis corporis* and sanguinis Sacramentum; ita nos quoque levemus corda
nostra ad Dominum, qui illi^ agens nobis ministrorum manibus porrigit verum
suum copus, etc: Haeming: Comment: in Loc: August: de Consensu Evang: lib: 3.
Mat 5. ^7.
: for the Minister, his action and words are herein Sacramental, it belonging
only to the Ministers of the Gospel to break the Bread, and bless the Cup, 1
Cor. 10. 16, 17. (though some unwarily of late have practiced the contrary;)
nor Secondly, without there be two or more of those ordained Elders in a Church
can christians perform the duty the Apostle requires of them in sickness, viz.
to send for the Elders of the Church to pray for them, James 5. 14. nor can one
Elder anoint the sick person with Oil in the name of the Lord, the Commission
being given not singly to one Elder, but jointly to two at the least. Nor
Thirdly can the people observe aright (as I conceive those rules of giving them
double honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 These. 5. 12. and to know them that labor among
them, and are over them in the Lord, and admonish them to submit to and obey
them that watch for their Souls, and are their guides, Heb. 13. 7, 17. if there
be only one Elder in their Congregation. Nor Fourthly, can the Doctrine the
Minister preaches be so fully confirmed, unless there be two or three of the
Elders to ratify it; (Christ himself had his Father with him, to bear witness
of the truth he spoke, John 8. 18. though his (...) had been sufficient) for in
the mouth of two or three Witnesses every word shall be established. Mat: 18. 16
: Nor Fifthly can the discipline of Christ in each Church be rightly
administered unless there be two or three of th^se ordained Elders gathered
together in Christ's name, to bind or loose, as Christ requires, Mat: 18. 17, 20.
which makes up a Representative Church, as the company of Prophets are called,
1 Samuel: 19: 20:
: for so Christ speaks to his Apostles, and in them to the Elders that succeed
them, What ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven, and what two of you
shall agree on earth, as touching any thing ye shall ask, it shall be done for
you of my Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 18. 18, 20. Nor lastly can the
wicked be so fully convinced, neither here in the Church, nor yet hereafter in
the day of Judgment, unless there be two or three of these, Luke 10. 16 Acts
13. 46 2 These 1. 10
: therefore St. Paul excommunicates not the incestious Person, but as joined
with other Elders; p: which authority the Lord gave unto them for edification;
2 Cor. 10. 8
: yea Christ himself distinguishes the Elders l 1 Cor. 5. 4
and Angel of the Presbytery in Thyatira, Rev. 2. 18, 24. from the people; and
diverse of the holy Martyrs in the Primitive Church confirm the same. Clem.
Epist. ad Cor: page: 54 Polycarp Epist: ad Phillip: Ambros: Com. in Ephesians: cap: 4
: Iraeneus calls all the first overseers of the Church of Rome Presbyters:
Iraen Epist. ad Victor. and adv. Haeres. lib: 4, chap: 43
: as Saint Luke long before had called all the Bishops of Ephesus, Acts 20. 17,
28. yea Evaristus Martyr, who was the Angel, or chief Presbyter of the Church
of Rome, ordained seven Presbyters to be in every City for Doctrine and
Discipline, Gratian did. 93. cap: legimu^
: Cyprian would do naught without his Clergy, and therefore in the fourth
Council of Carthage it was concluded as Orthodox, that every Church should have
his Presbyters, or Elders, without whose Counsel naught should be done in the
Church, Council Carth: 4
: Ignatius long before affirms the Presbyters to be as the Court of God, and
combination of the Apostles. Ignat. Epist. w Tert. Apols adu. Gent. cap^ 39
ad Tral. also Tertullian affirms, that the approved Elders sat as Presidents
in their Assemblies. u: so likewise Origin and Ambrose informs us, that there
was nothing done in the Churches without y Celsum. Ambr: Com: in Tit. chap. 5.
1 See the Appendix to Ius Divinum ministerii propos. 7
their Counsel, although in Ambrose his time the custom began to be obsolete by
the sloth, or negligence, or rather pride of some Presbyters, Origin C^nt:
: who would alone seem to be somewhat, which made way for Antichrist to come
in, for its conceived by some learned men, that the exaltation of one Bishop
above another was, and has been a chief means of settling Antichrist in his
Throne; Greg. M* Ep. ad Patriarch Constable Johan and Epist. ad Maur. Imp. Fox Acts
and Mon. part 1, page 108. Zanch: Annot: in 2 These 2 Musc* com. Loc Ius Divin.
Mi^. append. page 118, and 119
: and the want of these ordained Elders in each Church has caused the
Discipline of Christ to cease, and the inventions of men to be settled in its
stead in many places, whereby Christ's vine wanting a fence, is exposed to the
wild Bore of the* Wood* and crafty Foxes of the Field, who pull off and devou^
many of he^ tender Grapes; by means whereof Sects and Schisms are multiplied,
Blasphemous and monstrous Opinions are hatched and defended without shame, to
the heart* grief of Gods people, to the dishonor of God, and scandal of the
Reformed Religion which we p^ofess; for those of the Reformed Religion here
amongst us are grown into four great Factions: some are for Prelacy, and Lordly
Episcopacy, others for strict and Aristocratical Presbytery, others for pure
and popular Independency: others for refined and upstart Antipaedobatistry, and
Anabaptistry.

Therefore for Gods glory, the Churches edification, for reconciling our
unhappy differences, for the composing our distractions the re-uniting of these
four Factions, and preservation of love, unity, and peace among us, I humbly
offer these Proposals to your consideration.

First, It seems convenient, if not necessary, that the three Nations (though
they stil^ reta^n their Parochial bounds for civil ends, as now) should be
divided into several Congregational Churches, according to the ancient
constitution of the Churches in the Primitive times, and Apostles days, as the
supreme Authority of the Nations shall think fit in every Market Town, and in
some great Villages also, where Believers are many, and the Towns few, and
inconveniently placed, as the Churches were at first planted by the Apostles,
and Apostolical men at Jerusalem, Samaria, Antioch, Lystra, Iconium, Derbe,
Troas, Rome, Corinth, Philippi, Coloss, Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. as the Scriptures
testify; and Saint Paul left Titus at Creet, to ordain Elders in every City;
Tit: 1. 5, 7
: and so much Ecclesiastical History abundantly testifies, Clem. Epist. ad Cor:
p: 54 Ignat: ad Tral. Polycarp: ad Phillip: Epist. Eusebius Eccl: Secratet:
Theodo^et and others.
: thus in Judea of old there were Synagogues in the Towns and cities among the
Jews, the Villages belonging to these Towns, belonged to the Elders of the
Towns. Now the places where Christians assemble are by the Apostle called
Synagogues, James 2. 2. and there were many Synagogues in Jerusalem, no less
than four hundred Schools and Synagogues; Ainsw: Annot: in Lev: cap: 26 31
: and so much Saint Luke intimates, Acts ^5. 21 and 24. 12
: so at Jerusalem under the Gospel, though the Christians there were but one
Church, Acts 15. 4
: yet questionless they had Synagogues or distinct places of meeting each from
other, which the twelve Apostles jointly for a time did govern, together with
the Elders and Deacons ordained by them, Acts 15. 6, 22.
: for all the Apostles spoke together, and the Deacons served at the Table, and
Ministered for the Churches good, and the Elders assembled in Counsel with the
Apostles, to consider of matters in Doctrine, or manners; after when the Church
of Jerusalem multiplied to some m^llions, Acts 21* 20.
: each of the Apostles went to his place, and James with the Elders guided that
Church, as all Ecclesiastical Writers affi^m.

2. It seems fit that in each of these Churches whereunto the Congregation are
to resort for Ecclesiastical Discipline, there be joined all the Elders of that
City or Town, together with the Elders of the Villages belonging or adjoining
unto the said City or Town, to be the Bishops, Elders, or Guides of that
Church, to feed and rule the same, Acts 13. 1 and 20. 17 Phil* 1. 1 Heb. 13. 7.
17 Titus 1. 5
: and let no un-ordained Elder be joined with them, (the Deacons being first
approved, 1 Timothy 3. 10*
: and elected, yea and ordained by Prayer, and imposition of hands of the
Presbytery before they were thought fit to execute in the office; Acts 6. 3, 6
: nor read we in the Scripture of any one un-ordained Elder that ruled in the
Church; those Ruling Elders mentioned, 1 Timothy 5. 17. being such as did tread
out the corn of the Word, verse 17. and so worthy of Reward, for if the
inferior Officer the Deacon was to be ordained: much more ought the Superior,
which is the Elder, as its plain they were, n: Ordination giving both name and
being unto a Church Officer, as a Commission does to a Judge in civil affairs,
as the Reverend Ministers of London prove, Acts 14. 23 and 1 Timothy 4. 14 Titus
1. 5 Ius divin. minist: cap: 11
.

3. It seems fit that there be in each Congregation or Church at least two or
three of these ordained Elders, to gather together in Christ's name for the
administration of Discipline, as Christ and his Apostles teach, Mat. 18. 20 1
Cor. 5. 4
: promising to them his special presence where two or three of them are
gathered together in his name, as there were three in the least Ecclesiastical
Courts in Israel; and where Believers are many, and the Parishes thick, there
may be twenty three as there were in each City amongst them, wherein were one
hundred and twenty men householders; Ainsw^rth Annot: on Deuteronomy. 16 Goodwins
Iew^sh Antiq. lib: 5. cap: 1. 14
: yea in our greatest Cities there may be more, as there was in Jerusalem, the
Sanhedrim, which consi^ted of seventy two persons; l: and let these by common
consent rule in each Congregation, as they did in the Primitive times until
Cyprians days, Cypr: Epist. 39.
: yea till Saint Ambrose time, who flourished about Anno 374. for then the
Churches had their Elders as well as their Angels, without whose counsel
nothing was done in the Church; Ambr. Com: in Epist: Tim: cap: 5
and let all these labor in the Word and Doctrine, and in ruling the
Congregation committed to them, either by course in their several places of
meeting, as the Priests served in the Temple, Luke 1. 5 and 1 Cron. 24 19.
: whilst the rest are employed in ruling, or else let them constantly preach,
as now they do in their several Parishes, both publicly, and from house to
house, and privately as Saint Paul did, t: unless sickness, or some Acts 20. 20
Moses chose Rulers in Israel over thousands, hundreds, fifties, tens, to judge
the people, Exodus 18. 25
other necessary occasion hinder any of them, at which time let the other
Presbyters assist him that is wanting, and so let them all rule jointly with
common consent, the Church of God committed to them.

4. It seems fit that the eldest Presbyter (if he please to accept of it, or
the next Senior that will accept of it) be with common consent of the
Presbytery and congregation, chosen Angel of the Church, for such we read
werein the seven Asian Churches, approved of by Christ, to whom he directs his
Epistles; and so it was in the first Century, though soon after altered as
Ambrose, confesses; Rev. 2 and 3 capita. Ambr. Com. in Epist. ad Ephesians. capit. 4
See the Appendix in Iu^ Divinum Ministerii cap. 6. and 7
: that the Ordination that was then in the Church agreed not in all things with
the Ordination that was in the Apostles days: for St. Paul calls Timothy a
Presbyter, a Bishop created by him, for at first Presbyters were called
Bishops, and so the elder Bishop or Presbyter departing, the next following
succeeded him; and because the following Presbyters began to be found unworthy
to hold that Primacy, by the advice of a Counsel, this form of succession was
altered, that not order, but desert should create a Bishop; thus in time the
Church forsook the Apostolical pattern (under a show of wisdom as the Apostle
says) and established a humane tradition in its place; and the best way to
reform its corruption, is to teturn to its Primitive institution, as Christ
removed Bigamy out of the Church of the Jews; Mat. 19. 8 Such at this day are
the superintendents amongst the Germans, as Zeppyrus writes, lib. 2. cap. 10.
^un contro. lib 8 2. cap. 5. no^. 1
: and let the Angel in each Church be the first Presbyter in order of all the
rest; but not in dignity or office above them: for though St. Peter wills the
younger Presbyters to submit to the elder; Pet. 5. 5.
: yet are the elder also to be subject to them: and so the Holy Ghost requires
a subjection each to other. The Angel of the Church is to be Moderator in the
Assembly, and collect the Votes, and propound questions to the Presbytery for
Reformation, and therefore Christ blames them when they were negligent herein,
Rev. 2. 2. 14. 20, and chapter 3. 1. 15
; they are to see that all things in the Church be done decently, and in order,
with the advice and consent of his Co-presbyters. But he is not to have any
power or jurisdiction over the other Presbyters, or more than the rest, since
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are equally committed to them all; nor has
the Pope of Rome, or any other Bishop mo^e power than other Bishops herein;
Harmony of Confess. page 364. see Sect. 11
: as the Belgic Church concludes; therefore in al^ Acts of Government let them
be done by the common consent of the Presbyters, or major part of them (as it
was in the first Counsel: Acts 15. 6 22, 23
of the Apostles, Presbyters, and Bishops in their assembly in Jerusalem) with
the consent of the Brethren; for though the Presbyters are to separate the
precious from the visd, Jer: 15. 19
: and to judge what is good, or ill, truth, or error, who are holy, who
profane, who clean or unclean, and authoritatively to declare them so to be;
Lev. 13. 3 Deuteronomy. 21. 5, 8
: and though the Ministers of Christ as was before prophesied of them should
stand in judgment, and teach the people between holy and profane; ( Ezekiel. 44.
23
: and Christ gave to them the power of loosing, and retaining sin) Mat. 18. 18
John 20. 23
: yet the Congregation of Israel were obliged in general by Gods command to put
their sentence in execution, as to shut out the Lepers out of* the
Congregation, whom the Priests had declared to be such; Numb, 5. 2, 3
: so also under the Gospel St. Paul requires the Church of Corinth to put away
the incestious person, whom he and the Presbyters had pronounced unclean, for
he had determined of him already, 1 Cor. Hac increp^tio quae a pluribus sie
Arius Mont. Int.
5. 4, 5. 7. 13. and he desires the Presbyters when they were gathered together
in Christ's Name, and his Spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus to deliver him
over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit might be
saved: and after enjoins the whole Congregation to purge out the old Leaven,
and to put away from them that wicked person; nor were they to receive him in
again till the Presbyters should pronounce him clean: no more than the Lepers
were to be received into the Camp, till the Priests pronounced them clean; nor
did the Church of Corinth receive him in again till St. Paul had judged of him,
and pronounced him clean, so absolving him, and desiring the Church to receive
him, and the Presbyters to forgive and comfort him, for he judged, sufficient
unto him was the increpation, which was inflicted by many, 2 Cor. 2. 6
: many blamed him for his sin, and scandal, and executed the sentence, St. Paul
and the Presbytery had pronounced upon him; but they did not judge and censure
him as our Democratical Brethren would have it, assuming to themselves the
K^ye^ Christ never gave them, for they belonged to the Ministry, they received
that power from the Lord; Lev. 14. 3, 4 2 Cor. 10. 8 Ta^tae se uti dici^
potestate quanta concessa est ab author. Ambr: Com. in loc.
; all ^he Church cannot be head, eyes, or Rulers: where then were they ru^ed,
and the rest of the body, 1 Cor. 12. 14. or who then were to obey and submit
unto their Rulers, Heb. 13. 7. 17.

5. If either of these Elders dye, let the people choose, Acts 6. 3. and 14. 23.
and the Presbytery of that Congregation approve of, and ordain another to take
his office, 1 Timothy 3. 10 Acts ^. 20. and 6. 3 Ambr. Com. in ^^c: vide Appendix
Iuris divini Minist* A^gl. page 120
: but if the Angel die, let the next Presbyter succeed him, for he is a Bishop
or Angel who is first amongst the Presbyters; as Timothy a Presbyter was a
Bishop, because he had no Presbyter before him, as Ambrose says; and let the
Ordination be with Fasting* Prayer, and Imposi^ion of the hands of the
Presbytery, according to the example and precepts of the Apostles, Acts 14. 23.
1 Timothy 3. 1. and 4. 14 and 5. 22. Titus 1. 5. Heb. 6. 2.

6. To prevent envyings, emulations, dissentions which may arise between the
Presbyters themselves, or any other of the Church let all Tithes, Glebes,
Rents, Pensions, Oblations, Augmentations, or any other annual profits
whatsoever, belonging to the Presbyters of each Congregation, as Presbyters
there be paid in kind, according to Law, or be valued by a Jury of men of
another Congregation on Oath before a Judge of Assize yearly, and let each
particular proportion of Land be rated what it ought to pay in lieu of the
Tithes, etc. and the time of payment be by a Law prefixed to be paid to the
Presbyters, or their Deputies, on the penalty of treble damage, according to
the Satute of King Edward the Sixth, (still in force) for predial Tithes, i:
and Vide Statut. Edwardi 6: de decimis s^l^e^d.
let these Tithes, Gleabs, Rents, etc. thus valued be paid in unto the Angel of
the Presbytery, who shall repay faithfully the same, according to each man's
need, Acts 4. 35 in the Presbytery, and according to the number of each
Pretbyters Family, for which by the command of Christ he is to provide for, 1 Timothy 5. 8 Romans 12. 17
: and let the Angel be accountable for his distribution to the Presbyters. Thus
was it decreed by God amongst the Levites of old, they were to eat portion like
portion, Lev. 6. 16, 17 etc. 10. 13, 14 Number. 18 9 10, 19 Lev. 22. 11 Deuteronomy. 18. 8
: and this was put in execution by those two zealous Reformers, H^zekiah, and
Nehemi^h, ^ Chron. 31. 15 Nehem. 13. ^3
: and was also practiced by the Primitive Saints; Acts ^ 3^ 1 Cor. 9 ^, 13, 14
2 Cor. 8* 14 Gal. 6. 6
and unti^l this in Parliament be established, let every Presbyter enjoy the
profits of their own particular Parish^s as now they do, and accept if they
please of better livings, as they fall in the Congregation by Seniority in the
M^nistry, that so the youngest Presbyters may have the least, and the eldest
the greatest Means; old age being honorable, if found in the way of
Righteousness. And let all Avowsons (...)sentations, Impropriations, Donations,
Tenths, and First Fruits be taken away out of the Church of Christ, as being
inventions of Satan to allure men to simony and corruption, which were brought
into the Church in the time of Antichristian darkness, approved of to feed and
enlarge the Popes and Prelates Revenues, and sold to others, and bought by
others for self* ends, and worldly advantages, and has occasioned abundance of
horrid sins, to the destruction of many men's souls; yet let there be a just and
reasonable satisfaction made to the Impropriators for them, out of the Bishops,
and Deans, and Chapters, or other Churchland, as the Supreme Authority of the
Nations shall think fit in each place, according to the proportion of money
paid for them, or Land given in the Lieu of them, and in consideration of the
time they have already, and are for the future to enjoy them.

Lastly, The Presbyters thus settled and provided for, let them diligently by
praying in public, and Teaching from house to house as Saint Paul did, Acts
20. 20
; gather together the Saints, and labor in the Word and Doctrine to convert
Souls, and to separate the precious from the vile; Ephesians. 4. 12 1 Timothy 5. 17
Jer. 5. 19
; and those that are not scandalous in life, or Doctrine, but are ready to give
the Presbyters a reason of the hope that is in them, with meekness and
reverence, and are willing to own them as their Guides and Pastors, and to obey
them in the Lord as such, 1 Pet. 3. 15 Heb. 13 7* 17
; let them be received as perfect members of that Congregation, to partake in
all the Ordinances of Christ in that Congregation administered. But as for such
as are ignorant, before they be admitted to the Lords Supper, let them be first
Catechized, until they are able in some reasonable measure to give an account
of their Faith, and to declare their willingness to walk in Christ's ways, and
to observe all his commands, as Members of that Church, and then let them being
approved of by the Presbytery, with the peoples consent, be admitted to the
Lords Supper, after one or more of the Presbyters have prayed for them, and
laid their hands on them, Heb. 6. 2 Acts 8. 17. and 19. 6
. for this Ceremony followed Baptism to complete Church Members, See Hanmers
(...).
: which even the Presbyters did perform, the Angel or Bishop being absent,
Ambr. Com. in Epist. Ephesians. cap: 4. Apud Aegiptum Presbyteri consignant si
presens non sit Episcopus.
; as Saint Ambrose affirms.

Secondly, Let the Children of Church Members (who are though un-Baptized, yet
holy) 1 Co^. 7 14 Ezra 9. 2
on the desire and profession of one of the Parents Faith, be admitted to
Baptism, as the holy Seed of Israel was to Circumcision, the Promise being
made, not only to the Jews, and their Seed, but also to as many of the
Gentiles, and their Seed, as are called of God, and faithful, Acts 2. 39 Gal 3.
7, 14, 26. who are also Abraham's Seed to signify, which God called his Name
Abraham, Genesis 17. 6. compared with Romans 4. 16. But let Baptism be administered
(if it may be without danger) by immersion, and not aspersion, as it was
generally practiced by the Church for many Centuries, as the most common and
landible way of Baptizing, Aquin: sum: part 4. 66 art. 7 Chris. Hom. 24 in
Johan cap. 3
* and only used, unless incases of necessity, Cypr. Epist. 26
: which caused those so Baptized to be called Climici; but as for such as allow
not of Infant Baptism, contrary to the custom of the Church, and gracious
Promises, and privileges belonging to them, Genesis 7. 17 and 28. 4 Mark 10. 14
Acts 2. 39
: for the Seed are in the Blessing, Psalm 37. 27. as Heirs called to inherit
it, 1 Pet. 3. 9. yet so they hold no error, contrary to the foundation of
Religion, and behave themselves in our Assemblies without farther offense; we
may bear with them, that by the Word they may be convinced, or converted: we
are not rashly to judge them for their weakness, but ought to bear with them,
and not please our selves, but them, for their good, to edification as Christ
did. But if by holding this Opinion, or other of like nature, they cause
division and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine received, we are to avoid them,
Romans 16, 17
: In things superstructive, which are dubious, or indifferent, we ought not to
condemn, or contemn our weak Brother, Romans 14 per totum Phil. 3. 15, 16
: for if it be necessary for him, God will sooner, or later reveal the same
unto him; nevertheless whereunto we have attained, we should walk in love, and
speak the truth in love, Ephesians. 4. 15 2 John 1
: and love one mother in the truth.

Thirdly, But for those who have been Baptized in their Infancy, and through
ignorance shall not be able to give a reason of the hope that is in them, nor
do not know how to examine themselves, nor undeastand nor in any competent
measure the Covenant of Grace, nor the nature, use, and end of receiving the
Lord Supper; 1 Cor. il. 28, 29 26, 27
; or are scandalous in their Lives and Conversations, and so unfit to eat with
the Godly, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 13
: or through profaneness, carnal shame, or fear, or out of hardness of heart,
or perverseness of spirit shall refuse to give an account of their Faith, or to
obey and submit unto their Guides, cleaving unto them Acts 17. 34
will^ngly, freesy, and sincerely, Psalm 110. 3 Mark 8. 38 Luke 14. 23 Philem:
14
let them be suspend^d from receiving the Lords Supper, that they may be
ashamed; yet let not the communicates count them as enemies, but admonish them
as Brethren, 2 These. 3. 14, 15. and the Rule by which all Members are to walk,
is, the Scriptures, which ^s able to make the Man of God perfect, thoroughly
furnished to every good work. 2 Timothy 3 16. 17
. hereby the Spirit is to be tried, by which we speak, Esaias 8. 20 1 John 4. 1
. for if any speak not according hereunto, it is because there is no light in
him; nay, if an Angel from Heaven should bring anothsr Doctrine than that which
is to be plainly proved by the Scriptures, we are to repute him accursed, Gal.
1. 8, 9
. Christ and his Apostles have already revealed the whole Will of God to the
Church* and who so shall add to it, or diminish from it, shall be damned for
it, John 17. 6 Acts 20. 20, 21
. Rev. 22. 18, 19.

4. In all cases of Offense between Brethren, let that golden rule of Christ's
be observed, Matt. 18. 15, 16, etc.
. If any be obstinate in any scandalous sin, or fundamental error, after the
first and second admonition, reject him, and repute him as a publican, Tit. 3.
10, 11 Mar. 28. 17
. If he shall refuse to hear the Church, after that the Presbitery gathered
together in the Name of the Lord Jesus, have by Christ's power, delivered him
over to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5. 4
. and the people have put away, from themselves, that wicked person) 1 Cor. 5.
1. 3
. until he shall to the whole Church show evident testimony of his Repentance,
after his Excommunication, as the incestuous person did, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, etc to
1^
. But if he shall Apostatize from the Christian Faith, and become an open and
wilful blasphemer of the Truth, or an Idolater, and false Teacher, seducing
others from the Faith, to believe and receive his fundamental Errors and
blasphemies: he ought by the civil Magistrate (if he be a Christian) to be put
to death, as God commanded, Levlt. 24. 16 Deuteronomy. 12. 6, etc
. or at least to be severely punished, Zach 13. 3
. as Pious Kings in Israel, and Christian Princes in the Primative times have
done, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
. 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. But in superstructive Points of Doctrine, each man ought to
walk according to his knowledge, and conscience, Phil 3. 15, 16. Romans 14. 22,
23. Si^h whatever is not of Faith, is sin; and we ought to bear with the weak,
and not to judge each other about meats, or days, or such like things, Romans 15
1 and 14. 3, ^, etc.
. If any man be overtaken in a fault, such as are spiritual ought to restore
such an one with the Spirit of Meekness, considering himself lest he also be
tempted, Gal. 6. 1. Each man should abide in that Vocation wherein he is called
with God, 1 Cor 7. 20. 24. and 14. 33 and 12. 17, 25
. and not usurp each others Calling, or Office, no more than the Members of
the natural Body do: but having Gifts differing according to the Grace given
us, so let us use them, Romans 12. 6 Ephesians. 4 2, 3
. for the profit of the whole Body, endeavoring (in all lowliness, meekness,
and long-suffering, forbearing one another in love) to keep the unity of the
spirit, in the bond of peace. Every one should observe those general rules,
Romans 12. 1, 9, etc Phil. 2. 2, etc. Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. Heb. 3. 10, 11. and 10, 24.
and 12. 1. 14, etc. ad finem Epist. 1 Cor. 1. 40. in particular for our
thoughts, all of us should observe those two rules, Pro. 4. 23. Phil 4. 8. and
Col. 3. 1. and for our words, those two, Ephesians. 4. 29. Col 4 6. remembering that
he, whatever he be in his seeming Devotions, that bridles not his tongue, his
Religion is vain, James 1. 26
. And for our actions, those rules of the Apostle, Col. 3. 16, 17. Heb. 11. 6.
Matthew 7. 12. 1 Cor. 16 14. 1 Cor. 10. 31. doing all things in Charity, and in
Faith, in Christ's Name, to his glory; denying our selves, taking up our Cross,
lets follow Christ, Mat. 16. 24
. and deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and live soberly, godly, and
righteously, Titus 2. 14
. following God as dear Children, Ephesians 5. 1
. walking in love, as Christ has loved us, being ready to lay down, not only
our Goods, but our Lives for the Brethren, 1 John 3. 16
. and lets abstain from the appearance of evil. 1 These. 5. 22. Lets do nothing
doubtingly, against Conscience, or undutifully against Authority, for
Conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. and 14 22. or uncharitably against our Brother, in
things that 1 Cor. 8. 7, etc. Romans 14. 5, etc
. are indifferent; but lets walk as Children of the light, circumspectly as
wise men, Ephesians. 5. 15. daily growing in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, abounding more and more in well-doing, and persevering therein unto the
end, Mat. 10. 22
. being faithful unto the death, that so we may receive the crown of life,
Revel. 2. 10
.

In observing of these things, through Gods blessing, the Churches of Christ
which are amongst us, shall be edified, and walking according to these rules,
and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9. 31
be multiplied, and all the Saints be in one united, to serve God with one lip,
Zeph. 3. 9
. and shoulder, Zach. 14. 21
. and no Canaanite shall dwell in the House of the Lord unwarn'd, or
unpunished, which is the earnest Desire, and shall be the fervent Prayer of thy
Souls Friend, whosoever thou art, that read these Proposals, so thou be
Christ's, under what form soever thou live.

A TREATISE AGAINST PERJURY
Since any way to take Gods Name in vain, is such a sin, that God will not hold
the Offender guiltless, Com. 3
. And God has absolutely forbidden swearing falsely, Levi. 19. 12 Numb. 30. 2
. and Christ and his Apostle forbids us to swear at all, Mat. 5. 33. and James
5. 12
. (not that he does hereby abolish any part of his Fathers divine Worship,
commanded in the Law, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. but to prevent all occasions of Perjury, and
rash, and presumtuous swearing) which is a sin sticks so fast unto the Soul,
that without a great deal of washing, it will not out, Psalm. 51. 2
. Therefore above all things St. James dehorts from it, following herein the
counsel of the Hebrew Rabbis, Maimon Trea. of Oaths. c. 12
. who advised their Scholars to beware of this sin, more than of all
transgressions, it being one of the heavy iniquities, greater than all
iniquities. St. Paul tells us, the Law was made to condemn such, 1 Timothy 1. 9.
10 Zach, 5. 1, etc. Jer. 23. 10
. for God sends his flying Roll against them, which shall enter into the house
of him that swears falsely, to consume the stone, and the timber of it, yea,
the whole Land shall mourn because of it, Mal. 3. 5
. Christ in Judgment will come near to such, and be a swift witness against
them, g. he will make the Land desolate, and deprive it of man and beast, for
swearing is the Captain, in that cursed company of Vices, Hos. 4. 2, 3. The
Heathen accounted it a fearful sin, and therefore the wisest of them allowed it
not, but in great and weighty matters, as in the vindication of a man's fame, or
preservation of his own, or friends life, h. St. Augustine called Isecrat. in
St^baeo ser. 25
it, a dangerous Medicine, never to be used, but in a desperate Disease,
August. ser: 28. de verbis Apost. Deuteronomy. 28. 59
. And indeed God threatens to make their plagues wonderful, and of long
continuance, that fears not his great and glorious Name: He knows not how to
spare that People that persist in this sin, Jer. 5. 7, 11
. for they shall fall, and not rise again, Amos 8. 14
. he will surely cut them off, Zeph. 1. 4, 5
. Since therefore punishment inseperably follows at the heels of this sin, and
lights either invisibly on the Souls of men, as namely, by Gods withdrawing
his Grace, and favors from them, as from the ten Tribes that revolted from
David's house, to whom they had sworn Allegiance, for which they are said to
rebel, because of the Covenant they had made with David before the Lord, 1
King. 12 19 compared with 2 Samuel 5. 3
. (although it be said, the cause was from the Lord, that Rehoboam hearkened not
unto the people, 2 Kings 12. 15.) which was the ground of that Rebellion: or
else God permits Satan to blind, and harden their hearts, and to take full
possession of their Souls, as he dealt with Ananias and Sapphira, who agreed
together to tempt the Spirit of God, and to lie unto the Holy Ghost, Acts 5. 1,
etc.
. So it happened to* Judas the Traitor, after he had perfidiously betrayed his
Master, Satan was permitted by Christ, after the Sopp, to enter into him, and
to fill him with all impiety, and then to hurry him to the halter, and Hell; or
else God suffers Satan to seduce them, to believe those that speak lies in
hypocrisy, and to credit his strong delusions, which is a judgment threatened
on all, that receive not the love of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10, 11
. And that are traitors, truce breakers, lovers of pleasure, more than lovers
of God, having a show of godliness, but denying the power of it, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3*
. Or, Lastly, God departs from them, for detaining the Truth in
unrighteousness, and so gives them over to a reprobate mind, and vild
affections, Romans 1. 21, 24, 26*
. St. Augustine tells us, That the life of the Body is the S^ul, and the life
of the Soul is God; the Body dies when the Soul departs, but the Soul dies
when God depa^ts, when the Body is wounded with a sword, the Soul departs; and
does not God depart when the Soul is wounded with perjury? s. Or else visibly
August. in Epist. Jacob.
Gods Judgment falls on the persons, estates, goods, or goodname, of the
prophaners of his Name, or they fall into condemnation, and pit of destruction,
before they have lived out half their days, James 5. ^^ P^a. 55. ^0, 23
. for God is jealous of his honor, and will not suffer it to be profaned by
any man, but will have it recovered by their conversion, or confusion: Peter
Martyr from the Rabbis tells us, That when the Law was given in Mount Sinai,
against Perjury; Heaven and Earth shook, trembling at so horrible a crime,
Martyr loc Com: clas: 2. c. 7 Cum in Sinai darentur tabulae statim ut lata lex
est de perjurio totue orbis est concussus.
. for to profane Gods Name, is the proper dialect of the damned in Hell; who
speak as the Devil gives them utterance* their tongues being set on fire of
Hell, and fearful without repentance will their doom be, Rev. 16. 11. Mat. 5.
37 James 3. 6 Psalm. 109. 27
. God is known to abhor this sin, by the judgments he has (in this world)
executed on such as have been guilty of this sin; as in the three years Famine
in David's days, which came on Israel, for their breaking the Oath with the
Gibeonites, x. Saul's Family felt the y 2 Samuel 21. 1
vengeance of their Fathers folly. And the Kingdom of Judah, and Israel,
mourned because of this sin, Jer. 23. 10 Hoses 4. 2
. God removed the Diadem, took off the Crown, and over-turned the glory of King
Zedekiah, and brought shame and confusion on his posterity, and Army, for his
prophanness and perjury, Ezekiel. 21. 23, 25, etc: and Ezekiel. 17. 18, 19
. And what happened to the late unhappy King, and his damning, cursing, and
perjured Army, is too fresh in memory to relate. I have read of a Soul^^er in
Germany, who being sick, gave his Money to the Host, w(...)e he lay, and being
recovered, he demanded it, which he denying, the Soldier sued him; but the
Host forswore it against his Conscience, and presently the Devil carried him
away in the presence of the Court, nor could he ever after be heard of,
Fincelius libr. 1 demirac:
. It Is as one calls it, A God provoking, and a Devil impowering sin, Heavens
Alarm to Jurors.
. It so provoked the Lords wrath against the Christians in the Holy Land, and
so empowered the devilish Turks, that they prevailed still against them, and
over-came them after that Almerick King of the Holy Land, the 50th after
Godfry, had ^roke his Faith, and violated his Oath, which he had made with Elha
deck the Caliph, and his Vicegerent: after this, he was soon van quished in the
field, the Lord forsaking the Christians, and taking part with their foes: so
that (as our famous H^storian speaks) Rawl: Hist: of the world, lib* 2* prim:
part: c: 6. sect* 8. Psalm: 5: 6 Wisd* 1: 11.
. though the Cross of Christ, on which he suffered, was brought into the
Field, by the Christians, (as their last Refoge) yet since they had forsworn
themselves in his Name, that was cruc^fied thereon, and so prophanned it, they
could not stand, but were destroyed. The Sultan Sanar, being suddenly invaded
by Almerick, drew in the Turk Syracon to their And, whose Nephew Sal^dine,
after he had made Egypt his own, beat the Christians out of the Holy Land. If
the mouth that speaks lies shall be destroyed, how much more shall his be
that swears them? Very well known is the History of Vladislaus King of Hungary,
who having sealed and sworn a Truce, with Amurath the second great Turkish
Knolls his Turkish Hist. page: 297, and Rawl: Hist: ut supra:
. Emperor, (and that, as my Author says, the most advantageous for Christians,
that ever was) yet was he by Eugenius the Pope commanded, and by Cardinal
Julian, and other Bishops persuaded, to break the same* and to provoke the Turk
to renew the War; and though Vladislaus for a while prevailed in the Fight, (he
being now far stronger in the Field than before) yet as soon as Amurath had
drawn out the Truce, ( Vladislaus had sworn, and sealed) and spread it before
heaven, and invocated, revenge from Christ, on the Christians, for profaning
his Name, by this sin, saying, If thou art the true God (as the Christians
affirm) show then thy justice on these perfidious persons, who say they are thy
servants: and lo immediately the Day was lost, the Battle turned, and
Vladislaus, Julian, and 30000. perfidious Christians lost their lives, and
perished in their sin: And if God has thus remarkably from heaven revealed his
wrath on all such, as are guilty of this sin, shall we think they were greater
in this sin than others, in this Land, as Christ speaks, Luke 13: 3: 5
* surely no; there be thousands in this Land are guilty of this sin, as well as
they, and unless we repent, we shall all perish, for very few of age, can free
themselves from it: for so I find in a late Invitation to observe a solemn Fast
throughout the Land, See the Invit. to a Fast in the Land, Mar: 26 1656.
. that Oaths are put in among other sins of the Land, provoking the Lord to
wrath; and surely if any Oaths are to be repented of, then much more such
whereby men swear falsely, of which there are Three sorts:

As First, To affirm a falsehood by an Oath, under which especially are
comprehended all false Witnesses, and Jurors, and truly it is to be feared, such
are most of our Talesmen, and hackny Jurors, at our Sessions, and Assizes, who
swear only for hire, and for gain go on either side usually, perverting
judgment, and truth, without fear. It Is a great sin to make a Lie, for it ba^s
from heaven, Rev: 22* 15
. but greater to stand in a Lie, and defend it, as Gehezi did, ^ King: 5: 25,
26.
. which brought on him Naamans Leprosy; but the greatest sin of the Three, is
to swear a Lie, as those sons of Belial did* to take away the life of innocent
Naboth, 1 King: 21: 13
. and those perjured persons that swore against Christ, Mat. 26: 61, 62.
.

It Is a sin against the light of Conscience, derogating from all the Attributes
of God; when men tremble not at his sin revenging Justice, nor fear his
sovereign power, and greatness, nor are awed with his all-seeing wisdom, and
truth, who is the searcher of the hearts, and will render to every man
according to his works: O what desperate folly is it against all these, for men
to put his holy and dreadful Name to that, which their own Conscience tells
them is a falsehood? What other is it but a bold and impudent asserting of a Lie
before Christ the just Judge of quick and dead? It Is a profane and desperate
invocating of God to be witness to a Lie, as if he were the patron of it, or
approved it, when he infinitely loathes and abhors it, and has often plagued such
as have presumed so to do; as Anne Avery, a Woman in Woodstreet in London, who
swearing a Lie, was struck speechless in the place, and cast up her excrements
at her mouth, with horrible stink, Bailey ^n his Pract^ce of Piety.
. So also Earl Godwin in this Land, who flew King Alfreds Brother, of which he
being accused by the King, he not only denied it, but forswore it, wishing the
bread he was m Hollingsh: Chron. in ^sie life of King. Alfyed.
about to eat, might choke him, if he were guilty of the Fact; but lo, no
sooner were the words spoken, but God vindicated his honor; so that the bread,
according to his wish, choked him, and so he perished; a fearful spectacle of
Gods indignation, and the Sea, not long after, devoured his Land, which to this
day are called by his name. Eusebius tells us of three notorious persons that
conspired falsely to accuse Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, and to affirm their
Lie, one of them w^shed he might be consumed with fire if he swore not the
truth, Eusebius. cccles. Hist. lib. 6. c* 7
. The second wished, that some grievous and deadly Disease might seize on him,
if he swore falsely, Called by the Translator, M^rbus regius.
. And the third wished he might be stricken blind, if he were perjured: And ^oe
for their perjury, according to their imprecations, God plagued each of them:
for the first had his Wife, himself, and Children, with his house, and all he
had, burnt with fire from h^^ven: The second perished by a fearful and violent
Disease: The third was so terrified with the justice of God on his wicked
Confederates, that he penitently confessed the perjury, and mourned so long,
and bitterly, under the sense of this horrid sin, (for which, he obta^ned not
pardon) unt^l he had wept out his eyes; and so God made him as a spectacle of
his justice, in his blindness: so a so a monument of his Mercy, in giving him
repentance to mourn so lamentably for this horrid sin, which was not quite
expiated till his imprecation was fulfilled upon him, and his eyes expunged:
And woe will be to those, who being Non remit^r peccatum ^isi restituatur
^blatum: Aug: Epist: 54
guilty of this sin, do not repent much, and speedily, making also
satisfaction, as much as in them lies, for the injuries done by their perjury,
o. God pardons not the offense till thy Brother be reconciled, Mat: 5: 24
. or thou endeavor restitution.

The second sort that swear falsely (who are not so bad altogether, although
guilty of a great sin) are such, who being ignorant of the truth, yet
doubtingly, and rashly, without certain Knowledge, Faith, and Jer: 4: 2
. Judgment, confirm the same by an Oath to be truth; for though the thing they
confirm were truth, yet they not knowing it so, and yet by Oath affirming it
that they know it so, swear falsely; for in swearing they pretend to know that,
which indeed they know not, and so in reference to them it is false they swear,
though in it self the thing may be true they swear: this God accounts lying,
and an Oath being added to it, makes it Perjury. For to Lie, is to speak
against that, which he thinks in his mind; such swearing the truth, but not
from the heart, as God requires, Psalm: 15: 2 Mentire, est contra mentemire:
Plin:
. swear a Lie, because they know not they swear truth. Now Liars are from their
father the Devil, and his works they do, John 8: 48
. and to swear a Lie is one of the greatest aggravations of it; for the Devil
will speak truth, but not truly, not after a right manner, nor for a right end;
it is to equivocate, deceive, and hurt men's souls; as in Adams tentation, he
told the woman, if they did eat, they should be as Gods, which if understood of
Angels fallen is a truth; but if of the blessed Trinity, or holy Angels, as he
would have Ez^e understand it, was a Lie, Genesis 3: 5
. So the spirit of Python in the Maid, confessed Paul and Sylas to be the
servants of the most high God, which showed to them the way of Salvation, Acts
16: 17
. but this was for ill ends; as that he might be acknowledged a God, in
speaking truth, or to uphold the false tenant of many gods, or provoke St.
Paul, and commend his own Oracles; or lastly, by this means to hinder the
preaching of the Gospel, and to raise persecution against the Apostles, which
accordingly took effect; for Paul grieved in Spirit, could no longer endure the
Devils approbation, when they had the power of Christ in their Ministry to
confirm the Doctrine they preached, Acts 16: 17, etc. to 25
. but turning, commanded the Spirit in the Maid, in the Name of Christ, to come
out of her, and when her Masters saw the hope of their gain was gone, they
raised persecution against them. So that he swears falsely, who without
judgment, and justice, swears; which is a high profaning of Gods holy Com. 3d.
Name, in which whosoever sins, God will not hold him guiltless. And truly it is
to be feared, a great part of the knowing men of the Land are guilty of this
sin, swearing ignorantly, doubtingly, or rashly; witness those Oaths taken in
the Universities, to observe the Statutes thereof, when Scholars are
Matriculated, or take Degr^es, when scarce one o^ a hundred knows them: The
Oaths heretofore usually taken by Majors, Burgesses, Sheriffs, Common
Council-men, Citizens, Freeholders, and Tenants, in their Cities, Towns,
Courts, Assemblies, which usually were ignorantly, or doubtfully taken, or
carel^sly and negligently performed; yea, worse than these are the Oaths which
Judges, Sergeants at Law, Apprentices to the Law, and Clerks, and other
Officers in Chancery, Inns of Court, and other Courts take, ignorantly or
profanely, many of them, without any inte^tion, or purpose to keep them, for
usually f^r B^ibes and excessive Fees, (which now abounds more than ever;
witness the wealth not only the Judges and Lawyers have gotten, but even their
Clerks, Registers, and other Officers far surpassing some Knights, or Esquires
estates) they have turned judgment into wo^mwood, and have left of
righteousness in the earth, and often some of them plead against their
Consciences, in most unjust causes, helping therein to oppress the poor,
fatherless, and widow, against such God complains and threatens ruin: Amos 5.
7
. Nor are all our Justices of the Peace, Bailiffs, Constables, Head-borroughs,
Church Wardens, Overseers of the Poor, and Highways, Tything men, Jaylors,
and other inferior Officers, especially most of your Attorneys, Under
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, etc. free from this sin; many of them ignorantly, rashly,
without faith, reverence, knowledge, or judgment, taking their Oaths, for
honor, or profit; and usually without fear, or care to avoid perjury,
continuing in, and executing their Offices; and therefore God may just^y (as he
threatens) call the Husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful of
lamentation to wailing, because he w^ll pass through the Land in wrath, Amos
5, 10 the 18 verse
. Nay, I am afraid, some of our Nobles, and our late Parliament Men, our
valiant Commanders, and reverend Ministers, cannot wholly vindicate themselves
from this sin; much l^sse can many of the Common Soldiers, and Country people
of the Land, who took the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy, the
Protestation, and Covenant of the Three Kingdoms: Did not most of us, do it,
ignorantly, rashly, or doubtingly, compulsively, or presumptuously, without
Faith, Judgment, and Righteousness, which is a great sin, contrary to Gods
Rule, who will have us swear in judgment, justice, and truth, Jer. 4. 2
. Surely, I fear few can free themselves from this sin, if without fear,
prejudice, favor, or self-love, they would seriously in their Consciences
peruse those Oaths, Protestation, and Covenant; and deal impartially with
themselves, as God will do without respect of persons, when he comes to Judge
them: Or if any plead he sinned not in taking these; then certainly he sinned
with a witness, in not keeping these, as his own Conscience, Gods Spirit, and
his Word taught him: which is the Third way of swearing falsely; namely,

Thirdly, When men swear to God, or men to do something, that's just and lawful,
which they intend not to do, or if they intend it, yet perform it not, but do
quite contrary thereunto, having their evasions, equivocations, or mental
reservations, to elude, avoid, and frustrate these which was accounted a
Jesuitical trick, and a damnable sin heretofore amongst Protestants in Queen
Elizabeth's, and King James his days. Dr. Mortons Reply to the moderate
Answerer against more than heathenish equivocations written 1606.
. This sin in Religion, says my Author, is sacrilegious and detestable, in
politic State most pernicious, and intolerable; and in every man most wicked
and baneful to his soul: This is a horrible sin tending to most fearful
damnation. Dod and Cleaver on the 3d. Com: p. 107, and 108.
. For he is a true Christian that having sworn to his hindrance, yet will keep
his Oath: But he is far from a good man, that swears that, which he never
purposes to perform; both Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, and all godly Divines
have condemned it. Aug. Contra. Mend. cap. 5. 8 Hierm. Comment in 1 Cor. 4 Pet.
Lumb. lib. 3. dict. 38. Aquin. 22. quest. 111. art. 1 Harm. of Confess. sect 10
Mockets Book of God and the King. I fidore. Beda, Dr. Featly, Saunderson, etc.
. Yea, and the very Heathen too. As Menander, Plato, Cisero, Aristotle, Seneca,
Plutarchs Lives, etc.
. for not only Gods Name is abused whom they invocate to witness, (which is
most fearful and glorious) but also men are hereby cheated. and deceived, and
made to believe a Lie, instead of Truth: God much complains of this sin, Jer.
3. 10. and 2 Cron. 34 32
. and threatens severely to plague it. Ezekiel. 17 15 Jun. Annot. in locum*
. It provoked the Lord to break forth as a man in passion, shall he break the
Covenant, and be delivered? Nay, God swears in his wrath (as one mightily
offended) severely to plague Zedekiah, though a King, for desp^sing the Oath,
and breaking the Covenant, which God calls his Oath, and his Covenant; because
(as Junius observes) was sworn in his Name, and he was the Author of it, by his
Prophet. Jer. 34. 11 Aecolam. Exp. in loc:
. As also to show, as one says, Tthat he will revenge the breach of Oath, and
Covenant made o men, as much as if it had been made to himself; he had
profaned Gods Name, and God would not hold him guiltless, but his imprecation
shall fall on his own head, for his perfidiousnesse, which indeed was fulfilled
on him, and his, in severity, 2 King. 25: 6, 7 Jer. 52. 1
. when his Children and Nobles were slain before his face, and then his eyes
put out, and he himself carried Captive into Babylon, and kept there till the
day of his death.

And yet alas, our Land is too much guilty of this crying scandalou^ sin, which
cries aloud for vengeance; for such were, and are, for the most part, the Oaths
that have been taken by Papists, and Church-Protestants against the Popes
Supremacy, the Oath of Abjuration, which thousands never intend to keep, they
having their Dispensations, Equivocations, mental Reservations, and secret
Evasions, to delude God, the Magistrates, but chiefly themselves; for in their
hearts they are still resolved to yield Obedience to the Sea of Rome, and
believe Transubstantiation, and Purgatory; use Pilgrimages, and Prayers to, and
for the Dead: yea, some Protestants are too much Jesuited, who took the former
Oaths, Protestation, and Covenant, when in the very taking of them (I fear)
they intended not to keep them; for generally the Country took one, or more of
these, for fear, rather than love; by constraint, rather than willingly; for
selfends, and not for Gods glory. Generally, the whole Nation feared not an
Oath, but some either ignorantly, rashly, or presumptuously took them; or which
is worse, resolved profanely and perfidiously not to keep them: like those
that took the Covenant in Josias days in falsehood, Jer. 3. 10
. returning unto the Lord feignedly: Nor to this day is there any fit means
used (as I know of) to remove the guilt of this crying sin from the Land, which
in the opinion of an enlightened Jesuit, Emman. Sa. Aph^r. tit. de Jurament. 26
Perjurium gravius est Homicidio, etc.
. is greater than Murder: Therefore one long since wished, That as the
Murderer in our Land, for Murder, was hanged by the Neck; so the Perjured
person for his sin, might be by the Tongue: Dr. Mortons Confut of Equivocation,
c^p 5.
. And though we punish not so severely this sin, as other Nations have done,
and God has out of his patience, and goodness, forbore with us, thereby
leading us to Repentance, yet their Damnation slumbreth not, that shall to
their lives end, persist in the same; God will hasten his vengeance, and cast
such out of his sight, (as the Prophet speaks) Ier. 14. 11
. and if they continue in this sin, God will not hear them. God has often, and
clearly forbad this sin, Deuteronomy. 23 21 Numb. 30. ^, etc.
. and th^eatned such with the loss of Heaven: Psalm. 15. 4 Revel. 22. 15
. And the truly godly have kept their Oath, though it were to their own hurt,
as Joshua, and the godly Princes, Jephtah, and others: yea, it is the mark of a
true Christian, that he fears an Oath: Eccles. 9. 2
. I have opened my mouth to J^hovah, says Jaepthah, and I cannot recall it:
Judge. 11. 35
. he was content to put an end to his Posterity, rather t^en to commit Perjury.
And so zealous was Joshua, and the Princes, having sworn to the Gibeonit^s,
that when the Army would have destroyed them* they cried out, We have sworn to
them by Jehovah God of Israel, and we may not touch them: No, though they were
a people of the Hevites (who were expressly, and by name, commanded of God to be
rooted out) Exodus 23. 23
. though they were Liars, Dece^vers, and Counterfeits, and over-reach^d, and as
it were derided Joshua, and the Princes, by feigning themselves Ambassadors
from a far Country, which they avowed by their vynowed Bread, and patched
Clothes, clouted Shoes, and rent Bottles; nay, though Gods command (of
destroying them) long preceded the Peace, they had granted them, of sparing
them: and though the Oath and Promise they made was with a People a far off,
for so the Israelites had told them: Josh. 9. 7
. If they dwelt amongst them they could not make a Peace with them, because God
had forbidden it: Nay, though this Peace was made without warrant from the
Lord, Josh. 9. 14
. nor could they challenge (as our famous Historian speaks) the witness of the
true God, in whom they believed not, Rawleighs Hist. of the World, l. 2. c. 6.
sect. 3.
. and therefore if ever any man might have saved himself by Evasion, or
Delusion, Joshua might have done it, without Equivocations, or mental
Reservations. Yet to the end (says he) that the faithless subtilty of man
should borrow nothing in future, from his example (who knew well that the
Promises made in the Name of the living God, were made to God, and not to the
dying man) he held his Oath and Promise firm, and inviolable (though they to
whom he swore were worshippers of Devils) for it is not as faithless men take
it (says he) that he which swears to a Man, Society, State, or King, and
swears by the Name of the living God, and in his presence, that the Promise, if
it be broken, is broken to a Man, Society, State, or Prince; but the Promise
made in the Name of God, is broken to God. It Is him we neglect herein, and
profess we fear him not, but set him at naught, and defy him. And not only
the godly, but the very Heathen abhorred breach of Oath and Covenant to men
(though they swore by false Gods) Marcus Attilius Regulus is famous herein
amongst the Romans, who being taken by the Carthaginians prisoner in the War,
had leave to go back to Rome, on his Parol, taking his Oath, That he would
return again as their Prisoner, if he effected not what was desired by the
Carthaginians; which he being not able to accomplish, yet for his Oaths sake
(though he knew the Carthaginians would kill him, on his return) he returned
back unto them, August. l. 1. de Civitat^de^. cap. 15
. choosing rather to endure their Cruelty, than to commit Perjury. In such high
esteem, and honor, was the Religion of an Oath, even amongst the Heathen. It Is
indeed a great sin for a son to break his Promise with, or to alter the Deed of
his Father; but greater for a State, Kingdom, or Prince, to break those
contracts made in former times: witness Saul's breaking the Oath of Joshua, and
the Princes (though it were 400. years after it was made: 2 Samuel 21. 1
. (And this I instance in, lest any should think Joshua, and the Princes, erred
in keeping the Covenant with the Gibeonites aforementioned) which provoked the
Lord so much, that even in holy David's days, God sent a Famine for three years
on the whole Land, nor was his wrath appeased, ti^l seven of Saul's
Grandchildren were delivered to be executed, on a Gallows, by the oppr^ssed
Gibeonites. Therefore we may not think to make void our Oaths by new coined
Distinctions, forged Evasions, God-mocking Equivocations, to swear one thing,
(as my learned Author long before our Troubles spoke) Rawl. Hist. of the world,
lib. 2 cap. 6. sect. 8.
. by the Name of the living God, and to reserve in silence, a contrary intent*
for then the life and estates of Men, the Faith of Subjects to Kings, of
Servants to their Masters, of Vassals to their Lords, of Wives to their
Husbands, of Children to their Parents, and of all trials of Right, will not
only be made uncertain, but all Chains where by F(...)-men are tied in the
world, be to^n asunder. For by his Oath a man assures others, that his ^ords
are true, as God, whom he invocates, is true; and s^cretly, or expressly
imprecates a Curse on himself, if they be not true: Therefore, says the
Schoolman, he is doubly guilty, that swears fraudulen^ly: first, Because he
takes Gods Name in vain: and secondly, Deceives his Neighbor when he swears
falsehood, Pet. Lumb. lib 3. did. ^9: Qui c^lliditate utitur jur^mento
dupliclier peccat. ^uit and nousen d(...)en Vanum sum^: and proximum dolo capit.
. But he that loves, or makes a Lie, shall be damned, and much more he that
swears 2 Rev. 22. 15 Psa. 15. 4
him. z. Let a man use never so great art, or cunning in swearing, yet God does
value the Oath, according to their sense to whom the Oath is made. Isid. lib 2
de snm. bono capit 13
. Faith is to be kept in an Oath (says St. Hierom) because we are not to
regard man, to whom we swear; but God, by whom we swear. Hierom Com. in Ezekiel.
cap. 17
. They are Perjured persons, says St. Augustine, who preserving the words,
with some Sophism, deceive the expectation of them, to whom they have sworn,
Aug. in Genesis
. Therefore God foreseeing that in the last days this sin should abound, and
knowing that man's heart was deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
he plainly commands in his Law, that that man that swears, should not swear
fa^sly, Levit. 19. 12
. for thereby he should p^ophane his Name. If by an Oath he has bound himself*
he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth, he shall not
break his word, Numb. 30. 2
. God will surely require it, that thou keep thy Oath, or else plague thee for
it, according to thy d^sert; for so much the word r^quiring signifies. Genesis 9.
5 Deuteronomy. 18. 19 and 23. 21
. That which is gone out of thy lips, thou shall keep, and perform, according
as thou have vowed to the Lord thy God, and as thou have promised with thy
mouth; Deuteronomy. 23. 21
. The Law (says the Apostle) under the Gospel is made to condemn such, 1 Timothy
1. 10
. and they are given over to vild affection, and to a Reprobate mind, as the
Romans were, who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit this sin
are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that
do them, Romans 1. 26, 28, 31, 32, compared together.
. Truce Breakers, and Traitors* are two of the number of those Hypocrites that
shall come in the latter days, 2 Timothy 3. 3, 4, 8
. who as Jannes and Iambres resisted Moses, so shall they the truth.

And yet alas, though God is so severe against this sin, and requires such
sincerity, and simplicity, in all our Oaths and Promises we make, to God, and
Men: yet how mightily has this sin prevailed in these latter days amongst us,
Men making breach of Oaths, a mat^er of custom, not Conscience, under pretense
of honest public intentions, and necessity for public ends; violating the
Oaths, Covenant, Protestation, Engagements beforenamed, which we promised to
observe, and keep, and to perform the things, especially contained in the
Covenant of the Three Nations, as we would answer for our Perjury at the Great
Day, when the secrets of all men's hearts shall be disclosed, and every man
shall receive according to what he has done in the flesh, whether it be good,
or evil. Now for us to violate those Oaths, and perfidiously to break any
Article therein, (which is in our power, and lawfully we may observe) under
pretense, that good may come thereby will not (as the Apostle says) then, our
damnation be just? Romans 3. 8. Justam p^nam blasphemis illis Paulus denunciat:
Beza Annot: Hoc peccatum blasphemiam appellat Paul^^ and abjicit a sensu
divinae Doctrinae, Amb. in loc.
. The Jews might not break a Ceremonial Precept, much less a Moral, under
pretense of any good to come thereby: it lost Saul his Kingdom for offering
Sacrifice, and not obeying Gods command, under pretense that the people fled
from him, and he was afraid the Philistims would come o^ him, before he had
Prayed, and craved Gods assistance, 1 Samuel, 13: 12
. Vzza lost his life, for touching the tottering Ark, though with a good intent
to stay it; for so it is said, the Oxen shook it, nevertheless the anger of the
Lord was kindled against him, so that he smote him for his Error presently. 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7
. St. Augustine allows not a man to tell a Lie, though it were to save his
life, or another man's life; and he gives a good reason for it, for thereby l
Gregor: lib: Mor: 18: in Job, cap: 2 Innocent. Tit: de Vsuris, c: 4.
he destroys his own soul. Aug. lib: de Mend. c. 6
. and Gregory, and Innocentius say the same; p. otherwise Peter had not sinned
in denying his Master: And if Christians may not tell so much as an officious
Lie, for the saving of their own, or their Brothers life, (which is the
greatest good, can be performed, or pretended by any) much less may they
profanely, or perfidiously swear a Lie, (by violating their Oaths, and
Covenants so solemnly sworn unto) under pretense of necessity, or public good;
David prays against such cursed Hypocrisy, and God-mocking flattery, Incline
not my heart unto any evil thing, to pretend pretenses in wickedness, with men
that work iniquity, let me not eat of their dainties: Psalm: 141: 4 S^e
Ainsworths Anno^: on the place.
. So Ainsworth translates it: And David gives the reason of it in another
Psalm; Psalm. 125. 4. 5
. As for those that turn aside to their own crooked ways, to which Satan and
their own deceitful hea^es lead them, the Lord shall lead them forth with the
workers of iniquity: Or as the Chalde Paraphrase, He will lead them to Hell,
and their part shall be with the workers of iniquity; but Peace shall be on
Israel* (viz. such as are upright in heart, to pay the Promise, as Israel d^d.
Genesis 35. 2. 3 compsred with Genesis 28 20
And if any man, to free himself from Perjury, shall say when ^e took those
Oaths and Covenant, he ^quivocaced, and had his mental Reservation, etc. ^e
does not surely thereby exte^uate, but rather aggravate his offense; for in his
swearing and Covenanting, he professed God to be the Author of Truth (who
cannot deceiv^, no^ be deceived) whom he invocated to witness the truth, and
sincerity of Agreement, b^tween his words and heart; imp^^ing his vengeance, if
^^ speak not the truth: when neverth(...)e by his eq^vocation, and
reservations, by his Lies, and per(...)snesse, he endeavors to deceive God,
and does deceive himself, and the Persons to whom, and with whom, and before
whom he swears: But let such know, God will not be mocked; Gal. 6. 7
but what a man s^^eth, that shall he reap: with the u^right swea^er that
^e^reth ^n O^th, God will show himself upright, Ps. 18. 25, 26
in keeping Oath, and Promise to such: But with the perverse, and froward, who
have in their Oaths, such wrenches, and ^vasions, God will show himself awry,
for Gods wrath is revealed from Heaven against all such, Romans 1. 18, 3* 2
and it is to be feared such are blinded in their sins, or given over to a
reprobate mind, who profanely sport with these holy things, and yet think they
sin not, but play as Sampson with his Cords, fast and loose, as pleases them:
Just like him, whom the O^atour speaks of, Clsero lib: de Offic: 3
who being a Roman Soldier, captive at Carthage, was granted his Parol (on his
Oath) to return again into Prison thither, within a perfixed time; who as so^n
as he was out of Carthage, returned unto the Prison again, pretending he had
forgot something behind, which ther^ he would fetch (intending thereby to elude
his Oath) which done, he came to Rome, and there stayed longer than his Parol
allowed him; telling the Senate, he was freed from his Oath, by reason of his
former return: but the Grave Senators, understanding of his fraud, sent
forthwith this Perjured fellow, back to Carthage, bound with Cords, to show
their disl^ke of such deceit, and equivocation in an Oath, though it were made
to an Enemy; well knowing, that fraud, and deceit in an Oath, does not lessen
Perjury, but make it more heinous.

And lest any man should plead the wickedness of the person, or persons, to
whom the Oath, or Covenant were made, might dis^ob^ige them let them remember
the Gibeonites forementioned, who were ^olaters, and Deceivers themselves, with
whom fraud may be used if with any. Fallere falleatem non est fians. Livius de
bello pun. lib. 2
And these Carthaginians, who were faithl^ss and perfidious even to a proverb.
Punica sides.
But you may see by (...) Ex^mple^, that both Religious and Heathen Princes
abhorr^d this sin. Insomuch that Cicero says, such as use these Evasions and
Pretenses, they seek out but for a shifting hole, for their Perjury. Clcero
lib: Offic. 30.
And indeed any thing may rather subtly be excused than an Oath, in which the
least deceit, is an heinous sin, and pulls down speedy vengeance on him that
uses it; Witness Arrius, that Blasphemous Heretic: this was the grand sin
that filled up the Measure of his wickedness, and put a period to his imfamous
life, Histor. eccles. Tripart. Epiph. scol: imerp: lib^ 3 page: 135, 136 Omnes
transeuntes digito notabant locum Arrii detestabilem recordante^ interium.
for being compelled by Constantine, that godly Emperor, fot the peace of the
Church) to deliver his Subscription, to the general Council of Nice, and to
avouch his integrity thereunto, to subscribe it, by an Oath, he consented
hereunto; but before he did it, he wrote his damnable Heresy in a Paper (as
his desperate wicked heart had invented to Elude his Oath) and this Paper he
put secretly under his clothes in his bosom; and then being urged, after he
had written his subscription, to the truth, (confirmed in the Council of Nice)
to swear, That he had written according to the truth in his heart; he clapped his
hand on his bosom, and swore he had written as he did truly believe in his
heart; meaning in the Paper in his bosom: which the good Emperor, and his
Followers, understood of the Papers he had subscribed. But the Almighries Eye
beheld his treachery, and his wrath was kindled against him, and his Perjury,
his damnation slumbred not; for no sooner was he out of the Court, going in
triumph into the City, to glory over his foes, (the holy Bishop Alexander, and
his Orthodox Adherents) but lo, when he came into the place called
Constantines Market place, he was st^ucken suddenly, with the terrors of the
Almighty (as the Psalmist says) Psalm. 120. 3, 4 Verba similia sagittis acutis
r^busti, i. e. maxim lethalia ut presentissimam mortem afferentia ^deoque
obvium quicquid est conflagrantia. Trem: and Jun. Annot. in loc:
for his deceitful tongue, there was given to him, the sharp Arrows of the
mighty One, and coals of Junipe^, which so burned in his belly, that it made
him withdraw behind the Market-pl^ce, where a Privy was, where, with his
Excrements, be voided out his Entrails, and a multitude of Blood, and his
Liver, with his Spleen, of which, he immediately died: God in his Justice for
his Blasphemy, Perjury, and Hypocrisy, striking him with a Judgment
proportionable to his sin; for he had hid his wickedness in his inward parts,
therefore God will openly discover both it, and them, he had deceived, and
mocked good men: now his deceit in his Breast, is discovered, and he is made a
spectacle and derision to Angels, and Men: The Almighty caught him in his
craftiness, and his devices were carried headlong, Job 6. 13
And thus is he made a Monument of divine Vengeance to all men, who thought to
delude and deceive all: Insomuch (as my Author says) all men passing by, with
their finger pointed at the place, recording the detestable death of Arrius.
'Twas therefore a good Lesson Acosta the Jesuit taught his Perjured brethren,
Acost: lib: 2 cap: 21 de salute Iudiarum:
That men ought not to Lie, though it were to gain all the Barbarians to the
Faith; and he said no more, than St. Augustine long before had done, that a man
might not Lie to his Neighbor, though it were to procure his Salvation,
August: lib: de mendacio, cap: 20
And if he might not Lie, much less might he swear a Lie, for though it were
true (which yet indeed is false) (as the Jesuits affirms) that the officious,
and jocosous Lies, be venial sins, Aquin: 22 dae: quest: 110. Ar: 2 c: They
borrowed this from the old Error of the Priscillianists: Qui do^ebant and suo
exemplo confirmabant, licere propter alicujus salutem mentire in Religione, ita
ut quod credis negare and quod non Credis profiteri bona conscientia possis:
modo veritatem fidei in Cord saluam retineres Aug. ad Consen. cap: 3: tom: 4:
ye even these when they are sworn unto, and confirmed by an Oath, become
pernicious, as Tollet, a chief Father, amongst them shows. Tollet Jes:
instruct: sacer^d, libro de Sept: pec: cap: 54


In a word, an Oath being the end of all Contention, Heb. 6. 16.
all Nations, by the Law of Nature, have condemned this sin, and provided
punishment for the Perjurers, that wilfully transgress herein, some adjudged
them to be whipped; others to be hanged, others to be slit in the Nose, others
to be branded in the Forehead, others to lose their Ears, others to be bored
through the Tongue, Dr. Whites Confutation of Equivoca. t. 20
The Judicial Law of God was amongst the Jews, that he should suffer the evil,
or loss, which by his Perjury, he had brought on another; as an eye, for an
eye; a hand, for a hand; and life, for life, Deuteronomy. 19. 19
Thus Susanna, her false Witnesses, are stoned to death, which death they
intended against her. Hist. of Susanna
And Daniels are cast to the Lions, who by their malice and Perjuty had caused
him to be cast to them, Dan. 6. 24
And though this sin may escape the punishment of men, yet shall it not the
Judgment of God, Prove. 19. 5
for so the holy Ghost tell us a false Witness shall not be unpunished, and he
that speaks Lies shall not escape. Plutarch gives us a notable Example hereof,
in one Cleomenes, Plut. in Lac.
who having made a Truce with the Argives, for seven days; when he observed
them the third night, to be careless of their Watch, and given to sleep (in
confidence of the Truce made) he arose in the Night, and seized on the City,
and slew some, and captivated others: But when they complained against him, for
his Perjury, and violation of the Truce made; he Replied, He Covenanted for
seven Days, the Nights were not added in the Oath: But God suffered not this
Perjured Commander, to prevail, for the Women of the City, he had taken, took
Arms out of the Temples of their god, and with them executed Vengeance on his
Army, and at last he himself was stricken with Madness, so that the wounded
himself with a Dagger, and slit his body from his Ancle-bones unto his Vital
ports, and so langu^shing, drawing his mouth aside, he ended his perfidious
life, as a fearful Example of Gods wrath against this sin revealed from heaven.

Since then God is so severe a revenger of thi^ sin, and the Oaths and Covenant
we have taken do oblige us faithfully to observe the things contained therein,
so far as they are lawful, good, and possible to be kept. Lets all, in these
Three Nations, that are guilty any ways of this sin, humble our selves for it,
confess it, and forsake it; for if we hide it, we shall not prosper, nor
obtain Mercy for it, Prove. 28. 13, 14
O lets not with the wicked pretend pretenses, or invent excuses, to ext^nuate
it, or paint it over, by equivocation, or mental reservations, (that we had in
the taking of any of them) or think by any private interpretation of our own,
to elude them, or by any Napkins that others may bring, suppose that we may
wipe them out, by any new Oath, or Engagements made, Ezekiel. 21. 28 Trem and Iun.
Not. in loc.
and so think they are frustrate, or repealed, safer and happier will it be for
us, to fear always, as its in the next verse, that so we may be brought to
Repentance: for he that hardens his heart in it, shall fall into mischief,
See Iun: notes on Prove 28. 14
And truly, unless we, throughout this Land, do repent of this sin, as Christ
tells us twice, we shall all perish, Luk: 13. 3, 5
there is no Appeal from this Judge.

Secondly, Since we have lifted up our Hands to Heaven, and opened our Mouths to
the Lord, and so cannot go back from the Oaths, Protestation, and Covenant, we
have made (as J^ptha said) Judge. 11. 35
Lets (as we expect to stand before Christ's Tribunal with Joy, and receive the
blessed sentence from him) observe, and do the things we have promised, so far
as they are lawful, just, good, and possible, (which are Conditions should have
been inserted as a Clause in all those Oaths and Covenant) lest otherwise, we
persisting in this sin, pulls down Gods wrath on us, and our Land: O lets not
after Vows make inquiries, w. nor suffer our mouths to cause our flesh to sin,
nor say before the Angel, that it was an u Prove. 20. 25.
Error, why should God be angry at our voice, and destroy the works of our
hands, Eccles: 5. 6
yea, not only hurt our selves, but hereby give a scandal to all Christians,
and cause the precious Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, and his glorious Gospel
to be blasphemed, by Turks, Papists, and Infidels, as if the Christian Religion
which we profess, were a Doctrine that allowed of Perjury, which the very
Turks and Heathen do abhor, and have been content, to suffer any misery, rather
then wilfully to run into Perjury: Witness that famous Roman Augustine relates
of, who to avoid this sin, and perform his Oath made* returned into the hands
of his deadly foes, who with exquisite torments Mu^dered him, including him in
a strait piece of Wood, full of sharp Na^^s, in which he could scarce stand
upright, and if he leaned on any side, he must needs wound himself, and so long
he stood, till he died with Watching, though he were a Heathen, yet he chose
rather to endure the worst of temporal evils, rather then offend his gods by
whom he had sworn, Aug lib. 1. de Civitate Dei, cap: 15
. he feared to offend his false god^, which were indeed Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 20
. will not he rise up in Judgment against those, that fear not to offend the
true God, by Perjury, who will not acquit an offender. Exodus: 34: 7
. The like dread of Perjury is reported to be in the Saguntines, who chose
rather to have their City ruinated, than their Faith violated, which they had
made to the Romans: Aug. de Civitate Dei, lib: 3 cap. 20
. Did not Amurath ubbraid the Christians with Vladislaus Perjury, and will not
both Turks and Heathens condemn our Religion, as false, when they shall hear
that there is such Perjury and Falsehood continued in amongst us, that is not to
be named amongst the Heathen, as St. Paul speaks in another case. 1 Cor. 5. 1
What can this work amongst them at this day but obstinacy in their infidelity,
and blasphemy of that Faith which is the life of our Souls. Dr* Mortons
Confutat. of Equivoca^. part 3: cap: 20
.

Therefore Thirdly, Let there be a day of Humiliation appointed by the Three
Nations, that every man guilty of this sin, may smite upon the thigh, and be
ashamed, and so may confess and forsake it; but especially, let such deeply
humble themselves, whose mouths, have been full of Cursing, and bitterness,
swearing on every light occasion, powdring in their common talk (as they they
think) their discourse, but indeed putrefying it, with profane and cursed
language, and Oaths, as the Devil that rules in them, gives them utterance;
their tongue, in St. James his phrase, being set on fire of Hell: James 3: 6
sc. i^citata A diabolo Gebennoe and inferni civi: Gagneu^ scol: in loc:
. Also let us bewail our wicked, absolute, and impossible Vows, and Oaths,
which are not to be kept, but broken, A turpi Voto muta de cretum, quod
iniquiter jurastine persolve: James 4: 17
. (if the Lord will) says St. James, d. (and so far as conveniently we may, as
well as lawfully) says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10: 23
. are requ^red in those that promise ought. Saul sinned in his rash Vow of
killing him, that tasted meat that day. 1 Samuel 14. 24
. So did David in his passionate Oath to destroy Nabal, and his Family* for
their Masters incivility, and want of charity, 1 Samuel 25. 21
. worse, did those Forty that bound themselves in an Oath, not to ^^t till they
had killed the holy Apostle, Acts 23: 12
. this the very Papists condemn, Dr Saunderson de jurament. sect: 13: lect. 2.
. for in an Oath we are to have regard, as well to the matter, what we swear,
as to the manner how we swear: So said the Dr. of the Chair, An unlawful Oath,
in respect of the act of swearing, obliges, although it be certain, what ought
not to be performed, ought not to be sworn; nevertheless it may come, and does
often come to pass, that what ought not to have been sworn, ought
notwithstanding to be performed, the thing being lawful, not of it self, but by
accident, ( viz the Persons swearing) and so it obliges the Person swearing to
his promise, (unless there appears some other sinful impediment) as he
instanceth in the Oath of the Israelish Princes given to the Gibeonites before
mentioned: they ought not to have sworn to them, but having sworn, they ought
not to break their Oath, which Saul's Posterity found true to their sorrow, as
well as all Israel, 2 Samuel: 21: 1, 2, etc:
. in this the Schoolmen are right, Aquin: 2d^: quest: 88: Ar: 2, and 3: Fieri
non debet sed factum valet.
.

To prevent Perjury in the Universiries, and Cities, and Courts, let the
Statutes, Laws, and Customs, which they are sworn to observe, be set down in a
Book, or Table, for Public use, to be made, and truly used by all men, in some
Common Place, where all may have liberty to read, and know them, that so men
may swear in Judgment, Justice, and Truth, Jer: 4: 4
. And to prevent this sin in Judicature at our Assizes, and Quarter Sessions,
let there be no Tales-men returned, by the Sheriff, or his Bailiffs, nor no
Jurymen allowed of, but such as are approved of by the Testimony of the
Minister, and Church, where they live, to be wise, and able men, sound in the
Faith, fearing God, and hating covetousness, of knowledge in the Laws of the
Land, of holy life, and conversation, unto the Justices of the Peace in each
County, to serve as Jurymen, who confirming them, and allowing of them, let
these freely for their Countries good, serve in all Juries, without taking
Reward for their pains, on the penalty of Bribery, unless what may be allowed
by the Common Purse of the said County) this will, I believe, destroy all our
Hackney Jurors, and prevent abundance of Injustice, and Perjury, now
perpetrated in Courts of Judicature.

Fifthly, Lets all Repent of our rash swearing without Judgment, and
submission to Gods will, whereby we have made our Wills superior to Gods, whose
counsel alone shall stand, and he will perform all his pleasure, who has
lately showed our vanity, and prophannesse herein, in dis-enabling most of us
to do, what we absolutely Covenanted, and swore to perform; yea, let there be
no swearing, but on weighty Causes, James 5: 12 Mat* 5: 34 Aug: lib: 19: contra
Faustum:
. they ought to be used only in cases of necessity, as men use dangerous
Medicines.

Sixthly, Let the Laws already made against rash Swearers and Perjured persons,
be put better in execution, and let more encouragement be given to those shall
discover them. And let such as hear them swear rashly, and falsely, and know it
so, but shall not reprove them, or see them punished, let them undergo the same
punishment, as being partakers with, or approvers of the same sin. Agentes and
Consentientes pari paena pu^ie^di sunt, Linwood.
.

Lastly, Let all sorts of Persons in the Three Nations faithfully perform their
Vows, Oaths, and Covenants made (with submission to Gods Will) to their utmost
power in their vocations* (and so far as lawfully they may) though it be to the
loss of their honors, places, offices, or riches, for what will it profit a
man to gain the world, and to lose his own soul, as every perjured person that
remains unrepentant in this sin, does: Mark 8: 36 1 Timothy 1: 10 Psalm. 24. 4.
. Therefore let every man do this seriously (as in Gods presence who sees him,
and beholds all his ways, before whom shortly he must appear and give an
account for these Oaths and Covenants) read over, and piously meditate on the
Oaths, Protestation, and Covenant he has sworn unto, and then let him pay,
what he has promised, and vowed, without delay, especially such things as
concerns the glory of God, the honor of Christ, the good of the Church, the
maintenance of Truth, Unity, and Love, the punishing of Heretics, Scismaticks,
and such as cause War and Division in the Nations, and the flying of the sins
we have sworn to forsake, and to reform to our power the same in others, and in
reference to the persons to whom, and with whom, we have sworn; lets observe
those Rules of Christ, to love them as our selves, Romans 13: 9 Mat: 7: 12
. and to do to every one of them, as we would be dealt withal our selves, were
we in the same state, and condition with them, q. O lets not pretend pretenses,
or make excuses or invent Arguments, to shift off, ^quivocate with, or any way
to elude these sacred bonds, for God will surely require the payment of them:
Suffer not therefore thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou
before the Angel, it was an Error; wherefore should God be angry with thy
voice, and destroy the work of thy hands for thy perfidiousnesse, as Solomon
teaches, Eccles: 5: 4, 5, 6:
* O lets remember that new Oaths and promises cannot make void the old, no more
than Zedekiahs new Oath to the King of Egypt, could make void his old Oath made
to the King of Babylon, 2 Chronicles 3^: 13: compared with Jer. 37: 5: and Ezekiel: 17:
15
. or a new Covenant or Promise made to a second Wife, can make void the old
Covenant and Promise made to the first (she being alive, and she being not put
away from him) Dr: Saunderson de jurawent: lect: 2: sect: 11:
. because an Oath has naturally its obligatory power, but constructive only,
not destructive, it cannot take away the Obligation it finds, or impose
another repugnant to it; and the reason is, because by all obligations some
right is confered on another, for whosoever is obliged, is obliged unto
another, and its most unjust, that by the mere act of one, the right of another
without his consent should be weakened. The obligation of an Oath cannot be
taken away by dispensations from any third person, (unless the Party be
willing for whose favor and benefit it was made, to accept of, and ratify the
same, Saunders: ut supra, lect: 7: sect: 8:
. as the Doctor shows. Let us therefore know, thus it is with us, in our
Oaths and Covenants, God was called to be a witness of the truth, and
sincerity of our words, and hearts, who^e mouth cannot be stopped, nor hand
stayed, from executing vengeanc^ on those that are Perjured herein; he regards
not persons, ^^r will he take Gifts; Rom: 2: 11 Acts 10: 34 Gal: 6 Deuteronomy: 10: 17
. he accepts not the persons of Prin^es, nor regards the Rich, more than
the Poor: He will come nigh to them in Judgment, and will be a swift Witness
against them, for their not fearing him who is the Lord of Host: Mal: 3: 5
. the flying Roll sent by God shall irresistably cut them off, Zach: 5: 3
. which is his Curse, for every one that steals, shall be cut off as on this
side, according to it, and every one that swears shall be cut off, as on that
side, according to it: The Lord of Hosts says, he will bring it forth, and it
shall enter into the house of the Thief, and into the house of him that
swears falsely, by his Name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house,
and shall consume it with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof. Therefore
I Conclude* that neither Pope, nor prince, Senate, nor Synod, no
Ecclesiastical, nor Secular power, has any right to dispense with, or absolve
any man from that bond, wherein before the dispensation granted he was engaged
in; as the learned Doctor affirms: Dr Saunders. ut (...)ra, lect: 7: sec^: 4.
. And ^ men (against the light of Gods Word, and conviction of (...) own
Conscience) will take liberty unto themselves herein, ^od will surely no more
spare them, than h^ did King Zedekiah. Ez^^h: 17: 19 ^ etc ^us ^^ andi viola^o
impie^ati^ coput est quia omni ex^usatione vacua si^ e^usmodi violatio: The^d:
interp: in Zachar.
. For to confirm the truth hereof, God swears (who cannot ^i^, nor Repent) to
terifie men from Perju^y, As I live, says the Lord, surely mine Oath that he
has despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense
on his own head: and the Prophet after shows him his particular doom, Ezech:
21: 25 26, 27
. in these words; And thou profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is come,
when iniquity shall have an end; thus says the Lord God, remove the Diadem,
and take off the Crown: This shall not be the same, exalt him that is low, and
abase him that is high: I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be
no more, until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him. Now this, and
all the former remarkable Examples, specified before, of Gods divine Justice,
related in this Book, and others we read of, happened to them, for Examples of
Gods indignation against th^s sin, and they are written for our Admonition, (as
the Apostle says) upon whom the ends of the World are come, 1 Cor: 10: 11:
. Wherefore my dearly beloved, lets fle^ from this sin, lest partaking with
those before named herein, we also reap of their plagues; for unless we repent
of it, we shall all perish by it, Luk: 13: 3, 5:
. The good Lord prevent us with his Mercy, and remove the Judgments hang over
our heads, and deal not with us after our sins, nor reward us accord(...) our
iniquities, but as high as the Heaven is above the Eart(...) great let his
Mercy be toward us; and the Lord our God pardon what is ^^st* and grant us
Wisdom to discern, and Piety to practice what is required, that so the flying
Roll that is gone forth, come not into our Lands, or Houses, to cut us off, and
the blessing of God the Father, and the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ his Son,
and the Comforts of God the blessed Spirit, be on the heads, and remain in the
hearts of all those, that tremble at Gods Word, Ezra 9: 4: Eccles: 9: 2:
. and fear an Oath, e. which is the desire, and shall be the continual Prayer,
of your Souls Friend, and Servant in the Lord,

E. F.

FINIS.

