ROME for the Great TVRKE, OR ELSE, The Great Turk for little ROME.

BEING A Brief Narration of the present Calamity of the King of HVNGARIES
Country, and some other Parts adjacent thereunto.

WITH An humble persuasion to all Christian Princes to join courageously and
Unanimously together, to lower and suppress the Pride and Tyranny of this
inhumane and young railing Rabshakeh:

That boldly Writes himself an implacable Enemy to all that profess and own
the Name of CHRISTIANITY.

woodcut of man in turban

LONDON, Printed by T. F. for F. Coals, in the Old Bailey, 1664.

woodcut of soldier

The Preface to the Reader.
NOw in the 14. th year of King Hezekiah, did Senacherib King of Assyria, come
up against all the fenced Cities of Juda, and took them.

Then Rabshakeh stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jews language, and
spoke saying, hear the word of the great King the King of Assyria, thus says
the King, Let not Hezekiah deceive you; for he shall not be able to deliver you
out of his hand; neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying, The
Lord will surely deliver us.

Then came Eliakim the Son of Hilkiah, which was over the household, and Shebna
the Scribe, and Joah the Son of Asaph the Recorder, to Hezekiah with their
Clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh, and it came to pass that
night, that the Angel of the Lord went out and smote in the Camp of the
Assyrians, an hundred fourscore and five thousand, and when they arose early in
the Morning, behold they were all dead Corpse. 2 Kings 18. 13, 28, 29, 30, 37,
Chap. 19. 35. etc.

ROME for the Great Turk, OR, ELSE The Great Turk for little ROME.
Heroic Christians you do understand,
That we have many Foes within our Land,
And it is a real truth you need not doubt it,
As we have many in, we have more without it.
Witness that Sultan that in Pride declares
He is 'bove our highest, the Sun, the Moon and Stars,
And in the height of his ambitious pride
Speaks against CHRIST, that for poor sinners died.
Comparing Mabomet, a piece of Clay
To him that made the World, and springs the Day;
And boldly says, his Sepulcher or Tower,
Is by his potent strength now in his power:
His Alcaron, and all the Cheats he has,
He thunders out, to weaken our strong Faith.
His Bashaws and his Ianizaries too,
Confirms his haughty language to be true.
Likewise Vizier his saucy General,
Swears what he says, is all Canonical,
And vows by Mahomet, now they have power
They will all Christians in the world devour.
But let these Catiffes dominere and swear,
And by your leave build castles in the air:
We have a Savior, though they count him small
With one word of his mouth ruins 'em all:
And when by them, JEHOVAH'S work is done,
He Will make his pale three Moons, to kiss his Son;
For if his wrath once thoroughly kindled be,
He Will pay 'em home for all their Blasphemy.
In the mean time let every Christian Prince
Act in his sphere to lower his insolence;
And stand not now on trifles, wise men see
Tends not to Peace, to Love, nor Unity.
And really through Faith implore his aid,
That has the Universal fabric made:
Then you shall see what will become of those
That are our SAVIORS, and his Servants foes.
And though the Church of Rome we know must down,
Being against CHRIST, his Scepter and his Crown.
Yet peace and joy will Coronize each one
That does detest the Whore of Babylon;
The house of Austria, that all along
Has done Messiah and his servants wrong,
His plumes will now be plucked to let him know
They shall be safe when he shall not be so.
And when the Turk on them has his desire,
He Will burn in Tophet for to make a fire.
To reach all Rabshakeh; how they proclaim,
Decrees against Christ, and a true Christians name;
And as the people of Israel heretofore,
VVe're threat'ned by those that now dare threat no more,
Even so these Uipers they shall understand,
They fight against a Power that shall Command.
For if the Lord of hosts does once out-brave 'em,
Their three and Thirty Kingdoms, will not save 'em.
And though New Hausell, lately surrendered be
To the Giant Turk their greatest Enemy,
Before he goes much further he may know,
That his own Slaves may work his own overthrow.
For those poor Captives, that for many years,
Has served him against their will with sighs and tears,
And in his Gallyes taken uncessant pains,
Rowing along their coasts in Iron Chains,
In luring many a blow upon their back.
When their sad hearts were ready for to crack;
And with their Bastinadoes on their feet,
Blow after blow most cruelly does mere.
Their Prayers and tears ere long will sore on high,
To ruin him and his Conspiracy.
Now I could wish you that drink Wine in boules,
For to survey the misery of these souls;
And you that lie upon your beds of Down,
And your soft heads with Roses seems to Crown,
Sits down to eat, and rises up to play,
And with vain sports do droll your time away;
Although that lenity a while forbeares
These cases might be ours as well as theirs,
Then England be not too secure for fear,
Though God has blessed and spared us many a year,
If we too long rebel, against his Crown,
Justice at length, will fairly cut us down.
But to Conclude.
Likewise their great Prophet that knows no more,
When he may perish on the Christian shore.
Then I know when Paul's Steeple will be built
And her fair Pinnacle most richly gilt,
And though Hungaria and some other Parts,
Suffers a while by his inhumane Darts;
GOD in due time, do what his Forces can,
Will wound and spoil this great Leviathan,
And hook his nostrils for to make him tame,
And back again retreat with grief and shame:
And when he does with horror thus return,
Constantinople will in Sable mourn.
Which is not only the hope, but also the belief of one that wishes well to
all the Protestants in the Christian world.

E. F.

FINIS.
Licenced by Order. June, 5. 1664.


