THE Old Man's Complaint as Follows: 1680.
MY Prime is past, my Strength decay,
My Youth is spent, my Head grows gray;
My Eyes are dim, and waxes Old,
My Blood is dry, my Body cold;
My Ears are dull, my Joints are weak,
My Teeth are gone, I scarce can speak:
My Knees are lame, I cannot go:
All Is out of Frame from top to toe.
My Sins are many, which cause me weep,
And sigh and sob when I should sleep;
My Glass near run: I cannot stay,
From hence to Grave I must away:
But where my Soul shall placed be,
Alas! that is Unknown to me:
A Faithful Friend I hope to find,
To Comfort my Distressed mind.
old man

A Friendly Admonition.
POOR Aged Man! what cause thee cry? Job Chap. 7. Verse 1. Revel. Chapter 6. v. 15,
16, 17.

Do thou not know that all must Dye?
The Monarch Might and Princely Peer,
Have we a biding City here?
The Royal Blood and Noble Race
Must all in time to Death give place.
The Prelates Wise, and Lawyers Sage,
Must silent be when Death's o'th Stage.
Remember that thou art but Clay, Job Chap. 10. ver. 3, 9. Joel Chap. 2. ver.
13. Genesis Chap. 7. v. 15, 16, 17.

And when Death comes thou must away:
Therefore Repent while thou have space,
For after Death no hope of Grace.
JEHOVAH High, whose Words are Just,
Created Man of Earthy Dust:
And placed him in EDEN fair,
That goodly Garden to Repair;
Wherein was many a Fruitful Tree, Genesis Chap. 3. ver. 6. Job Chap. 14. ver. 12.
Heb. Chap. 9. ver. 27. Heb. Chap. 8. ver. 12.

But one Forbidden, that Tasted he;
For which Contempt GOD did Decree
That into Dust Man turned should be:
Whose Corpse within the Earth should stay
Until the Latter Judgement-Day:
And then likewise if Just thou be,
Returns to Him that gave it thee.
Do not therefore Delight in Sin,
Condemned are those that Dye therein.
Our Savior CHRIST does plainly say, 1 Cor. Chapter 15. ver. 32. Rev. Chapter 20. ver.
13. 2 Cor. Chapter 5. ver. 10.

That he will have a Comming-Day,
With Angels bright, whose Trump shall sound,
And Raise all Dead wheresoever found;
And then Account all Men must give,
How Well or Ill they here did Live:
Yet though thy Sins in Number be
As Drops of Rain, or Sands in the Sea;
Or as the Stars that shines in the Air,
Do not with Cursed Cain Despair; Heb. Chap. 9. ver. 14. Heb. Chapter 10. ver. 17.

For CHRIST has Mercy left in store,
For Thee and Me, and Thousands more.
In Love except of my Good Will,
Whose good desire exceeds my skill,
And if my Name you do not know,
In Fifteen Letters I will it show.

With Fifteen Short PRAYERS as Follows.
WILLIAM FARTHING
WHat shall I render unto the Lord for all his mercies from time to time
bestowed upon me, I will confess my sins as did holy David, and I will weep for
them as did the Prophet Jeremy, and I will Fast as did the Prophet Joel, and I
will Repent as did the Ninevites, and I will wait with Patience as did Holy
Job, till the appointed time which the Lord has set for my Change.

IT is the Lord himself whose Word never failed, and whose compassion have no
end; It is he that by his wonderful Providence, even when we were at the Pits
brink, brought to light that most horrid Plot that the bloody-minded Papists
had brought upon this Kingdom this last Year; for the which I bless and praise
his Holy Name, Amen.

LOrd preserve my gracious King Charles, with all the loyal and religious
hearts that stand up to defend the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and Lord I beseech
thee to bring to light all such Plots as ever shall be plotted or imagined
against them or this Nation; and that the Gospel may by my Royal Sovereign be
maintained unto his life's end, Amen.

LAy to thy helping hand, O Lord, and strengthen my weak Condition, and pour
the Oil of thy grace into my wounded Conscience, that I may ever walk in the
light of thy Gospel, so that at last I may receive comfort for my poor soul,
Amen.

I Am, O Lord, Created by thy goodness after thy own Image, I beseech thee
destroy not the work of thy own hands, but show mercy unto me, and grant me thy
gracious Pardon for all my sins, for Christ his Sake, my alone Savior and
Redeemer, Amen.

ADmit me, O most merciful Father, to thy gracious favor, for many are the
dangers of this life, and I have none to defend me but thee; Heaven is thine,
and the Earth is thine: keep me on Earth as one of thine, and good Lord in thy
good time bring me to Heaven to rest with thee, for Christ his sake, Amen.

MOst gracious God, I have grievously sinned; what shall I do, O thou preserver
of Men? O Lord I confess nothing can be hid from thy presence; therefore I
renounsing all merit in my self, do beg thy Gracious Pardon through the merits
of Jesus Christ, by whom I was Redeemed, and it is he that has made
satisfaction for my sins.

FOrget me not, O Lord, now I am Gray Headed, but Increase that little Grain of
my weak and feeble Faith, and Direct it to the true Object, that is, the merits
of Jesus Christ, and make me strong therein, that when I shall leave this Body
to the Grave, I may be partaker of a joyful resurrection, in, and by the merits
of Jesus Christ my Redeemer.

ARm me, O Lord, I beseech thee, with the Spiritual Shield of Faith against all
temptations, and Establish my hope, and good Lord keep me from Despair, so
shall I be able to resist the power of Satan, and shall be comforted in thy
mercies, through Jesus Christ.

REmember thy promise, O Lord, which thou have made unto Mankind, that if he
will repent him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, as did the Prophet
Ezekiel, thou will have mercy, therefore O Lord I beseech thee again and again
to have mercy on me, who with bended knees and unfeigned tears do beg thy
gracious Pardon for Christ his sake, Amen.

THough I have delighted in my sins, which are more in number than the hairs
upon my head, or the Sands on the Seashore, Lord I beseech thee let thy Holy
Spirit prepare me to a true and hearty sorrow for them, and with thy most
precious Blood wash away all my sinful spots; And this I beg for Christ his
sake, my only Savior and Redeemer.

HEar and accept of these my weak and humble petitions, O Lord, and for thy
mercy sake bow down thine ear and hear me that is become a Worm, and no Man,
and I beseech thee not to disdain these my requests, but except me into thy
favor, Amen.

Jesus thou the only beloved Son of God, and Savior of the whole World, who
art the life of the Living, and the death of Death, and therefore both in Life
and Death advantage; which sits at the Right Hand of God, making
Intercession for all sorrowful and penitent sinners, to whom with the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, now and for evermore, Amen.

NOw will I draw my Name to a conclusion, and once more give thanks unto the
Lord for all his abundant mercies in such a wonderful manner from time to time
bestowed upon me, which am by reason of my wicked life, unworthy the least of
all his mercies; but it is his goodness that I had not been cut off by Death
many years agone.

GReat and Wonderful has thy mercies been showed toward me, and thy
Compassions have no end, O Lord we have heard with our Ears, and our Fathers
has declared unto us, how thou did of thy Wonderful Power, long since,
overthrow that Invincible Armado, which was intended against our most Gracious
Queen ELIZABETH, in the Year 1588. And likewise for the Delivery of our Dread
Sovereign King JAMES, and the States of Parliament, from that most Horrid Plot
and Bloody Massacre that the Papist had almost brought to pass the
Gun-powder-Treason, in the Year, 1605. And now Lord, for us the Father to the
Children; and the Old to the Young, shall Report how thou of thy great Mercy,
and a most wonderful Providence of thine, did also Preserve my most
Sovereign and Gracious Lord King CHARLES from that Secret and close-Contrived
Plot that the Bloody-minded Papist had almost brought to pass against King and
Nation in the last Year 1678. For which thy mercies, O Lord, we Bless and
Magnify thy Great and Holy Name, beseeching thee to continue still thy Helping
Hand to this Kingdom, and that we may the Remainder of our time, Live in thy
Fear, Dye in thy Favor; Rest in thy Peace, Rise in thy Power, Remain in thy
Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

The place of my Birth was at St. John's, in the parts of Marshland, in the
County of Norfolk, upon the One and Twentieth Day of June, in the Year of our
Lord, 1621.

FINIS.
Printed by T. H. for J. Clarke, at the Bible and Harp, in West-smith-field.
1680.


