THE CITY OF LONDON REPROVED For its Abominations, which does concern all the
INHABITANTS thereof that are Guilty.
REpent thou Bloody City, (who does, and has long Crucified the Just, and
caused Him to suffer;) whose Pride and Hypocrisy, Deceit and Dissembling, has
reached unto Heaven; the God of Heaven has seen thy Abomination, and the Cup
of flatteries, and deceitful Abominations that thou have given to the Heads of
this Nation, and does give to every Change of Government, and every Power that
comes up to Rule; thou can bow in thy deceitful flatteries, according to the
Priests of the Nation, for thy own Ends: But the Righteous God has seen you
all, and does see you, and he will uncover you, and lay your Abominations open,
and rend off all your false Coverings, under which you may nide your selves
from Men, but the Lord sees through them, And He will Uncover you, and make
your nakedness appear, yea your professing Coverings, and outside adorning,
and seeming Religion, under which you have Committed great Abominations, and
Dissembl ng both with God and Man; the day is come wherein you cannot hide your
selves.

Does not even the Witness of God in your own Consciences, that Bears
Testimony for the Truth of God; This that tells you, You should deal singly and
uprightly with all men, this that tells you, You should do unto all men as you
would have them do unto you; Does not this bear Testimony to your very Faces,
that you are deceitful and dissembling Hypocrites, Time-servers, and
Men-pleasers, that have so used your Wit and Policy, and acted so in Deceit,
Dissembling and Hypocrisy, that the most part of you have kept your selves out
of Sufferings all these times of Suffering, which have been nigh twenty years;
And few or none in the Nation have escaped the Scourge of Suffering as you have
done; but they have suffered by one party or another, which you have escaped
through your Policy and Subtilty? -- Did you not strengthen, uphold and
maintain, with all your force and strength, the long Parliament against the
King and those that were with him? And did you not Feast them and bow under
them for your own ends? And did you not Feast Oliver Cromwell, with as much
Acclamation and Solemnity as your Hearts could invent? Is not your Feasting
only to please men? but it is a great Abomination to the Lord and destructive
to the Creation: Oh the excess, and Abomination, and wicked inventions that
are exercised by you at such times! they are even heavy to bear; surely God
has seen it, and he will reward you according to your Works.

And surely, if the Lord had not amongst you a Seed, you should be as Sodom,
and be made even like unto Gomorah; For the Lord may well say unto you, The
show of your Countenance does VVitness against you, and you declare your sin as
Sodom, and hi^es it not, you strengthen the Hands of the wicked, that none can
return from his wickedness: And you are unto the Lord as Sodom and Gomorah, and
it may well be said unto you, as it was unto Jerusalem, It will be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorah in the day of Judgment then for you; For you
have been the destruction of many Nations, in that you have made so much
Profession of God, and of Christ, and of the Scriptures, but the fruits that
you have brought forth, has been Pride, Hypocrisy and Deceit, Fullness of
Bread, Excess of Riot and Drunkenness, Chambering and VVantonness, yea all Sin
and Abomination that could be committed; Insomuch that the very Heathens in
several parts of the World, are even ashamed of your practices; Your Deceit and
Dissembling is so manifested amon^ people, that have not made such a
Profession, that even the Name of a Christian is odious in many parts of the
World. But this is the Fruits that your much Preaching and Profession brings
forth, which is not in the Life and Power of God, and so is even a stink to
the Nations: Well may the Lord say, How shall I pardon thee for this? Thy
Children have forsaken me, When I had fed them to the full, then they committed
Adultery, and assembled themselves by Troops, they were as fed Horses in the
morning; Shall I not visit for these things says the Lord? And Shall not my
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Go ye up upon her Walls and destroy,
but make not a full end: Take away her Battlements, for they are not the Lords.
Surely the Lord has seen, and does see the abomination and wickedness that is
committed, and set up, and countenanced among you; and he cannot pass by it,
but must avenge the Abomination of it.

Can your Hearts endure, or can your Hands be strong in the days that the Lord
does deal with you according to your works, who despises the day of the Lord,
and despises his People, and will have none of his Ways, nor none of his
Counsel; but will have those ways and worships in which you may have Liberty
to act according to your own hearts Lust, and according to the evil of your
ways, and abominations of your hearts? But the day of the Lord is come, which
will burn as an Oven, and the wicked, and them that do wickedly, will be before
him as Stubble; and then What will you answer him? When the Lord pleads with
you by Sword and by Fire, how can you stand in his Presence, who has Acted
against him, and are in continual Rebellion against the God of Heaven,
spending his Creatures upon your Lusts, and setting your Hearts to work
Abomination against him, by all ways that you can invent? What can you Plead
for your selves, when he comes to call you to an account for those things? Can
you say to him that you acted those things to please men, and to humor men,
and to turn men's hearts toward you for your own ends, though they have been
one against another, and you really true to none but for serving of your time?
Will this stand before a just and Righteous God. who can by no means clear the
guilty? I tell you, Nay.

Oh Consider in this your day the things that belong to your Peace: Ye know not
how near the hand of the Lord may be to smite you, for you have been A Sinful,
Provoking, and Aggravating People against God, and unto this very day abound in
Pride and Wickedness: And you have been warned from the Lord by a despised
People, by which God will be clear from your blood; though you have taken
little notice, and given little regard, yet God will be thereby justified, and
you condemned: So if you love your souls, Repent, and turn to the Lord, and put
away the evil of your Doings; Cease to do evil, and learn to do well, that the
Lord may have mercy on you, Who delights in mercy: At the time of Ignorance
God wincked, but now he warnes all men every where to repent: And remember that
you are once more Warned.

LONDON, the 4th day of the 5th Month, 1660. M. F.

London, Printed for ROBERT WILSON.


