To the Supreme Authority the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
The humble Proposals of Edmund Felton Gent.
That which he humbly offers is,
HOW Ireland and all other English Plantations may multiply and increase much
more trading then now is, or has been for many years; and all the Soldiers in
Ireland paid, and other just debts, and yet not any money for so doing disbursed
by the States, but to their great advantage; yea many hundred thousand pounds
hereby to be brought into their Treasury: And for which so doing, in 1601. is a
Precedent upon record: by which course the late Queen Elizabeth then carried on
the War in Ireland, with small taxes to the Subjects, and as the state of
Ireland now stands, by the prescribed course following, Ireland in few years
may be fully planted with Englishmen and women, all which may be accomplished
as follows.

1. If it shall please the States to cause 200000 l. or more forthwith to be
coined in Occamy money, as they do in Holland, and the late Queen Elizabeth did
for Ireland in 1601. and to pass there for current coin; every hundred pound
thus coined, to be in half-crowns, shillings, sixpences, and smaller pieces.
The mettle, stamping and silvering of 100 l. of the said coin, will not stand
the State in above five pound; three hundred pound of which coin any of the
Inhabitants in Ireland to have for 100 l. in Gold or Silver, which there, is as
good to them as gold or silver, there passing current by Act of Parliament. The
States hereby gets clear for every three hundred pound thus coined to pass in
Ireland, eighty five pounds. By this course not any man there living can be
prejudiced, but much bettered in his estate; for any man whose stock in money
there (or here if he go for Ireland) be but 10 l. he shall have for it 30 l.
in the new coin, for 20 l. to have 60 l. for 100 l. in gold or silver, 300 l.
and so proportionably. Thus every dealer herein trebles his stock, and by this
means when they are in Ireland it will keep them there; and the Soldiers
there who has land given them for their Arrears, will by this course be
enabled to keep their Land and to stock it, if 100 l. or 50 l. of the said
coin be lent to such Soldiers as have wife and children, for one year gratis,
and for the years following they shall keep the said money, to pay to the State
5l. or 6 l. for 100 l. within two years will pay the States what they
disbursed; and as long after as the said 100 l. or 50 l. shall by any be
detained, to pay the rate of as aforesaid to the States use, which will come
clearly unto them.

The said coin likewise to pass current in all other English Plantations and
no where else, and upon the same terms as in Ireland; by this course both the
gold and silver in English Plantations will also be brought into this Nation,
to the great in riching of the States, and the Inhabitants both in Ireland and
the said Plantations. And for that this is not a coin to be horded up, it will
cause the more Trading, Planting, tilling and stocking of ground, and so
consequently the more employment for the poor.

If objected, How shall any come for England, and here travel and follow their
occasions?

It Is answered, That whosoever has just cause so to do a^ what Port-town soever he
shall land, where the chiefest of able and honest men to be Treasurers, there
to have 20 l. 10 l. or less, bringing treble the coin as they had when went
for Ireland (and they to have sixpence in the pound) but not any man to have
above 20 l. in silver (nor that if ten pound may serve for his occasions) to
travel and return back. Spain and other Nations who are far more richer in
gold and silver then England, have much of Copper and Occamy money which goes
currantly amongst them in their dominions.

2 Also a great revenue for some years may as thus come unto the States, if
they please to lend 100 l. or more of the said coin to Families that will go
for Ireland, having a stock of Corn and Cattle, who wants money, and willing to
farm Lands in Ireland of the States, which so doing will cause much people to
go to inhabit there.

And as for strangers that shall trade in Ireland, or any of the English
Plantations, to trade with Commodities for Commodities, or to give gold or
silver for what they shall buy there, but not to buy any Commodity with this
States new coin, but for their expenses for meat, drink and lodging whilst
they are in Ireland, or the English Plantations, if they give gold or silver,
to have treble the sum of the Treasurers there, which will be a means to
prevent bringing in of the like coin.

3 If objected, that if there were such a coin the Dutch and other Nations
would bring in abundance of the like, and carry away Commodities of great
value for it; which may be prevented as aforesaid and follows.

First, Strangers to barter Commodity for commodity, unless they bring silver.
Secondly, if there be as strict a Law for counterfeiting or making any of the
said coin as the Act of Parliamnt is for stealing away any Maid under 21
years of age, not any will dare to venture (to be as a slave all his life) to
make any of the said coin.

Secondly, Whatsoever goods shall be brought into Ireland or any of the English
Plantations to have the Governors seal set thereon as soon as landed, and what
goods soever are to be opened for sale in that City or Town, the said Governor
or chief Officer to appoint some honest men to be at the opening thereof, to
see if any coin be conveyed therein, and if any Lead should be brought to
Ireland or any of the said Plantations, then the Governor or chief Officer in
view of the people where it shall be landed, to set a stamp on each sow of
Lead, which is not to be melted in the said City or Town till the Governor or
chief Officer, shall send some honest men to view the stamp and to be at the
melting thereof, and therewith an Iron ladle to see if there be any coin
therein conveyed.

Thirdly, That there be the like course of searching of any caske wherein shall
be wine, oil, or any other Commodity whatsoever, and that at their first
landing if any liquid Commodity, and before it be housed.

And if any of the said Commodities by whole sale be carried to other Cities or
Towns, the chief Magistrate there to set his mark or seal on the said Pack,
in the presence of some honest Townsmen, to the end (if not opened presently)
that it shall not be opened till the said Magistrate shall send some honest men
to be at the opening thereof. And to prevent favor or affecting any, if it may
be thought fitting, the said Overseers to take this Oath following, (either
voluntarily or given by the Magistrate) I A.B. desire of God I may not prosper
in this life nor any thing I take in hand, if I prove deceitful in this my
undertaking for the Commonwealths good.

Reasons conduceing hereunto, considering how this Nation is much impoverished
in gold and silver, since these troubles; As First, by sending many hundred
thousands of pounds out of England into Holland and other Countries. Secondly,
the treasure cannot but be great that has been hid this time of war, and to
be believed, most of the hiders have lost their lives before they could
discover where they hid it. Thirdly, many who now have much treasure, will not
be known of it for fear of Taxes. Fourthly, it cannot but be a great prejudice
to this Nation, if those that go for Ireland, shall carry what gold or silver
they can thither in this impoverishing time.


To prevent which, the Proposer humbly conceives this way of a new coin for
Ireland and all other English Plantations, will wonderfully enrich that land,
and make the people better able to pay their Taxes in England and Wales.

Ireland has now been this twleve years very chargeable to England by reason
of the late troubles, and not any thing profitable by way of Trading to this
Nation, (since which troubles, hundreds of thousands of pounds have been sent
thither) all which time, the English inhabitants has contentedly endured under
great sufferings. If now for the like time men would with as much patience
content themselves to have this prescribed new coin if but for 12 years, it
would be the cause that Ireland would almost be fully inhabited, and have
plenty of Corn, Cattle, Sheep, and all other necessary food, which as the
Apostle says is sufficient, exhorting the people of God to learn to be content
therewith. But if not but by covetousness men will be rich in gold and silver,
he plainly tells them it is an entrance into strife, and many foolish and and
noy some lusts which drown men in perdition and destruction; as for those
covetous ones who think gain godliness, the Apostle tells them no, it is not
so, requiring all that fear God to withdraw themselves from such, saying,
godliness with content is great gain, 1 Timothy 6. chapter and for men so to be, it
would be the New birth, and much rejoice them to see their Brothers and
Neighbors to thrive by them. But the covetous man thinks all too little for
himself, which Solomon confirms (saying Prove. 1. 19.) He that is greedy of
gain takes away the life of the owners thereof. It is content, not wealth, is
man's happiness in this life.

In all which the Proposer humbly submits unto your Honors most grave wisdom,
Edmund Felton.

London, Printed by E. C. for M. S. 1653.


