ENGINES Invented to save much Blood and Moneys (in these times of War) and
to do extraordinary good service*

WITH The approbation of the Honorable Major General Skippon, and five of the
Committee for the Fortifications of the City of LONDON.

By Edmond Felton Gent.

Imprimatur,

JOHN BOOKER.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill at the sign of the Bible in Wood-street,
M.DC.XLIV.

Rayo(...)d excellent Engines tending to save much blood and moneys in these
times of War.
IT is Gods command, No man should seek his own, but every man one another
wealth. A sufficient warrant for any man undertaking in so seeking: and whether
I have so sought and can do a general good for this Kingdom, witness two
Attestations in this Book, one under the hand^ of the honorable Serjant major
General Skippon, the other under the hands of five of the Committee for the
Fortifications of the City of London; the originals ready to be produced on
demand.

If any man should go and report to any nation or people, where Gun-pouder is
not known, that they would cause a great iron bullet of ten or twenty pound
weight or more to fly a mile, two or three in the air, it would be answered
it were unpossible so to do; and also where printing is not known, as
impossible that 3 men should perform more in a legible way of writing in one
day then an hundred men, and for that it is known to us how it is done, we
should slight his judgment should gainsay it.

And what more unpossible to some to conceive how half an Armies victuals may
be saved, five parts of six of their pay, all the money that should be laid out
for apparelling of them (and the money that should be disbursed for Pikes for
half an Army, and some small quantity of Armor that some of them are to have
will perform all this.) And this half Army to secure the other half Army from
the horse and from Musket Shot. I presume this report would prove to those that
know not how it is to be done, as hard as Samsons riddle.

Gods hand is not shortened, he gives as miraculous blessings (by means) to
whom he pleases, as well in this age as heretofore; therefore let no man
despise means, especially when the commodity thereby is greater than the
discommodity, nor ought any man to question by what means the Lord will end
this civil War in this Land; but when good ways and means shall be
discovered by any man to subdue the enemy with little bloodshed, may it not be
said it is likely to be the means God will end this War by, rather than by
equal exposing one another to slaughter, and to resist such means, what is it
but a refusing of Gods blessing, unless we have a command to the contrary.

It is not to be questioned, but that the Lord can do infinite things if he
please by his absolute power, which he will not do, so John said of him, Mat.
3* 9. But it is an actual or a working power which he executes in governing
of the world and the things therein; and it is one thing what God can do where
means is wanting, and another thing what he will do by the use of means.

Had Sir Francis Drake (that ever renowned Gentleman for his rare invention by
a fiery Ship) done as I have (for that I have not wherewith to manage my
invention as he had) discover his strategem how he could destroy those proud
Spaniards, (and their great Armado, that came to make a destruction of the
people in this land) it is very likely his success should have been no better
then mine, either in the discovery thereof, or dislike by some that would have
over-powred him.

And if it can either be hoped for, or by any likelihood made to appear, that
this War should end this Summer by a better way then by such means as it
expressed in the Propositions, than ought this way to be slighted, if a better
is not known, good reason this way and such like should be accepted of.

If it should be reckoned how many discommodities belongs to great pieces of
Ordnance, in respect of the benefit comes thereby, it would discourage men to
use them in field fights: First in respect of the great charge of the piece,
his carriage, and the horses to draw them. Secondly, the charge of powder and
bullet at one shot. Thirdly, the men to traverse them. Fourthly, the slow
marching of them. Fifthly, if weather be foul a day or two, they many times are
lodged, which cause the stay of the Army, all which may be helped, as the
Propositions (following) declares.

I will refer such as speak against means, to the first of Judges 19. v.
how the enemies of God kept their habitation in the valley, because they had
chariots of Iron, but they were driven out of the mountains (by the children
of Israel) where they had no such fence, not but that God could have driven
them from thence: But the Lord did not always in a miraculous manner destroy
his enemies, but by means suffered them to save themselves as the Canaanites
did with chariots of iron. To teach us in humane things to look to the means*
if not, what need men plow, but cast their corn upon the ground, and though
God gives the increase he will not give it in the worst way, nor will any wise
man so presume, than certainly if we use the best means to save men's lives, we
may expect the better success.

And if to feed men to maintain life we use the best way, though troublesome
to man and horse, why should we not use the best means to save the lives of
men. The shallower the corn is sown the worse will it be for the husbandman.
So likewise the more unprovided a General goes to the wars, the worser will
his success be, if any fear it not, let them go with clubs and swords, so
shall much money be saved, but I believe we shall find none so hardy, but if
those that withstandeth means were themselves exposed to the war, they would
be glad of means to keep them from the horse, and to be secured from
musket shot.

The use of means is not hurtful nor offends God, when it tends to good, but
the use of means may be said to be hurtful, when we use it against Gods
command, or when we put too much carnal confidence therein, as the Israelites
did in the Arc, when they carried it to the battle, trusting more therein then
they did in God, which caused the Lord to give both them and it into the hands
of their enemies for their vain confidence, but to use lawful means with
prayer and a trust in God for a good success, I presume it is lawful. Let me
use the freedom to declare by these presents, that I have been very strongly
opposed (by some) for above this two years, that not any thing I can do for
the good of the State takes success. And if it were required, why I should be
so maliced, they that do so or are the Authors thereof can show no just cause,
unless my seeking for the good of the State be the cause, or the good service
my late father did, who had a place under the great Seal of England to seize
on part of the Papists estates, to the use of the Crown, if they would not be
conformable to the laws of the land, or in suing in the right of the Crown and
for my own due kept from me by powerful hands.

Or for what my late brother did (to the late Duke of Buckingham) who was
willing to loose his life for the Kingdoms good, or in respect of my
adversary Sir Henry Spiller knight, against whom I have bin in suites more
then this twenty years in the right of the Crown and for my own due, being a
great estate, but could not obtain Justice against my adversary, so powerful
he was in friends and purse, by whose wicked doings my late father and my self
have been ruined: or for that some fears by these Engines the wars will too
soon be made an end of. For some of these causes or the like, it is certain I
am by some both privately opposed and fore-stalled from doing that good I can
for the State, who by themselves or their Instruments, run about the City to
disgrace me and my undertakings for the Kingdoms good, but to my face they
will not so vent their malice: and if such were not guided more by spleen and
malice than by the Word of God, they would tremble at the reward the Lord
threatens slanderers with, Rev. 22. 15.

But would it please the right Honorable the House of Commons to hear my
opposers against me, and what they can say, and hear me to clear my self, and
for what I can do for the Kingdoms good, they will choose rather to be absent
than present, than what belief is to be given to slanderers and depravers of a
man behind his back.

One asked Trajan the Emperor how he made so good choice of Counselors and
friends, he replied that his good hap came hereof, that he choose them neither
covetous men, nor liars, for they in whom covetousnes and lying ha^h any place,
cannot love perfectly, and where there is not true love for a States good,
there must needs be dissimulation, from such both in Church and Commonwealth
it shall be my prayer to the Lord to be delivered from.

And when men that can do good service for the State, shall be slighted and
neglected, what is it but to discourage men to be acting for the Kingdoms good
and encourage men to fawning and flattery; I have not sought as many have for
their own ends, my chiefest seeking (as it is generally known) was to have my
first Engine accepted of, to help the English in Ireland, and to have the
other accepted of here, for the quieting of the State, and saving of men's
lives, to which some things of great consequence may be added. And for thus
endeavoring the States good, I have spent my self out of means and am much in
debt.

And were these Engines put in practice (in such ways it has pleased God to
give me knowledge of) and that I may have the ordering of the^, I trust in the
Lord they will prove successful for the good of the King and Kingdom.

I confess it had been fitter this business should have bin carried in a
privater way, and that it might have so been, I have l^ft no means unattempted
and seeing I cannot by any means attain it, is the cause I thus publish it, to
encourage all men who are well affected for the States good to be furtherers
hereof; and that I can do other good service were I enabled, some Gentlemen of
known and approved fidelity can certify, if requested, who refused not to
give their oath for secrecy, which I could not obtain of others, and if men in
such a business and of so great concernment for the Kingdome^, fear to trust
themselves, I see no cause why I should trust them.

My trust has already bin too much abused, for one Young a Carpenter near
Cripple-gate, (lately deceased) hearing I could make the Engine expressed in my
Propositions, desired a friend of his to bring him acquainted with me, which he
did, and when J had told him J had caused an Engine to be made to keep the
foot from the horse, and also from musket shot, which said Engine some of the
City Commanders had seen, yet would he not believe such an Engine could be
made, till he went to Major General Brown, who certified him he had seen the
Engine that would keep the foot from the horse; and before J would tell him how
it was to be made, J enjoined him to secrecy (for that* J discovered somewhat
more to him then formerly J had) who most deceitfully in my absence makes three
of the Engines (but knew not how to make the breast-worke) brings them
publicly through the streets to his Excellencies house the Earl of Essex, and
there as publicly were they seen in the first Court. This man presently after
(as J was told) was made Captain of the Engineers, and J the inventer
slighted. His neighbors in Ship-yard by Cripple-gate, knows I was every day
for a fortnight with him, giving him* directions to make the said Engine, which
he could not do, but in my absence got better workmen than himself to make the
above said Engines; and the said Carpenter told one Mr Daulman, one of the
Common Council, he had instructions from me to make the Engine, and so Mr
Daulman told a friend of mine.

Which said Engine shortly after was made at Oxford, but not in so good a way
as this is, nor so marchable with men, nor had they breast-works but of boards
and iron plates (which mine have not) against which should a bullet be shot out
of a piece of Ordnance, and hit that breast-worke, the splinters of the wood
and iron, would do far more hurt than the bullet.

There was about 20 of the said Engines made at Oxford, and from thence carried
to Gloucester to go up to the walls: And had not his Excellency the Earl of Essex
so happily arrived to raise that siege (as he did) it was reported by some of
the Army, the City was in great fear to be taken thereby, most of which said
Engines the besiegers burnt, because they should not be taken. And this is the
benefit comes by publishing good inventions, which ought to be kept with all
secrecy, which I always desired, for the prevention of which J could wish
there were a Committee, of approoved skill and honesty to take oath of secrecy
not to discover any rare invention, and tide by the said oath to deliver the
truth of their knowledge, what they conceive thereof, so shall good inventions,
not only be kept secret for the good of the State, and men encouraged in their
undertakings, if recompensed for their pains and charges, as J have heard the
custom is in the State of Venice.

There is (J here) now again some few breast-works made in this City by a
Commander to go upon service, which will do a hundred times more mischief (in
the discovery) than good, when any man intends to repair a great house, that is
almost ruined, he will not go to repair it with a few men, least it fall to the
ground in the repairing, much less can a kingdom be brought to a settlement
that is divided by war by small and weak means, or by a few Engines be they
never so excellent, but by extraordinary good means, if well followed it may,
then why should a little hinder what much may effect.

I could have much more enlarged my self in way of just complaints, or most
forcible inducements to ingratiate my service and endeavors, but these times
rather require actions then discoursings, the sum of which action is thus
contracted in the following Propositions.

Propositions of Edmond Felton, Gentleman,
WHo has invented and made an Engine for war, which will keep the horse from
the foot, and secure the Musketeers from all shot but of Ordnance, and much
secure them from small shot out of Ordnance, and it is ten to one a shot out of
a piece of Ordnance hits the said Engine, two Engines supplies the place of a
100. Pike-men, taking up 7 or 10 yards in length, and will also go in as narrow
a pla^^ as a Coach (as occasion serves) and in fair ways two men may manage
one Engine at pleasure, if otherwise four or six Musketteers may lay their
Muskets on the Engine and run it before them with more ease than to carry their
Muskets, and thus may their fellow soldiers ease them every hour or half
hour, twenty of the said Engines supply the place of a thousand Pike-men,
whose pay with the Officers is above 400 pound a week, hereby would be saved
all the money should be laid for apparrelling of those soldiers, there will
likewise be saved five parts of six of their pay, and the first weeks pay those
one* thousand Soldiers with their Officers are to have, will make the said
twenty Engines, then is there also saved all the Arms a Regiment of Pike-men
are to have, which will be some hundred pounds, and the sixth part of the pay
those soldiers are to have will maintain the said Engines, pay the men that
shall manage them, and wagons to carry the breast-works of them, if so thought
fit, or provision may be made that one hundred Dragooners with their horses may
draw one hundred of the said Engines after* them, if the ways prove very bad,
and 3 hundred (or more) of the said Engines with the breast-works may be made in
a month or little more.

One hundred Engines supplies the place of five thousand Pike-men, and takes up
in Front 350. or 500. yards, and march as fast as the Army can march in Summer
time. Thus may an Army in a short time be overtaken though ten or twenty mile
off, if they have their Artillery with them, and at what advantage the pursuing
Army shall please, constraining them to fight or fly. If they shall bid battle
the odds will be great against them, if fly than will their Artillery be taken.

There may be made two running Sconces with some of the said Engines to flank
at each wing of the Battalia to prevent the horse from wheeling about to fall
upon the rear, in each of which Sconces 3. or 400 Musketteers may be placed to
shoot every way, and Drakes and other Ordnance may be securely placed in the
intervails, and other good helps to secure the Engines that they cannot be taken.

The benefit of this running breast-work are first, the soldiers with them may
suddenly entrench themselves; hereby much money weekly will be saved in Pionars
pick Axes, Spades and Wagons to carry them. Secondly the said Engines will be a
great ease to the City and Country, in victuals and lodging. Thirdly, in saving
of men's lives. Fourthly, these Engines will encourage faint hearted soldiers
to fight, who shall not fear routing by the Enemies horse. Fifthly the
soldiers may fight hereby, though much wet fall, and also shelter themselves
from great rains. Sixthly, hereby much horse may be saved, for 3000. horse with
8000 Musketeers, and a 100 Engines, will do better service then 6000 horse and
16000 foot without the said Engines, which 3000 horse shall not need to be put
upon service, but when the enemies are routed.

Hereby in horse some 1000 pounds weekly may be saved, other excellent helps
may be added to the said Engines.

And it is often seen that soldiers are fearful to fight against the Enemy,
when they see the hors^men encouraged to charge resolutely, but where these
Engines are in front, they will discourage both horse and foot to come on, and
much more discourage them, when the Battalia are flanked with the said Engines.

The most and best services consists either to defend or assail passages by
water or by straits, or to assail Towns, Forts or Fortresses, for which the
Musketteers with this running breast-worke are the most excellent. And also
hereby siege may be laid to any place; And likewise a siege raised from any
place (if not) the besiegers in a short time (by the help of the said Engines)
may be subdued.

The Pike is counted the chiefest weapon to defend and to enter a breach; If so
approved on with naked men, much more to be approved on with breast-works,
which will secure the Musketteers from small shot, forcing securely on a
breach; though the Enemies near that place are furnished both with shot and
short weapons.

Major General Skippons Attestation.
Having seen an Engine of this bearer Mr Edmond Felton which was of three tire
of ten Muskets in a tire, to shoot Arrows withal, and being requested by him
to signify what I thought thereof, J could do no less but testify that if
the said Engine were completely made up, it would do very great Execution and
be of very good use and service. October. 20. 1642.

Ph. Skippon.

The said Engine Major General Skippon saw 6 months before the date hereof in
the Artillarie Garden.


Whereas Edmond Felton Gent. has of late discovered (unto us the Committee for
the Fortifications of the City of London) how an Engine (of his invention) will
secure the foot from the horse, and the Soldiers from Musquetshot, which
Engine in fair ways two men may manage at pleasure, for the seeing of which
we appointed some of the said Committee to see and try the said Engine, (which
has hanging breast-works,) and it was shot at about 40 paces from it, the
Musqueteeres ramming in powder and bullet in their Muskets, with full
bandeleeres of powder, yet could not the shot pierce through the said
brest-worke, which we who were appointed did see, and so reported to the rest
of the Committee; And being requested by the said* Edmond Felton so to certify
under our hands, of the truth of what was seen and reported of, we have done
accordingly, witness our hands the 14th of March, 1643.

The said Engine was seen and tried the 19th of February. 1643. Richard
Bateman, Christopher Park, Thomas Noell, James Sto^y. Peter Mills.


FINIS.

