AN APPEAL TO THY Conscience: As thou will answer it at the great and
dreadful Day OF Christ Jesus.

BEhold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with
sparks: walk in the light of ^our fire, and in the sparks that you have
kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow. ^say
50. 11. Printed in the Nineteenth Year of our Gracious Lord King Charles whom,
God grant long to reign.

An Appeal to thy Conscience.
READER, whosoever thou art, I charge thee before God, 2 Timothy 1. 4. 3.
and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at that his
appearing, and in his Kingdom, suffer wholesome doctrine, and say aside the
itching ears of these times, that after their own lasts get them an heap of
teachers. Censure not before thou have read it, and be as free from faction, as
the Author of this Treatise is from Pop^ry, Socinianisme, Arminianisme, or any
by relation whatsoever, which might draw him into error. Spit our now the
venom of envy and sedition, if thou art impoysoned therewith, it may be God may
so work by his holy spirit in thy heart, that thou may acknowledge the
truth, and never suck in that venom again, and by repentance 3 Tim. ^. 25. 26.
may come to amendment out of the snare of the Devil, of whom thou art taken
prisoner (till then) to do his will.

But thou, O happy Christian, who know these things, and do them, be
assured, all the blessings are thine which God promises from Lev. 26. verse.
the third unto v. the 14. and take this exhortation from St. Jude, that thou
earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto thee, and be
steadfast, not carried about with every wind of doctrine, as multitudes of
corrupt men are in our days, who are raging waves of the Sea, foaming out
their own shame, murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts,
having me^^ persons in admiration because of advantage, mockers, separating,
sensual, having not the spirit, though they boast of nothing more: Likewise
also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil
of dignities, and by wresting the word of God, do seek to maintain their
rebellion, schisms, factions, and their cursed speakings, daily vented abroad
in their pamphlets, to the great dishonor of God, the scandal of His Church,
and the infamy of our State.

And since the lawfulness of any action is the surest ground for hope of Gods
blessing thereon: which (as the pretense runs) is To defend (...) Protestant
Religion, and root out Popery and Idolatry; to obtain the ^ust liberty of the
subject; and ^o free them from sla^ery and oppression; We (...) therefore with
all sincerity and plainness, not handling the word of God deceitfully, but by
m^nifestation of the truth, commending our selves to ev^ry man's c^nscience 2
Cor. 4. 2.
in the sight of God, ^y no other foundation but what the Scriptures have
confirmed, which is,

That subjects may not take up a^m^s Against their lawful Sovereign, because
He is wicked an unjust; no, though He be an Idolater and Oppressor.

The Reasons are.

First, because it were an high pr^sumption and impiety in us to limit that 1
Reason.
command which God does not limit. Now our obedience to Superiors is always
commanded without limitation: For God does not command us to obey our Rulers
only whilst they are good, bu^ indefinitely, be they good, be they bad, Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, Heb. 13. 17. Honor
the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Speak not evil of the Ruler of thy people Exodus 22.
28. Thou must hold thy tongue, much more thy hands. And St. Paul did acknowledge
that unawares he had offended against this precept in reviling Ananias, though
he was a most wicked High Priest. Acts. 23. 2, 3, 4, 5.

Secondly, we may not think evil of the King, therefore much less may 2
Reason.
we take up arms against him, Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in
thy thought. But who can reveal our thought? Surely God only, Psa. 94. 11.
Ier. 17 10. And rather then a means shall be wanting, a bird of the air shall
carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter.

Thirdly, S. Paul says, Recompense to no man evil for evil. Romans 12. 3
Reason.
19. If thou may to no man, then certainly not to thy King, unto whom thou
can not do a greater evil and indignity, then to take up arms against him.

Fourthly, That which peculiarly belongs unto the Lord, thou ought 4 Reason.
not without his authority to meddle with: But taking up of arms peculiarly
belongs unto the Lord. Deuteronomy. 32. 35, where the Lord says, Vengeance is Mine
and of all kind of temporal vengeance taking up of arms, that is, the sword,
is the greatest, which made David to choose the pestilence to fall upon his
land rather then the sword. 2 Samuel 24. 13. 14.

Fifthly, Romans 13. The Apostle argues the point expressly. Let every soul
(none excluded) be subject unto the higher powers: for there is no power 5
Reason.
but of God (if no power, then the power of a wicked Prince is from God) and
the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever threfore resists the power
resistteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. Here is a heavy penalty laid, not the confiscation of thy
goods, nor the quartering of thy body, but far worse, the everlasting damnation
^^th of soul and body in hell fire for ever.

Observe under what powers St. Paul lived, and to whom he command^ this
subjection, even to those Idolatrous, bloody Emperors, Claudi^s and Nero.

Neither is St. Paul alone, for St. Peter also joins with him, Submit your
selves to every ord^nance of man, for the Lords sake, unto the King as
supreme, for so is the will of God, 1 Pet. 2. 13* 15.

Sixthly, S^lomon counsels every wise man to keep the Kings Commandment, 6
Reason.
and that in regard of the oath of God. Eccles. 8. 1. 2. Here the Covenant made
by the people to obey the King is called, the oath of God. And who dare sin so
far against his own soul, as to break this oath of God by disobedience and
rebellion? Nor art thou, Read^r, fr^e from this oath of God, who have taken the
oaths of supremacy and Allegiance unto the King, and have so solemnly vowed to
keep the late Protestation, which includes them both.

But Solomon goes further, and tells us, The King does whatsoever pleases him,
where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what
do thou? Now by the common rule, Quod quaestiones affirmativ^ resolver^ntur
negative, the sense is, That none may say unto the King what do thou? How
none? Thou will say, may not his Judges? or if not they, may not the Captains
of his Host? o^ if not they may not his Princes and Nobles? or if not they, may
not the great Council of 70* Elders? mentioned Numb. 11. 16. The Script^res
answer, none may, none at all; for who may say unto the King, what do thou?
or (as Job asked the question) is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked? and
to Princes, Ye are ungodly? Job 34. 18,

Seventhly, God commands, Tou^h not mine anointed, Psalm. 105. 15. Therefore
^hou may not smite him, Therefore thou may not be^re 7 Reason.
arms against Gods anointed. But if thou should slay His anointed, which ^e
adventure thou may do, if thou fightest against Him, how hideous a monst^r
shall thou appea^e to be before the Lord in the day of Judgment?

Thou may not smite or curse the father of thy flesh, be he good, be ^^ bad.
Exodus 21. 15. 17. Prove. 20. 20. Nor set light by him. Deuteronomy. 27. 16. nor
withdraw thy obedience from him, Mal. 1. 16. Therefore much less may thou
smite or curse Gods anointed, or set light by him, or withdraw thy obedience
from him: whom not only the fifth Commandment enjoy^es thee to honor, Exodus
20. 12. but even the Heathens will tell thee, that he is more then thy Father,
for he is Pater tui, Pater Patrum, et Pater Patriae, The* Father of thee, the
Father of thy Fathers, and the Father of thy Country 8 Reason.


Eighthly, for subjects to take up arms against their own King, though an
Idolater and opressour, is contrary to the practice of Gods people in all ages,
for the Israilites were subject unto Pharoth, and though he was a Heathen and,
sore Oppressor, yet they were so far from rebellion, that they would not go
out of Egypt with out his leave. Exodus 4. 23. and 7. 16. 12. 31.

We read that Solomon was an Idolater. 1. K. 11. 15. and a great Oppressor,
chap. 12. 6. yet the Israelites patiently submitted unto his yoke and rebelled
not.

Abijah was an abominable Idolater, and an allower of sodomy, 1. K. 15. 3. 12.
yet his subjects rebelled not.

Ahab was an Idolater. 1. K. 16. 31. a slayer of Gods prophets, chap. 18. 4.
and an oppressor, Chap. 21, 19. yet his subjects r^belled not.

Manasseh was a great ^dolater and bloody Opressour, 2. K. 21. yet his subjects
rebelled not.

Ahasuerus was an Heathen, and by the false accusation of wicked Haman, made a
decree to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish all Jews, both young and
old, little children, and women, in one day: yet he Jews made use of no other
weapons, but what God had allowed, Mourning, fasting Weeping, and wailing, nd
would not defend themselves against that most unjust and bloody decree, till the
King had granted them leave at the request of Queen Esther* Esther 3. 13. and
chap. 4. 1. 3. 16. and chap. 8. 3. 11.

In breife, which of the Prophets did stir up the people to take up arms
against their Sovereign, though they lived under many Idolatrous and cruel
Princes? Nay, he^re what St. James writes, chap. 5, 10. Take my Brethren, the
Prophets for ensample of suffering adversity, and of long Patience.

Jeremiah, by the express commandment of God charged Zedekiah King of Judah,
and all his people, to be subject unto Nebuchadnezzard King of Babylon, chap.
27. 4. 8. 12. who was a great Opressour and Idolat^r. Dan. 1. 2, 3. and 3. 1.
19.

Christ our Savior taught us obedience unto the higher powers, by paying
tribute unto Caesar, and expressing how careful H^ was lest He, or any of His
Diciples should offend them. Matthew, 17. 25. 27 And He commands to render unto
Caesar the things which are Caesar's. chap. 22. 21. And when the officers of the
Jews took Him, and bound Him, and led Him, away to Annas and Caiph^s (John.
18. 12. 13.) it is testified, That he was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and
like a Lamb d^mbe before his shearer, so opened He no^ his mouth* Acts. 8. 32.
And even on the Cross, that shameful and cursed death of the cross, He
prays for His persecut^rs, Father for give them, for they know not what they
do, Luke 23. 34.

Behold, behold h^re thy Savior, and take not upon thee the name of Christian,
if thou will not imitate Christ. He was obedient to the laws of the Heathe^ish
Emperors of Rome; He commands thy obedience also, He patiently submi^s
himself unto the censure of those wicked Highpriests, and i^ the midst of His
bitter and unspeakeable Tortures on the Cross, His charity breaks forth in a
prayer for His tormentors. H^re is no taking up of arms, no doctrine of
disobedience unto thy King, no example of rebellion, God is not the auth^r of
confusion, but the Devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, 1 Cor. 14.
33. John. 8. 44.

The Apostles and Christians were subject and obedient unto the laws and
mercil^sse cruelties of the Heathenish and bloody Roman Emperors, blessing
their persecutors, being patient in tribulation, and always praying for their
enemies, as Justin Martyr writes, Ap^logia secunda, and Ambrose contra
Auxentium, and Tertullian in Apologitico. Yea, the Christians were obedient
unto that pro^^st enemy of Christ and hellish Tyrant Julian the Apostate: Se
Augustine upon Psalm 124.

Nor was this* because the Christians were then few in number, and unable to
resist, as some do wickedly aver to the great di^inuion both of the D^esse^
nobis* vi^num erorum ^tcop^arum? Externi sumus, et vestra omnia implevin
(...)bes insul^^, Castel^a, etc. Tertul.
glory of God, and praise of his Saints* but Tertullian gives the true reason,
Apn^ sectam Christian orum occidi licet, o^ idere non licet; According to the
Profession of the Christians, it is lawful to suffer death and be slain, but
it is not lawful to slay. The unlawfullnes ^f resisting ^as that which
restrained them. As for their number he relates Apolog. chap. 37. that the
Christians were so many, that all * Cities, Towns, Castles, F^rts and prisons
were filled with them. And also Cyprian ad Demetria^um* writes thus, N^m^
nostrum reluctat^r; quamvis* nimius et copiosus noster sit numerus, Non of us
do resist, a^though our; number be exceeding great and copious.

And certainly, if thou shall judge with righteous j^dgment no^ making flesh
thy arm, thou can not conclude either from the smalnesse of their number or
the slenderness of provision or defense, that the children of God in a lawful
and just cause warranted from God* word* were at any time unable to resist. The
Lord will keep the feet of his saint^, for by strength shall no man prevail.
1. Sam. 2. 9. There ^^ no King saved by the multitude of an h^st, a mighty man
is not delivered by much strength: A horse is a vain thing for safety. Psalm.
33. 16. 17. The battle is not to the strong. Eccles. 9 11.

Jonathan encouraging his Armor-bearer with this* That their is nor* strain^
to the Lord, to save by many or by few smote a garrison of the Philistines* and
procured thereby the destruction of the whole army, whose number was as the
sand which is on the sea shore in multitude. 1. Sam. 13. 5 and chap. 14. 4. 6.
14. 15. Unarmed David* upon the same ground that the Lord saves not with sword
and spear, for the battle is the Lords, assured himself that the Lord wou^d
deliver mighty Goliath into his hands, who had an helmet of brass upon his
head, and was armed with a coat of male: and the weight of the coat was 5000
sheckels of brass. And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of
brass between his shoulders. And the staff of his spear was like a weavers
b^am, and his spears head weighed 600 sheckels of Iron. chap* 17. 5. 6. 7, 47.
So Asa crying unto God and saying. Lord, it is nothing to thee to help, whether
with many, or with them that have no power Over^hrew Zerah and destroyed an cost
of Ethiopians consisting of a thousand thousan^, and three hundred charets. 2.
chr. 14. 9. 11. 13. this carried Iehoiada the Priest above all defficu^ties
against that bloody, usurping Queen Athal^ah, 2. chr. 24. This was the
Churches confidence in David's time, God is our refuge and strength, Therefore
will no^ we fear, though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be
carried into the midst of the sea The Lord of hosts is with us. Psalm. 46. 1. 2.
11. And with whom God is (as without doubt he is, was* and ever will be with
his church) how can they at any time be accounted unable to resist in a just
cause?

Do thou respect multitude, and is the Lord with the^? Elisha or King
Hezekiah will tell three that there be more with thee then against thee. 2. K.
6. 16. and 2 cor. 32. 7. do thou regard armies? the Lord breaks the bow and
cutteth the spear in sund^r, he b^^neth the chariat in the fire. Psalm. 46. 9.
It is therefore apparent, that if the children of God had had any warrant from
Gods word by force to resist the wickedness and cruelties of their lawf^ll
Sovereigns, they never wanted ability.

Ninthly, Gods heavy judgments upon those* who have taken up arms 9 Reason.
against their Prince, though an Idolater and oppressor, ought to be a warning
unto us how we do the like.

Amon was an Idolater, and his servants conspired against him, and slew him,
but the people of the Land (detesting such horrible treason*) slew all them
that had conspired against him. 2. K. 21. 21. 22 23. 24.

Nebuchadnezzar was an Idolater, cruel Tyrant, and type of Antichrist, yet
after that Iehoiakin had once yielded up his faith and service unto Him
(whereby he became his lawful Sovereign) the Lord was so offended with his
rebellion, that he sent not only against him bands of enemies, but also; gave
the land of Judah to destroy it, and the Lord gave him into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar, who buried him as an ass is buried, drawn and cast forth
without the gate of Jerusalem, 2. K. 24. 1. 2. Ier. 12. 19 Dan. 1. 2. Neither
was this a s^ffic^ent warning, but Zedekiah did also rebel, and was taken by
Nebuc^a^nezzar, who gave judgment upon him* and they flew the sons of Zedekiah
before his eyes and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him wi^h f^t^ers of
brass, and carried him to Babyl^n.

Lastly, To t^ke up arms against thy lawful Sovereign* though he be an
Idol^ter and ^ppres^^ur is contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England,
as it is delivered in the second part of the Book of H^milies, in the last
Hom^l: And also against the doctrine of the Fathers, Martyrs, and all holy men,
even from Chr^sts ^ime until these last hundred years; as you may s^e^t at
large proved in the Book, entitled, The subjests duty.

Bu^ what t^u^li^s thereso cle^r, which has not met with some opposition? Let
the servant^ do what they can, he envious man will find a time to sow tares
among the wheat, Matthew. 13. 25. 28. Howbeit no point of doctrine has been
longer nor, more generally received in Christ's Church then this has: for no
divine ever doubted thereof, until the wicked Jesuits began to flourish, who
have turned all Religion into policy, and to maintain their conspiracies,
treasons, stabbing, poisoning, banishing, deposing, and murdring of Princes,
have by corrupting the Word of God, endeavored to prove, That Subjects may and
ought to take up arms against, resist and slay their lawful Sovereign, if He
be an heretic and oppressor.

But that which is most to be lamen^ed* ^s, that many learned men, and
otherwise great lights and pillars of the Protestant Church, have through an
over ho^ and fiery* Zeal run into the same path with the Jesuits, using the
same arguments with them, and alike countenancing sedition and rebellion, to
the ruin both of Church and state where they prevail. And since their
arguments are by factious spirits, enemies to all peace and government, spread
abroad in these unhappy times of publiqu^ differences, I shall therefore,
Reader, for the full satisfaction o^ thy Conscience, set them down in order,
and according to the Word of God, render unto each a particular answer.

The first Objection.
David took up arms against Saul, who causelessly sought his life, 1 Samuel 22.
1, 2. and chap. 24. 18. Therefore Subjects may lawfully take up arms against
their Sovereign.

The Answer.
To this I answer, That it is falsely alleged that David took up arms
against Saul. For if we read the story of David, 1 Samuel we shall always find
him flying from one Town to another; never resisting, never sighting. And when
the Lord delivered Saul into his hand unawares in the Cave, in the Wilderness
of En-gedi, he did not lay hands on, or do the least hurt unto Saul; nay, he
acknowledged he committed ^n ^ffence of high presumption, and his heart smote
him, because he cut off Saul's skirt; n^r would he suffer his men to rise
against Saul, but diswaded them saying The Lord forbid that I should do this
thing unto my master the Lords anoint^d to stretch forth mine hand against him,
seeing he is anointed of the Lord, chap. 24.

Again, when the Lord deli^^red Saul into his hands in the hill of Hachilah,
and Abishai would have smote him; David forbad, saying, Destroy him not, for
who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless?
chapter 26. So that David's carriage toward Saul is worthy the imitation of all
faithful and religious Subjects. F^y we may from the causeless wrath of the
King, but resist and take up a^mes against Him* we may not, David shows us no
such example. And it is also observable* that though Saul maliciously and
unjustly pursued David, yet David continued in his duty toward Saul; always
speaking most honorably of him. And in testimony of his loyalty, when Saul did
but look^ behind him, David stooped with his face to the Earth, and bowed
himself; and presently after protests that he never sinned against him, 1 Samuel 24. 8, 11. whose loyalty unto Saul is further cleared, 2 Samuel 1. For when
the Amalekite brought him word that he had slain Saul, he took hold on his
clothes and rent them, and mourned and wept, and fasted until even, with
bitter lamentation over Saul. And commanded the Amalekite to be sl^in and said,
How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thy hands to destroy the Lords
anointed. Wherefore David cannot be made a pattern for 1 Samuel 16. 13. 16.
disloyalty and rebellion: yet he was anointed King before Saul knew him.

The second Objection.
When Saul answered, God do so and more also, for thou shall surely die,
J^nathan: The people said unto Saul, As the Lord lives, there shall not one
hair of of his head fall to the ground. So the people rescued Jonathan that he
died not. 1 Samuel 14. 44, 45. Therefore Subjects may resist their Sovereign.

The answer.
To answer this objection, it is necessary to observe the story as it is set
down* 1 Samuel 14. Where Saul charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be
the man that eats any food until evening. And what then followed? Certainly
an example of singular obedience in the people, for the Text says, That though
they were pressed with hunger, yet none of the people tasted any food; And
further, When the people were come into the wood, behold, the honey dropped, but
no man put his hand ^o his mouth, for the people feared the oath; only
Jonathan unwittingly dipped the end of his r^d in an honeycomb, and put his hand
to his mouth. Presently one of the people told Jonathan ^^ his fathers charge,
and in effect that he had broken it. And the Lord himself because of this
sin refused to answer Saul when he drew near to him for counsel, v. 36 37,
38. Then Saul called all the chief of the people together, to know by whom this
sin was done; and the people, like obedient subjects sai^ (as before in the 36
verse,) Do what seems good unto thee. The lot then fell upon Jonathan,
Io^athan confesses, and in confessing excuses his fault saying, I did but
taste a little honey with the end of my rod, and lo, I must die. Saul answers,
thou shall sur^ly die, Jonathan. Then the people began to meditate, and said
unto Saul, shall Jonathan die? (As if they should say shall thy son die? thy son
Jonathan whom thou love ^o dearly? v 39. shall he die? he, who heard not
when thou did charge the people with the oath? v. 27. he, who has wrought
this day great salvation in Israel? God forbid. (Let God hinder thee from ^his
deed; God in whose power only it is, let him forbid thee) as the Lord lives
(that is most certainly, most assuredly, God shall so turn Liberav^runt,
Hieron. redemerunt. Jun. and Trem. vide Greg. ^ ag. in Reg. cap. 14.
thy heart that) there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground: for
he has wrought with God this day. So the people (by their mediation and
entreaty) rescued, or freed, or redeemed, or delivered Jonathan, that he died
not.

Here is nothing but obedience to Saul's commands, nothing but loyalty. And
therefore thou abusest the Scriptures to allege this place for rebellion and
taking up Arms against thy Sovereign.

The third Objection.
The ten Tribes of Israel rebelled against Rehoboam, and set up a King amongst
themselves because he refused to ease them of the heavy yoke which 1 K. 12.
his father Sol^mon had laid upon them. And when Rehoboam had raised an army to
reduce them unto obedience, the Lord forbad him, saying, Ye shall not go up,
nor fight against your brethren the children of Israel, return every one to his
house, f^r this thing is from me. Where the Lord does approve thereof.
Therefore Subjects may lawfully rebel against their Sovereign, if he be an
oppressor.

The Answer.
It is true the ten Tribes of Israel rebelled and made Jeroboam their King, and
it is true the Lord forbad Rehoboam to fight against them, saying, Ye shall not
fight against your brethren, for this thing is from me. But in what sense?

Thou must consider herein two things; First, the Action: Secondly, the evil
in that action. The Action was the making of Jeroboam King* and this action was
good, and was from the Lord, 1 K. 11. 31. And in respect of this, Jeroboam was
their lawful King. But the evil in that action which was their falling off,
and withdrawing their obedience from Rehoboam, and rebellion, was from
themselves, their proud and corrupt natures; And i^ respect of this, Jeroboam
was an usurper; as he confesses himself, 1 K. 12. 27. If this people go up to
do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at J^^usalem, then shall the heart of this
people return again unto their Lord, even to Rehoboam.

But you will reply, the Scriptures say not that this action only of making A
doubt.
the King was from the Lord, but this thing, that is* the whole business was
from the Lord. And therefore the withdrawing of their obedience and rebellion
was also from the Lord.

I answer, it is true, their rebellion may also be said to be from the Lord;
Resolved.
but how? Non voluntate Deiefficiente, sed permittente; not that this was
wrought or approved by the Lord, but because this as all other sins are, was
permitted and suffered by the Lord, who gave them up to uncleanness through
the lusts of their own flesh, Romans 1. 24. And mark what followed, They left
all the Commandments of the Lord their God, and made them molten images, even
two Calves, and made a grove, and worshipped all the host of Heaven, and served
Baal. And they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire,
and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil in the
sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger. Therefore the Lord was very angry
with Israel, and removed them out of his sight; there was none left but the
T^ibe of Judah only. And the Lord rejected all the seed of Israel, and
afflicted them, and delivered them into the hands of spoilers, until he had
cast them out of his sight. The prime cause and reason of all which, is here
given, For He re^t Israel from the house of David, and they made J^roboam the
son of Nebat King, and Jeroboam drove Israel from following the Lord, and made
them sin a great sin. For the children of Israel walked in all the sins of
Jeroboam which he did, they departed not from them, until the Lord removed
Israel out of his sight. So was Israel carried away out of their own Land to
Assyria unto this day, 2 K. 17.

See here an example of rebellion, and what a dreadful and unparaleld
judgment followed. They were rent from the people of God, given up to their
own corruptions* cast out of Gods sight, delivered into the hands of spoilers;
and at length carried into p^rpetuall captivity. Grant, O Lord, th^^ by thy
judgments the inhabitants of the world may learn righteousness* I^a. 26. 9.

The fourth Objection.
When Joram King of Israel sent to take away the head of Elisha, as he sat in
his house with the Elders, ere the messenger came to him, he said to the
Elders, see ye how this son of a murderer has sent to take away mine head?
Look when the messenger comes, shut the door, and hold him fast at the
door. 2 K 6 32. Therefore to preserve our life, we may resist the Kings
Officers, and by consequence the King.

The Answer.
This conclusion is not rightly inferred. For it is one thing to hold a
messenger fast; and another thing to resist, strike, or slay him. The former
does delay the execution o^ the Kings command; the latter is a high contempt of
his power. But if we observe the text, Elisha had just cause to command what he
did; not so much to preserve his own life, as to perform the will of the King.
For as God had revealed unto him the coming of the messenger, and his message:
So he likewise revealed unto him, that Joram was sorry for sending the
messenger, and that he himself was coming after with all speed to recall his
command. This is implied in the reason which he gives, why they should shut the
door and hold him fast at the door* to wit, is not the sound of his masters
feet behind him? As if he should say, hold the messenger a while, Mox enim Rex
ipse aderit, mandati jam paenitens, For by and by the King himself will be
here, who at this very time repents him of his message.

Joseph. Antiqu. Jud. l. 9. c. 2. Theodoret, in 4. Reg. Interrogat. 22 Lyra, to
whom (if need were) I could add many modern interpreters, who all agree in
this Exposition.

Wherefore this endeavor of Elisha to hinder the execution of that command,
whereof he knew the King repented, and which the king in person did haste to
prevent, was no resisting nor disobedience, but his duty and the ready means to
effect the will and desire of his Sovereign.

The fifth Objection.
Jehu conspired against the said Joram, and killed him, 2 K. 9. 14. 24. and was
approved and rewarded by God, chapter 10. 30. Therefore to kill a wicked Prince is
lawful.

The Answer.
This act of Jehu was extraordinary, and by the particular command of God, as
appears by the words of the young Prophet, when he powered the Oil on his
head, 2 K. 9. 6, 7. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I have anointed thee
King over the people of the Lord, even over Israel. And thou shall smite the
house of Ahab thy master. Therefore what Jehu did in obedience unto the
special revealed will of God, cannot be a pattern for us.

So Peter Martyr, loc. com. ^lass. 4. c. 20. Vnum tantum Jehu contra Dominum
suum armavit Deus: quod ut peculiare fuit, ita non est in exemplum trahendum:
God armed one only Iehu against his Lord and master: which because it was
peculiar and extraordinary, is not to be drawn into example. And a little after
he has this observation, Certe si populo sit fas Regno deijcere injuste
imperantes, nulli Principes, aut Reges usquam tuti erunt; quamvis enim probe ac
sancte regant, non tamen populo satisfaciunt: If it be lawful for the people
to depose those who govern unjustly, then verily no Princes or Kings shall
ever be safe; for though they may rule well and uprightly, yet perhaps they do
not satisfy the people.

The sixth Objection.
They who make the King, may depose the King, and consequently take up arms
against Him; But the people make the King, as you see in the first of Sam. 11.
15. And all the people went to Gilgal, and made Saul King there. So 2 King. 14.
21. And all the people of Judah took Azariah, and made him King, for his father
Ahaziah.

The Answer.
To which I answer, That in strict and true understanding, the people do not
make the King, but God properly and absolutely makes the King. He is declared
by the people, but he is appointed by God. Outward Solemnization or Coronation
he has from the people, but his Power, Right, and Authority he has from God.
And more particularly (as the Scriptures deliver) from the second person in the
most sacred Trinity. Isa. 9. 6. Prove. 8. 15. Coloss. 1. 16. 1 Timothy 6. 15.
Revel. 17. 14. Who is God over all blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5.

This is evidently set forth in Holy writ, for God sent Moses to be a ruler.
Acts. 7. 35. And God appointed Joshua over the congregation of Israel. Numb.
27. 16. 18. The Lord raised up the Judges. Judge. 2. 16. The Lord anointed Saul
to be Captain over his inheritance. 1 Samuel 10. 1. And though Saul was afterward
chosen by the casting of the lot, yet The whole disposing thereof was of the
Lord, Prove. 16. 33. 1 Samuel 10. 24. and 14. 41. Afterward the Lord says, I
have rejected Saul from reigning over Israel: For I have provided me a King
among the sons of Iesse, 1 Samuel 16. 1. I gave thee, O Israel, a King in mine
anger, and I took him away in my wrath, Hosh. 13. 11. And 1 King. 13. 2. a
Prophet told Jeroboam of Josiah King of Judah, three hundred and twenty years
before his reign. Neither was Gods power of disposing Kingdoms limited only
unto Judah and Israel, but it was, is, and ever shall be, extended over the
whole world. He is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: by him Kings reign, Prove.
8. 15. Not this King only, or that King, but Kings, all Kings whatsoever. Moa^,
says God, is my wash-pot, over Edom will I cast my shoe: over Philistia will I
triumph, Psalm. 108. 9. I have made the earth by my great power, and have given
it unto whom it pleased me, and now I have given all those lands into the hand
of Nebuchadnezzar my servant* and all nations shall serve him, and his son, and
his sons son, until the very tim of his land com^: and then many Nations and
great Kings shall serve themselves of ^^m* Jer. 27 5 6, 7. Thus says the Lord
to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose righ hand I have holden to subdue Nations
before him, I will go before thee, I will break in pieces the gates of brass
and I will give thee the hidden r^ches of secret places, that thou may know
that I the Lord, which call thee by thy name am the God of Israel, Isa. 45.
Where God shows, that all Kings are by his particular appointment, in that he
called Cyrus by his name above 180. years before his reign.

And Daniel* Chap. 2. 21. God changes the times and the seasons: he removes
kings and sets up kings. And Chap. 4. 17. The most High rules in the
kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the
bas^st of men: which is confirmed in the same Chap. verse. 31. by a voice from
Heaven. Daniel told Belshazzar in the very height of his glory, that God h^d
finished his kingdom, and given it to the Medes and Persians, Chap. ^. 26, 28.
And his Prophecy from the seventh Chap. to the end of his book, is a ^elation
how God would govern the world, what Empires there should be, what King and
Kingdoms even in particular.

Whence It is abundantly proved, that God is the sole disposer and maker of
Kings and Kingdoms, and that he gives them according to his good pleasure and
will. And therefore the Scriptures call the King The Lords Anointed. Gods
Vic^gerent, 2 Chr. 9. 8. The Minister of God, because he is ordained of God,
Romans 13. 4. But he is never called the peoples Anointed, or the Minister of the
people. But though God be Almighty, Genesis 17. 1. and can do whatsoever he
pleases without means, and therefore can immediately by himself call
whomsoever unto the Sovereignty, as he did Moses, Ex 3. 10. and Gid^on, Jud. 6.
14. yet it has pleased him for the most part to make use of second and outward
means, whereby he has given the Sovereignty unto whom he has ordained it. And
those means or ways as the Scriptures have revealed unto us were eitheir
Extraordinary or Ordinary.

The extraordinary means or ways were three: First, by special Messengers
from God himself; And so God gave the Sovereignty to Joshua by (...)s^s N^m
27. 22, 23. And unto Saul, David, and Jehu, by his Prophets.

(...)na^^ by lot. And so the Lord chose Saul out of all the Tribes of (...)d
that after he was a^ointed, 1 Samuel 10. 1, 20, 24.

(...) the Kings last Will and Testament, though he had a Son and (...) And
thus David by revelation from God appointed Solo(...), though Adonijah was the
lawful Heir unto the (...) 1. 15. 1 Ch^. 29. 1.

The ordinary (and still continued) ways or means were two: First, by the
Sword or Conquest. Thus Abimelech, by the help of the Schechemites, his mothers
kindred, obtained the S^veraignty over Israel, Jud. 9. 1, 6. Thus
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon obtained the Kingdom of Judah, 2 King. 24. 1.
Thus Cyrus obtained many Nations, Isa. 45. 1.

Secondly, by birth right or hereditary succession. Thus Rehoboam succeeded
Solomon, Abijah Rehoboam, Asa Abijah, Iehoshaphat Asa. And it is plain that
Birthright was a very great privilege, as you may see, Genesis 4. 7. and 25 5.
Exodus 13. 1. and 22* 29.

As touching those extraordinary means, they belong not unto us, unless to
remember the Lord in all his ways, Isa 64. 5, and to say with David Lord, how
manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all, Psalm. 104. 24.

The ordinary means are those which we are to look after. And without doubt,
Birthright is to be preser'd before Conquest. For the sword is a terrible
plague, never laid upon a land but for the sins thereof. Levit. 26. 33. J^^.
24. 9, 10. and 25. 16, 29. And the Conqueror is the rod of Gods wrath, Isa.
10. 5. Lam. 3. 1. A hammer, Jer. 50. 23. The Lords Battel-ax, Chap. 51. 20. But
succ^ssion is a blessing both to Prince and people, 2 Samuel 7. 12. 13. 16. 2
King. 10. 30. Psalm. 128. 6.

Observable it is, That thorowout the whole Scriptures we read not of any King
that was chosen by the voice of the people: Nor of an Aristocracy, which is,
where the Nobles govern: Nor of a Democracy, which is, where the people govern:
And therefore let them consider how they can answer it at the last day, who
shall endeavor to change an hereditary Kingdom into an elective, or any other
government whatsoever.

Now to apply what has been said unto the objection. I answer, That that power
which makes the King, may undoubtedly depose the King, which power is God. As
to the Minor, if you affi^m that the people do properly and absolutely make
the King, it is then false. Neither do the places alleged prove it. For in the
1 Samuel 11. 15. the peoples making of Saul King in Gilgal, was nothing else but
the peoples further and mo^e general acknowledgement (then they had formerly
made at Mizpeh) that Saul was their lawful King. And in the verse going
before, it is called, The renewing of the Kingdom.

To the second proof out of the 2 King. 14. 21. that the people made Azariah
king. I answer, That the Scriptures intend no more in that place, but that the
people Crowned, declared, and received Azariah for their lawful King, which
according to the apprehension of common people may be said a making of the
King: But if we speak strictly and properly, God made Azariah King. He called
him, and he only gave unto him his power, right and authority by hereditary
succession, as being Son and Heir apparent unto his Father Amaziah, though the
declaration and outward celebration thereof was from the people.

The seventh Objection.
If the King break the trust reposed in him by his Subjects, then his Subjects
may lawfully take up Arms against him: but by idolatry and oppression, the King
breaks the trust reposed in him by his Subjects. Therefore for Idolatry and
Oppression his Subjects may lawfully take up Arms against him.

The Answer.
This Objection is raised from a false ground. For the King has not dominion
and power from his Subjects by way of trust, but from God, whose Steward he is,
and from whom he has both his kingdom and power. So that by Idolatry and
Oppression the King breaks not the trust reposed in him by God, and of which
one day he shall give an account unto God, Romans 14. 12. Indeed Subjects may
expect from the King performance of his duty in the well-governing of his
Kingdom according to the Laws of God, and the particular Laws of the Country,
so far forth as they are not contrary to the Laws of God; and they, who are in
fit place may exhort him thereunto: But this expectation of the Subjects is no
trust, nor if the King fail their expectation, does he break their trust
reposed in Him, because the people have committed nothing to his charge. For as
he has his kingdom from God, so also from God he has all power requisite to
so high a calling, whereby he obtains from his people both fear and love; and
without which, he were rather the picture and image of a king, then a king.

And that we might not plead ignorance, the Scriptures have clearly set forth
unto us some particulars, wherein his royal power does consist: as,

By him War is proclaimed, 2 Chr. 13. 4. By him a Peace is concluded, 1 King.
15. 19. by him the people are assembled: By him the people are dismissed, Josh.
24. 1, 28. 1 King. 8. 1. 66. By him a Law is made: By him a Law is repealed, 1 Samuel 14. 24, 34. Ezra 1. 1. and Chap. 4. 21. By him Offenders are pardoned, 2 Samuel 14. 21. By him all Officers are chosen and established, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, That is, whether they belong to Church or State: Or
(to use the phrase of holy Writ) for every matter pertaining to God and affairs
of the King, 1. Chro. 26. 32. See Chapters 23. 24, 25. 27. Genesis 41. 33, 34 41.
Exodus 18. 25, 26. 2 ^am. 23. 23. 1 King. 4 3. unto verse. 20. 2 Chr. 17. 7, 8.
and Chap. 19. 5 8. and Chap. 25. 5. and Chap. 29. 21, 25, 27, 30. and Chap. 31.
2. 5. 9. 11, Nehem. 5. 14, 15. Hest. 3. 1. and Chap. 6. 11. Dan. 2. 48, 49. and
Chap. 6. 1, 2.

By him all Arms and Fortifications are disposed and ordered, 2 Samuel 8. 14. 1
K. 9. 15, 17, 18, 19. 2 Chr. 8. 2. 3 4, 5, 6. and chap. 14. 6 7. and chapter 17.
12, 13, 19. and chapter 26. 9. unto verse. 16. and chapter 27. 3, 4. and chapter 32 5 6, 29.
Neh. 7. 1 2, 3.

In a word, all honor, power, and justice, are in him, and from him. Whence it
is manifest, the King has not his Realm nor Power by way of trust from his
Subjects; and therefore the Argument is drawn from a false Principle.

The eighth Objection.
If Subjects may never resist their Sovereign then they must obey him in his
unlawful commands, but this is contrary to Gods Word, Prove. 4. 26, 27. Amos 5:
14. Romans 12. 9. We ought rather to obey God then men, Act. 5. 29. Therefore in
unlawful commands Subjects may resist.

The Answer.
To answer this Objection, we must remember that there is a twofold obedience,
Active and Passive.

The Active obedience is to do what we are required: which obedience we ought
to yield to our Sovereign when he commands that which is lawful.

The Passive obedience, is with meekness and constancy to bear the
afflictions whereunto God has appointed us, 1 These. 3. 3. Which obedience we
ought to yield unto our Sovereign when he commands that which is unlawful.
Thus Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego willingly submitted themselves unto
Nebuchadnezzer, to be cast into the fiery Furnace, rather then to worship the
golden Image, Dan. 3. 17, 18. And Daniel willingly submitted himself unto
Darius, to be cast into the Den of Lyous, rather then to observe his idolatrous
decree, Dan. 6. 7, 10.

Of this obedience is that which our Savior preached unto his Disciples in the
Mount, Matthew. 5. 10, 11, 12. Blessed are they which are persecut^d for
righteousness sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when
men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is
your r^ward in Heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before
you.

And Saint Peter exhorts us unto the same, 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try
you, as though some strange thing happened unto you, but rejoice in as much as
ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings. If ye be reproached for the Name of
Christ happy are ye. But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief,
or as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters. Yet if any man
suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed.

God therefore does always require thy obedience unto thy Prince: If his
commands be lawful, then thou must obey him actively, by executing his will;
if unlawful, then thon must obey him passively, by submitting thy self unto
his punishment. So that there can be no cause or color for thy disobedience,
no ground for thy resistance, unless thou will obey neither God nor man.

The O^jections being fully answered, this truth delivered in Gods Word
remains firm and unshaken, That Subjects may not take up Arms against their
lawful Sovereign, because he is wicked and unjust; no, though he be an
Idolater and Oppressor.

But tell me, Reader, if thou can, where the Scriptures allow thee to take up
Arms against thy lawful Sovereign, who is a meek and patient See His
Maj(...) answer to the 19. Propositions.
Moses, a tender hearted David; no Idolater, but a strict and careful
maintainer of Gods true Religion, and such a one, whom his very adversaries
acknowledge to be, The Defender of the true, ancient, Catholic and
Apostolical faith. In whom Gods graces are so eminent, that though hellish
spirits have and do daily foame out their malice against him, yet there is not
one who has or can tax him with unchastity, malice, pride, cruelty,
profaneness, negligence of Gods service, or any other notorious vice; except
his denial of giving away his birthright be a breach of his Royal duty, as
the auhour of the Sovereign Antidote would feign persuade us to believe,
without proof. p. 9.


Nor can thou justly say, he is an Oppressor, for he has not only taken
away all Monopolies, Shipmoney, and all other grievances from the people, but
he has by public Act damned them for ever. And further to show his justice
and Princely clemency, he has in this Parliament passed many excellent and
profitable Acts unto his people; which, if we knew when to be satisfied, would
yield in few years more then an hundred sold recompense for all our damages.

But what Religion art thou of, who carriest the Kings faults so long in thy
mind, with a desire of revenge? Do thou say in the Lords Prayer, Forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us? and yet bear
thou a grudge toward thy Prince? Christ our Savior tells us, Matthew. 6. 15. If
ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive
your trespasses. And Saint Paul commands, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and
anger and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice.
And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as
God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4. 31 32. and yet will thou
never cease thy wrath and evil speaking against thy King? will thou never
forgive him? Thou owe unto God more then ten thousand Talents, Matthew. 18. 24.
And be assured, (for Christ has said it) God will not forgive thee that great
sum, if thou do not from thy heart forgive thy brother, especially thy King,
that petty debt which he owes, and those small trespasses which he has done
unto thee.

Oh consider! weigh the cause seriously, enter into thine own heart. Against
whom do thou rise up? Whom do thou oppose? Is it not the Lords Anointed? is
he not thy Father, thy Master, thy Head, thy Lord, and Sovereign? Have thou
forgotten how for rebellion Korah and his company, and all that appertained to
them went down alive into the pit, and the Earth closed upon them? Numb. 16.
32, 33. Was not traitorous Absolon hanged in an Oak, thrust thorough the heart
with three Darts, while he was yet alive, and afterward cast into a pit? 2 Samuel 18. 9, 14, 17. And shall thou glory in thy rebellion against thy lawful,
thy peaceable, thy religious Prince, and yet think to escape the judgments of
God?

The Scriptures go yet higher, and tell thee, that to oppose thy Sovereign,
is to oppose the Lord himself. Korah rebelling against Moses, is said to
rebel against the Lord, Numb. 27. 3. And the people in rejecting Samuel,
rejected the Lord that He should not reign over them* 1 Samuel 8. 7.

And not only opposing or resisting is against the Lord; but also not to help
thy Sovereign, is not to help the Lord. The inhabitants of Meros in not
helping Deborah their Sovereign, Judge. 4. 4. against Iabin King of Canaan, are
said not to help the Lord, and are therefore by the Lord accursed, chapter 5. 23.
Curse ye Meros, (said the Angel of the Lord) Curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants
thereof; because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty. If God has said such a heavy, such a fearful curse on
those who do not assist their Sovereign; Oh! what a hideous and dreadful
vengeance does attend them who oppose and take up Arms against their
Sovereign? Consider this ye that forget God, l^st he tearo you in piece and
there be none to deliver you, Psa. 50. 22.

An Evasion.
But thou will answer, That thou do not take up Arms against the King, but
against His evil Counselors.

The Reply.
To which I reply, That this distinction of taking up Arms against evil
Counselors and not against the King, is not to be admitted.

First, because it is a late new invented distinction, coined on purpose to
shadow over the ugly face of rebellion; having no color or ground either in
the Scriptures or Fathers. Whereas truth is ancient, and the lip of truth shall
be established for ever, Prove. 12. 19.

Secondly, because it is a vain distinction. For to oppose and resist the
Kings officers, especially his Counselors, who are his chiefest and highest
Officers, is to oppose and resist the King himself, because the power which
they have is not from themselves but from the King, who imparts it unto them.
And therefore David esteemed Nabals churlishness unto his servants and
messengers as done unto himself, and had destroyed Nabal and his family, had
not Abigail, Nabals wife, pacified him, 1 Samuel 25. 10, 14, 22, 23. So David
accounted that which Joab did unto Abner and Amasa, whom he slew, as done unto
him: and commanded Solomon to slay Joab, 1 Kin. 2. 5 6, 31. So Vasthi refusing
to come by the Chamberlaines, who were by King Ahasuerus commanded to bring
her, is said, not to have performed the Commandment of the King, and to have
done wrong unto the King: for which offense she was put away, Esther 1. 11, 15,
16, 19. Hence it is that our Savior says unto his Disciples, He that
despises you, despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me, Luke 10. 16.

Thirdly, because it is contrary to Gods Word, 1 Pet. 13. 14, 15. Submit your
selves unto every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the
King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him. For so
is the Will of God that with well-doing you may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men. Now who are nearer the King then his Counselors? and who can more
properly be called Governors then then they, who sit at the stern, guiding the
Commonwealth?

But le^t thou should think that S. Peter enjoyneth thy obedience only unto
good Governors, such as do right, and execute justice, he sets down in the
19, 20, 21, verses, This is thank worthy if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief, suffering wrong fully. For what glory is it, if when ye be
buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well,
and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even
hereunto were ye called; because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example that ye should follow his steps. Whereby it is plain that S. Peter
intended ou^ submission even unto evil Magistrates, evil Governors, and
consequently to evil Counselors.

And it is observable, that S. Paul, Romans 13. 1. commands, every soul to be^
subject to the higher powers, in the plural number; to teach us, that we must
be obedient, not only to the highest powers, to all powers which are above us.
But when he speaks of resisting, he speaks in the singular number, Whosoever
resists the power, to teach us, that we may not resist any one power, though
it be in a member or inferior Magistrate, because it is derived from the King,
who is the head of all power, and is ordained of God; and therefore he that
resists the power (though it be subordinate) resists the Ordinance of God.

Here you will say, that what S. Paul calls the Ordinance of God, S. Peter A
doubt.
in the place before cited calls the Ordinance of man, therefore the Apostles
seem not to agree.

This is easily resolved; For S. Paul speaks of the efficient cause, and
Resolved.
that is God, who only makes the King, and ordains all powers, and so every
power is the Ordinance of God. But S. Peter speaks of the final cause, and
that is man, for whose good, peace, and welfare, all power is ordained, and so
every power is the Ordinance of man, because it is by God vouchsafed for the
profit of man, Bucan. Loc. com. 49. 16.

And since there is no cause so bad but something is or may be said in excuse
thereof, I shall therefore Reader, for the satisfaction of thy conscience
(being desirous to remove the least scruple) set down by way of objection those
two places of the Scriptures, which are alleged for the taking up of Arms
against evil Counselors, and render unto each a respective answer, though in
truth the premises and conclusion be at defiance.

The first Objection.
It is expressly commanded, Prove. 25. 5. Take away the wicked from before the
King, and his throne shall be established in righteousness; therefore Subjects
may take up Arms to remove evil Counselors from the King.

The Answer.
To which I answer, That the command there given is not to the people, nor to
the Elders, nor to any Council or assembly, but to the King himself, whose
duty it is to take away the wicked from before him. And this is cleared:

First, by comparing this place (as Iunius and Tremellius do) with Prove. 20.
8. where it is plainly said, A King that sits in the Throne of judgment,
scatters away all evil with his eyes.

Secondly, by David's profession and practice, Psalm. 101. 3, 6, 8. I will set no
wick^d thing before mine eyes. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the
Land, that they may dwell with me. I will early destroy all the wicked of the
land.

Thirdly, by the joint consent of all Translators of the Bible, who give this
exposition of the words, that it is not enough that the King be pure himself,
but that he put away others that be corrupted. Therefore the person to whom
S^lomon speaks in the text alleged, is the King.

The second Objection.
Phinehas his ze^le in slaying Z^mri and Cozbi was counted unto him for
righteousness, Psalm. 106. 30, 31. and was rewarded by GOD with an everlasting
Priesthood, Number. 25. 8, 13. Therefore to take up Arms against, nay, to sl^y
evil Counselors is lawful.

The Answer.
Here is a conclusion drawn from premises which are nothing at all pertinent
thereunto. For Zimri and Cozbi were no Counselors unto Moses, who was then
Sovereign; Zimri being the son of Sal^, a Prince among the Simeonites, and
Cozbi the daughter of Zur, of a chief house in Midian, Number. 24. ^4* 15.
Neither can this act of Phinehas be made a pattern to all posterity. For then
it would follow, that a Priest or Minister of Gods word finding a man and
woman, yea a Prince and Princess, in the act* of whoredom* may lawfully kill
them. But this is most repugnant to the Scriptures, because no Divine may
execute the material sword. Wherefore this act of Phinehas was by the special
instigation of Gods Spirit, and not for our imitation.

Thus, Reader, thou see the weakness of the objections, and therefore can
not but conclude that this distinction of taking up Arms against evil
Counselors, and not against the King* is a new, frivolous* groundless
distinction, contrary to the Scriptures, and a mere Cloak to hide the horrid
and hateful sin of ^ebellion from the eyes of the weaker Christians. Take heed
then l^st thou be hardened through the decei^fulnesse of sin. Heb. 3* 13. Look
to thy end, and remember that in the place where the tree falls, there shall
it be, Eccles. 11. 3. Die for the Lord when God calls thee unto it for his
glory; but be assured thou die neither for, nor in the Lord (without Gods
extraordinary mercy) if thou cast away thy life in a cause which Gods word will
not warrant.

By me (says Christ the power and wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24.) Princes
rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth, Prove. 8. 16. If all Nobles
and Judges, then certainly all Counselors, though some may be evil. And
therefore to use the words of Gamaliel, Acts 5. 38. 39. Refrain from these men
and let them alone, for if their counsel or their work be of men it will come
to naught: but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, l^st happily ye be
found even to fight against God.

The second Evasion.
But thou will tell me, that thou take* up Arms in obedience to public
command and authority; and therefore do nothing but what is warrantable and
lawful.

The Answer.
It Is true thy obedience to public authority is lawful and necessary; for God
does require it, Tit. 3. 1. yet before thou yield thy active obedience
thereunto, be sure that ^oth the command and authority to which thou yeeldest,
and also the thing commanded and authorized, be agreeable to the Laws of God,
and warrantable by the Laws of the Land* wherein thou live. For if the
public command be unlawful, then is thy obedience thereunto also unlawful;
as, the obedience of the men of Israel in going to their tents, and forsaking
of David their King at the command of traitorous Sheba, was plain rebellion, 2 Samuel 20. 1, 2. Or, if the thing commanded be unlawful, then is thy obedience
also unlawful; as, those men sinned in casting the three Children into the
fiery furnace, at the commandment of Nebuchada^zzar, and for their wickedness
were slain by the flame of the fire, Dan. 3. 20, 22.

And indeed, when the act is unlawful, the public command and authority is
so far from diminishing or lessening the offense, that it does exceedingly
aggravate and increase it. Ephra^m is oppressed (says Hosea 5. 11.) and brok^n
in judgment; because he willingly walked after the Commandment; to wit, of
Jeroboam. Micah speaks of S^atutes of Omri, cap. 6. 16. take heed how thou*
keep them. And there is a throne of iniquity, which frames mischief by a
Law, Psalm. 94* 20.

Wherefore adventure not thy talent, thy life, and therewithal thy salvation
upon any authority or Ordinance of man, without a due and full examination
thereof between God and thy conscience, applying all to the only sure rule and
touchstone of truth, The Word of God. Not ought thou to fear the danger of
bringing the authority or commands of men unto this trial, for thou have a
warrant from S. Paul so to do, 1 These. 5. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that
which is good. And 1 Cor. 10. 15. he refers himself to the Corinthians,
Judge ye what I say. And Act. 17. 10, 11. The Bereans are accounted more Noble
then those in Thessaloni^a, in that they received the Word with all readiness
of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so; as
Paul preached.

If then the doctrine and commands of the Apostles, (who were filled with the
Holy Ghost, Act. 2. 4.) were subject unto this examination, how can the Laws
and commands of men now adays be above it, or in any wise freed from it? So
long as men are capable of error, so long are they subject unto examination.
And what man what Council may not err? That Royal Statute and firm Decree,
though consulted of, and presented to Darius by all the Presidents of the
Kingdom, the Governors, and the Princes, the Counselors and the Captains, was
but a faction and conspiracy to take away the life of Daniel. D^n 6. 4 5 6, 7.

Did not the Apostles err for a while in not believing the resurrection of
Christ? Luke 24 11. Did not Peter err in withdrawing himself from the Gentiles
through fear, and joining with the Jews? Galat. 2. 11, 12. whole councels, as
well gen^rall, as Provincial, though consisting of none but learned Divines,
have been carried by a faction and erred in the very fundamentals of Divinity.
And why may not a Synod in these days, whereof some only are pious, learned,
and Orthodox, err in like manner? Or an Assembly spr^nkled with Lawyers, err
in a point of Law?

Here Tertullian, Apologet. adversus Gentes. c. 4. Si Lex rua erravit, puto ab
homine concepta ^st neque enim de caelo ruit. Miramini hominem aut errare
potuisse in lege condenda, aut resipuiss^ in reprobanda? Nonne and ipsius
Lycurgi leges a Lacedemoniis emendatae? If thy Law has erred, I suppose it was
framed by man: for it did not come down from Heaven. Do you wonder that man
could err in making a Law, or repent for rejecting a Law? Were not the laws of
Lycurgus himself corrected by the Lacedaemonians?

Let us therefore search and try our ways, Lam. 3. 40. Let us not pin our
faith, our life, and salvation unto another man's elbow. Gods word declares unto
us manifestly, that it is not lawful for us to take up Arms against our
Sovereign, and it will not avail us at the last day to say, We did it by
authority of man. Every one shall bear his own burden: the Seducer shall not
excuse him who is seduced. If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into
the pit, Matthew. 15. 14. The soul that sins, it shall die, Ezekiel: 18. 4. And
remember S. Paul's curse, Gal. 1. 8. Though we (says he) or an Angel from
Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you then that which we have preached unto
you, let him be accursed.

The third Evasion.
But thou will say, If Subjects may never resist, then may the Prince govern
according to his own will and pleasure, and so may bring his Subjects into
bondage, slavery, and all evils and inconveniences whatsoever: which is
contrary to nature and reason to admit.

The Answer.
If we may deny or reject a truth delivered in Gods Word, because of evils and
inconveniences which might hereby happen unto us, then the whole frame of
Divinity will be soon overturned. We know, That the doctrine of God* eternal,
free, and unchangeable decree of reprobation, has brought many into the sin of
despair: The doctrine that true repentance is never too late, has led many
into the sin of presumption: The doctrine of assurance of salvation, has bred
in some a p^oud selfconceitednesse and contempt of their brethren. The doctrine
of justification by faith only, and not by works, has drawn many into a
neglect of Almes-giving. And what has been, may be, yet we neither do nor
must reject the foresaid doctrines; though indeed if we respect the evils and
inconveniences, they ought so much the rather to be rejected, by how much the
greater and more dangerous are the evils; for these evils are spiritual, and
tend to the destruction both of soul and body for ever; whereas the doctrine
of not resisting the King can only expose us (if we offend God) to evils
temporal and momentany.

But O man, who art thou that reply against God? shall the thing formed say
to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Romans 9. 20. Has not God
power over thine eternal estate to dispose thereof according to his will, and
do thou g^udge him to dispose of thy temporal estate, thy goods, thy Lands
thy life, or what is most dear? Will thou reject the Word of God because it
seems inconvenient to thee? dare thou say, the way of the Lord is not
equal? Ezekiel. 18. 25. God commands thy obedience unto thy Sovereign, though he
be wicked and unjust, and will thou plead dangers, evils, and inconveniences
against Gods command? Ohllet not arrogance come out of thy mouth, for the Lord
is a God of knowledge, and by Him actions are weighed, 1 Samuel 2. 3.

Cease from thine own wisdom, Prove. 23. 4. Advise not with nature. For the
natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of GOD, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Thou must deny thy self, and take up thy cross, if
thou will follow Christ, Matthew. 16. 24. And if thy reason cannot persuade thee,
yet let the reward invite thee, For every one that has forsaken houses, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or Lands, for
my Names sake (says our Savior) shall receive an hundred fold, and shall
inherit everlasting life, Mat. 19. 29.

Nevertheless the King is not left at liberty to do what he pleases, and to
make his will the rule of his actions. No, he is the Lords Shepherd, and Isa.
44. 28.
the Lord has appointed unto him his charge and duty. When God set Joshua over
the Congregation, Moses gave him a charge in their fight, Number 27. 16, 19. And
of David it is said, Psalm. 78. 70, 71, 72. He chose Davia his servant, and
took him from the sheepfolds, from following the Ewes great with young. He
brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance. So he fed
them (therefore the King ought to provide for, and cherish his people) acording
to the integrity of his heart, (therefore the King ought to be faithful to his
people) and guided them (therefore the King ought to be careful and vigilant
over his people) by the skilfulnesse (therefore the King ought to counsel his
people) of his hand, therefore the King ought to defend his people.) And when
the Prophet Ahijah told Jeroboam that God would give ten Tribes of Israel unto
him, he withal tells him his duty and the conditions upon which God gave them;
If thou will hearken unto all that I the Lord command thee, and wilt walk^ in
my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to keep my Statutes and my
Commandments, as David my servant did, then will I be with thee and build thee
a sure house, 1 Kings 11. 30, 31, 38. And at that time when the Lord chose Saul
to be King, Samuel told the people the manner of the Kingdom, and wrote it in a
book, 1 Samuel 10. 25. whereby it is evident that Saul might not rule as he
listed, for that God had prescribed the form or manner of the government or
Kingdom. And what that was you may read in Deuteronomy. 17. It shall be when he
sits upon the throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this
Law, (that is, the Deuteronomy) in a book, out of that which is before the
Priests and Levites. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all
the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all
the words of this Law, and these Statutes to do them. That his heart be not
lifted up above his brethren (therefore the King ought not to insult and
tyrannize over his people) and that he turn not aside from the Commandment, to
the right hand or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in his
Kingdom he and his children in the midst of Israel.

If then the King shall desire the preservation of himself, and the
continuance of his Kingdom unto his posterity, he must carefully observe the
Commandment of the Lord, and the execution of justice. He that rules over men
must be just, ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23. 3. It is an abomination to
Kings to commit wickedness; for the Throne is established by righteousness,
Prove. 16. 12. The King by judgment establishes the Land, Prove. 22. 4.

It Is true, the King is Gods vicegerent, and therefore accountable to God only
for his actions; Which David implied in confessing those his crying sins of
murder and adultery to be only against God: Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, Psalm. 51. 4. And even reason requires that the members should not
judge the head, because they are under the head: nor can they take away the
head, because thereby they cease to be members: yet if Princes do seriously
take it into consideration, they shall find little encouragement from hence to
give way to their own lusts: For besides the eternal vengeance of God, which,
without repentance, they shall most certainly feel after this life, having by
their wickedness made themselves incapable to inherit the kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. they do usually pluck down upon themselves or their posterity,
or both, temporal judgments: yea, and those the more heavy and terrible,
because by the neglect of their charge and duty, they become more unthankful
then others, and more injurious unto so free, so gracious, so bountiful a Lord
and Master: For unto whomsoever much is given, of him much shall be required,
Luke 12 48.

Of Gods judgments upon wicked and unjust Kings, the Scriptures afford many
examples. Oppressing Pharaoh, with all his mighty host, was drowned in the Red
sea, Exodus 14. 17, 28. Cruel Adoni-bezek was caught, and had his thumbs and
his great toes cut off, in like manner as he had done before unto threescore
and ten Kings, Judges 1. 6 7. The fat Tyrant Eglon had a dagger thrust into his
belly, and the haft also went in after the blade, and the fat closed upon the
blade, so that he could not draw the dagger out of his belly, and the dirt came
out, Judge. 3. 21, 22. Did not a woman east a piece of a millstone upon bloody
Abimelech from the wall, that he died in Thebez? Judge. 9. 53, 54 2 Samuel 11. 21.
Did not Saul kill himself? 1 Samuel 31. 4. Did not GOD take ten tribes out of
the hand of Rehob^am, for his father Solomon's idolatry and oppression? 1 Kin.
11. 33, 35. and Chapter 12 4. 16. Did not dogs lick the blood of Ahab, in the place
where Naboth was unjustly stoned? 1 King. 21. 19. and Chap. 22. 38. And was not
the whole house of Ahab aft^rwards destroyed by Iehu? 2 King: 10, 11. Hoshea
and all his Realm, for their wickedness, were given into the hands of the
King of Assyria, 2 King 17. 4, 6. Idolatrous Jehoram, his gots fell out, 2 Chronicles. 21. 19. Proud Vzziah was smitton with leprosy, Chap. 26. 20, 21. Wicked
Manasseh was bound with fetters and carried to Babylon, Chap. 33. 11. Boasting
Nebuchadnezzar was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body
was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like Eagles
feathers, and his nails like birds claws, Dan. 4. 33. Persecuting Herod was
eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost, Acts 12. 23. And indeed it is very hard
to find any one King despising his charge and duty by the breach of Gods Law
and the oppression of his Subjects, upon whom God has not laid some heavy
temporal judgment. So that to be accountable unto God only, and to have him
only to be judge, is not to be set at liberty, but the more careful and
diligent ought the King to be in his calling, knowing that it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31.

Nor has God left his people without remedy, in case a King should become so
wicked as to abandon his duty and fear of God. For he has in the Scriptures
set forth several means and remedies which the Subjects may and must use; and
they are five.

The first means is, by exhorting the King unto his duty, and often putting him
in mind thereof; this was frequently used by the Prophets, Psalm. 82. 2, 3. 4.
Isa. 1. 17. Jer. 22. 3. Ezekiel. 45. 9. And all the tribes of Israel told David of
his duty when he was made King saying, The Lord said to thee, Thou shall feed
my people Israel, and thou shall be a Captain over Israel.

The second is, by dissuading the King from his evil course. Thus Ioab
dissuaded David from numbering the people, 2 Samuel 24. 3. Thus a man of God
dissuaded Amaziah from hiring men out of Israel, 2 Chr. 25. 6, 7.

The third is, by reproving. Thus Nathan reproved David for murder and
adultery, 2 Samuel 12. 9. Elijah reproved Ahah, 1 King. 18. 18. Amos the Princes
of Israel, Chap. 6. 1. And John the Baptist reproved Herod the Tetrarch, Luke
3. 19.

Observe, that the remedies aforesaid do not belong to every subject: For every
one who lists may not exhort, dissuade, or reprove the King, but the
Scriptures express only the Ministers of God, the Elders, Nobles, and such
who are in eminent and fit place to have used these means, and that with all
reverence and modesty, 1 Samuel 24. 9. Prove. 25. 15.

The fourth remedy is, by flying or concealing our selves from the King. Thus
you shall find David always flying from Saul, 1 Samuel Elijah fled from Iezebel
into the wilderness, 1 King. 19. 3, 4. Baruch and Jeremiah hid themselves from
Iehoiakim, Jerem. 36. 19. Joseph took Jesus and his Mother, and by night fled
into Egypt from Herod, Matthew. 2. 14. And Saint Paul fled from the Jewish Rulers
who would have stoned him, Acts 14. 6.

But neither this, nor any one of the other three Remedies before mentioned,
are fure and certain to attain the end aimed at: For Jeremiah may exhort, but
Zedekiah will not regard, 2 Chr. 36. 12. Ioah may dissuade, but David's word
shall prevail, 2 Samuel 34. 4. A Prophet may reprove, but Jeroboam will not
amend, 1 King. 13. 4, 33. Vrijah may fly into Egypt, but Iehoiakim will fetch
him back again, Jer. 26. 21, 23.

The fifth and last remedy is, by flying unto God in prayer with a serious and
unfeigned repentance for sin. This is the chief, the certain, and never failing
remedy which Gods children have used at all times in their distresses. When the
children of Israel sighed by reason of the Egyptian bondage, and cried unto
God, then the Lord came down and sent Moses to deliver them, Exodus 2. 23. and
Chap. 3. 7 8. 10. In the time of the J^dges, when the Israelites repented of
their wickedness, and cried unto the Lord, the Lord always raised them up
deliverers, Judge. 3. 9 15. and Cha^ 4. 3. 24. and Chapter 6. 6, 14. and Chap. 10.
15, 16. and Chap. 11. 29. After their return from Babylon, being in miserable
slaverie under the Kings of Assyria, they assembling with fasting and with
sackclothes, and with earth upon them, repenting and acknowledging Gods
goodness and their ingratitude, humbly craving his mercy. And then they made a
sure covenant (not a Covenant of rebellion by force to resist their Sovereign,
and to free themselves from oppression, as some corrupters of the truth would
now a days persuade ignorant people) but a covenant or oath to walk in Gods
Law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do all
the commandments of the Lord their God, and his judgments and his Statutes,
Nehem. 9. 1, 2, 38. and Chap. 10. 29. The Psalms do plentifully show David's
practice in this kind, Psalm. 108. 12. and 109. 26. and 1 12. 4, 7. and 142. 4.
5. The Prophet Micah having set forth the small number of the righteous, and
the wickedness of these times concludes with this, as the only sure remedy,
Therefore will I look unto the Lord: I will wait for the God of my salvation:
my God will hear me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him, until he plead my cause and execute judgment for me, Mic.
7. 7, 9. Whereby it is clear, that the surest means of release from slaverie,
oppression, or any other misery whatsoever* which the vilest King can bring
upon his Subjects, is by prayer unto God with a serious repentance for sin, and
a patient expectation of Gods mercy until his time appointed.

There are two strong reasons expressed in holy Writ to confirm this. The first
is, because the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord as the rivers of water:
h^ turns it whithersoever he will, Prove. 21. 1. The latter is, because all
affl^ction is from him, and he does limit it according to his divine pleasure.
Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of
the ground, Job 5. 6. To me belongs vengeance and recompense, says the Lord,
their foot shall slide in due time. I, even I am he, and there is no God with
me, I kill and I make alive: I wound and I heal: neither is there any that can
d^liver out of my hand, Deuteronomy. 31. 35. 39. I make peace, and create evil, Isa.
45. 7. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.
6. Yet will I not make a full end of thee, but I will correct thee in measure,
Jer. 30. 11. and Chap 46. 28. It is therefore most agreeable to reason, that in
times of oppression under unjust Kings, we should fly unto God* since he only
sends, limiteth, and can free us from bondage and afflictions.

This was always the course of Gods Saints under the Gospel, insomuch that it
grew into a proverbiall speech, Preces and lachrymae, arma Ecclesiae: Prayers
and tears are the weapons of the Church.

Gregory Nazianzen. Orat. in Julianum, writes thus: Repressus est Julianus
Christianorum lachrymis, quas multas multi profuderunt, hoc unum adversus
persecutorem medicamentum habentes: Julian was restrained by the tears of the
Christians, which many shed forth abundantly, having this only remedy against
the persecuter.

Hear Peter Martyr, Comment. in lib. Jud. cap. 5. Licet cum aliquos cerimnus in
homines pios and Evangelium Filii Dei crudeliter grassari, orare, ut vel eorum
mutetur voluntas, vel frangantur vires, quo non omnia possunt efficere, quae
designant: quae si nequeant impetrari, saltem id precandum est, ut vires and
robur nobis a Deo suppetant, ad ea omnia perferenda, quae ad honorem and
gloriam ejus conducant: When we see some men to rage cruelly against the godly,
and the Gospel of the Son of God, it is lawful to pray, that either their
mind may be changed, or their strength broken, whereby they may not be able
to bring to pass all which they purpose: Which if they cannot be obtained, we
must verily beg this, that we may have sufficient strength and courage from
God, to bear all those things which may tend to his honor and glory.

Hear Ambrose in Orat. contra Auxentium, Repugnare non novi, dolere potero,
potero flere, potero gemere: adversus arma, milites, Gothos, lachrymae meae,
mea arma sunt; aliter nec debeo, nec possum resistere: How to resist I know
not, I can grieve, I can weep, I can sigh: my tears are my weapons against
weapons, Soldiers, Goths: in any other way I neither must nor may resist.

Hear Bernards resolution, Epist. 170. ad Regem Ludovicum Regem. Si totus orbis
adversum me conjuraret, ut quippiam molirer adversus Regiam Majestatem^, ego
tamen Deum timerem, and ordinatum ab eo Regem offendere temere non auderem; nec
enim ignoro ubi legerim, qui potestati resistit, Dei ordinationi resistit: If
the whole world should conspire against me, to the end that I should do
something against the Kings Majesty, yet I would fear God, and not dare rashly
to offend the King ordained by him* For I know where I have read, that he who
resists the power resists the Ordinance of God. And the same Father, Epist.
221. Quiequid vobis de regno vestro, de anima, and corona vestra facere
placeat, nos Ecclesiae filii, matris injurias, contemptum, and conculcationem
omnino dissimulare non possumus. Profecto stabimus, and p^gnabimus usque ad
mortem (si ita oportuerit) pro matre nostra, armis quibus licet, non scutis and
gladiis, sed precibus and sletibus ad Deum. Whatsoever you may please to make
of your Kingdom, life, and Crown; we the sons of the Church cannot altogether
dissemble the wrongs, disgrace, and spurning of our mother. Verily for our
mother we will stand, and sight even unto death (if need be) with such weapons
as are lawful, not with Shields and Swords, but with prayers and tears to God.

Thus, Reader, I have set before thee those remedies which Gods word has
declared, and the practice of Gods children has approved to be lawful for
Subjects to use against unjust, cruel, and oppressing Sovereigns. Murmr not
thou against God, because he has reserved unto himself only the power of
restraining the Prince. Is it not lawful for God to do what he will with his
own? Matthew. 20. 15. Will thou say, that God has not provided for the safety of
his Church and people, because he has not made thee a Judge and punisher of
thy Sovereign? Art thou able to search into the Lords ways? or can thou
direct the Lord? Should it be according to thy mind says Job? When he gives
quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he hides his face, who then
can behold him? Whether it be done against a Nation, or against a man only,
Job 34. 29, 33.

Seeing then all things are according to the wise disposing of our gracious
God, Cast thy burden on the Lord, Psalm. 55. 22. God is a very present help in
trouble, Psalm. 46. 1. Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in him, and he
shall bring it to pass. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him: fret not
thy self, because of the man who brings wicked devices to pass. For the
evildoers shall be cut off; but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall
inherit the earth, Psalm. 37. 5, 7, 9, 34.

The fourth Evasion.
But thou will say, What is all this to us, who live not under such a King as
the Scriptures make mention of?

The Answer.
Though I inended only the satisfaction of thy Conscience, which can admit of
no other rule then the Word of God. For, Lex Dei sola obligat conscientiam
hominis. Et ipsae leges humanae, qua sunt leges hominum, non obligant
conscientiam, Ames. de call. Conscient. l. 1. c. 2. The Law of God does only
bind the conscience of man. And humane laws, as they are the laws of men do
not bind the conscience. Yet because the rectifying of the judgment, is a
ready means to the rectifying of the conscience; and because this evasion is
by some much boasted of; I shall therefore briefly set forth the excellent and
sweet agreement which the laws of this Land have with the Laws of God, in this
particular, affirming, That the King of England is such a King as the
Scriptures mention; and that in four respects,

1. In His right to the Crown. 2. In His Power. 3. In His Charge and Duty. 4.
In the rendering of His Account,
1. His right to His Crown is by birth, descent, or hereditary succession. And
this appears,

First, by that part of the Oath of Allegiance which is used in every Leet,
That you shall be true and faithful to our Sovereign Lord K. Charles and his
heirs, which shows the descent.

Secondly, because we do our legeance to the King in his natural capacity, and
therefore he holds the Kingdom in His natural capacity, that is, as He is
Charles the son and heir apparent of King James of blessed memory. For
legeance or homage cannot be done to the King in His politic capacity, for so
the body of the King is invisible, Coke. l. 7. Calvin's case.

Thirdly, in the case aforesaid, it is expressly affirmed, that the King holds
the Kingdom of England by birthright inherent by descent from the
blood-Royall. And how inseparable this right is from the next in blood, you may
see in Henry the 4. who though he was also of the Blood-royall, and had the
Crown resigned unto him from Richard the 2* and confirmed by Act of Parliament;
yet upon his death bed He acknowledged He had no right thereunto, Speed. l. 9.
c. 14.

Lastly, by all the Judges, 1. Iac. at the arraignment of Watson and Clerk two
Seminary Priests, it was resolved, that immediately by descent His Majesty was
completely and absolutely King without the ceremony of Coronation which was but
a Royal ornament and outward solemnization of the descent. this is plainly
illustrated by Hen. 6. who was not Crowned till the ninth year of His reign,
Speed* l. 9. c. 16. yet diverse were attainted of treason before that time,
which could not have been, had He not been King. Besides we know, that upon the
death of the King, His Successor is forthwith proclaimed, which shows, that
the King has his Kingdom by descent, and st^ice not to be made King by the
people at his Coronation. Indeed the people are then asked their consent, not
that they have power to deny, but that the King having their consent, may with
greater security and confidence rely on His people.

Thus thou see the Kings right to the Crown is by succession.

As to the second respect, it is evident, That the power of the King of
England, is by the Laws of the Land as great and Royal, as that, which I have
proved out of the Scriptures to belong unto the King. For,

He only may proclaim war, and he only can establish peace among His people,
Coke, 7. Rep. fol. 25. b.

There is no lawful assembly, meeting, or Court, but by authority from Him.
Yea, the high Court of Parliament was at first devised; framed, and instituted
by Him, Polyd, Virgil. l. 11. Speed, Stow, Martin, Baker, and many others in
the life of Henry the 1.

By Him all Laws, Customs and Franchises are granted and confirmed unto the
people, Rot. Clans. 1. R. 2 n. 44.

By Him all the Officers of the Realm, whether Temporal or Spiritual are
chosen and established. The chief and highest by Himself immediately, Smith.
Commonw. l. 2. c. 4. The inferior, by authority from Him. Idem c. 5.

He has the sole power of ordering and disposing all the Castles, Forts, and
strong holds, and all the Ports and Havens, and generally all the Militia of
His Kingdom. For otherwise it will follow, that the King has power to proclaim
war, and not to maintain it: That the King is bound to defend His Subjects,
and is denied the means. Both which are contrary to our Law, which admits no
absurdity.

To be short, The Prince is the life, the head, and the authority of all things
that be done in the Realm of England, Smith. ibid. Supremam potestatem, and
merum Imperium apud nos habet: nec in imperii clientela est, nec investituram
ab alio accipit, nec praeter Deum, superiorem agnoscit. Cambden. Brit. p. 132.
He has Sovereign power, and a mere Empire with us* He is not under the
protection of the Roman Empire, nor does he take investiture from any other;
nor besides God, does acknowledge any above him.

We are bound by oath to maintain His Sovereignty in all causes, and over all
persons as well Ecclesiastical as Civil: not over singular persons, as some
would gloss it, but over all, even the body politic. For by diverse, sundry,
old, authentike Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and
expressed, that this Realm of England is as Empire, and so has been accepted
in the world, governed by our supreme head and King, having the dignity and
royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the sai^^; unto whom a body politic,
compact of all sorts and degrees of people, divided in terms, and by names of
spiritualty and temporalty, have been bounden and owen to bear next to God, a
natural and humble obedience, Preface to a Statute, 24 Hen. 8. c. 12.

The third respect is in His charge and duty, which consists in the observance
of the Law of God, the Law of nature, and the Laws of this Realm.

To observe the Law of God, He is bound as a Christian: to observe the law of
nature, He is bound as a man: to observe the Laws of his Realm, He is bound as
a King.

Nor is he only bound vinculo officii, as he is King, though this is a strict
tie, considering to whom he must one day render an account of His Stewardship;
but he is also bound vinculo juramenti, by an Oath taken at His Coronation. The
effect whereof is this, To keep, confirm, and defend all Laws, Customs, and
Freedoms, granted by His predecessors to the Clergy or people; To preserve
peace and concord in God entirely; and cause equal and right justice to be
done, according to His power. Whence it is clear, that the King has His duty
enjoined him, and ought not to make His Will the rule of His actions.

The fourth and last respect, is in the rendering of His account. For as the
Kings mentioned in the Scriptures were not, so the King of England i^ not
accountable for His actions to any but God alone.

First, because the King of England has not His Crown from any but God alone;
from whose gracious hand he has received it by the ordinary means of
hereditary succession; and was in the beginning obtained by the Sword, Smith*
l. 1. c. 9.

Secondly, the oath which he takes at His Coronation, binds Him only before
God, for there is no condition, proviso, or limitation, whereby He is made
accountable unto His people.

Thirdly, by the testimony of Bracton, fol. 34. a. b. Sunt sub Rege liberi
homines, and servi; and omnis sub co est, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub
Deo. Si a Rege peta^ur (cum Breve non currat contra R^gem) locus erit
supplicationi, quod factum suum corrigat, emendat; si non f^cerit, satis erit
ei ad poenam, quod Dominum exp^ctet ultorem; de chartis Regiis, and factis
Regum, nec privatae nec justitiarii debent disputare. There are under the King
freemen and slaves; and every one is under him, and he under none, but under
God only. If ought be desired of the King, (since a Writ cannot go forth
against the King*) an entreaty must come in stead, that he would correct and
amend his doing: if he do not, it will be punishment enough, that he expect the
Lord to be the avenger: Of the Royal grants and actions of the King, neither
private persons nor Judges ought to (...)ute.

To the same purpose Thomas de W^lsingham mentions a letter written ^o the
Bishop of Rome in the name of the whole Kingdom, from the Parliament held at
Lincoln, An^ Dom. 1301. wherein are these words, Scimus, Pater sanctissime, and
notorium est, a prima institutione Regni Angliae, tam temporibus Brittannorum,
quam Anglorum, quod certum and directum dominium ad Regem pertinuit, neque
Reges Angli^ ex libera praeeminentia Regi^ dignitatis, and consuetudine cunctis
temporihus observata, c^ram aliquo judice Ecclesiastico vel seculari
responderunt, aut respondere debebant. We know, most holy Father, and it is
manifest, from the very beginning of the Kingdom of England, as well in the
times of the Britains, as of the Angles, that the certain and direct
Dominion has belonged unto the King, neither have the Kings of England (by
reason of the unbounded pre-eminence of the Royal dignity and custom observed
in all ages) answered, or ought to answer before any Judge Ecclesiastical or
Civil.

An Objection.
But you will thus object. From whom the King receives His power, to them He
is accountable; but from His people the King receives his power. As Fortescue
delivers, c. 13. Ad tutelam Regis subditorum, ac eorum corporum and bonorum,
Rex erectus est; and ad hanc potestatem a populo effluxam ipse habet. A King is
ordained for the defense of the Law of his Subjects, and of their bodies and
goods: whereunto He receives power of his people. Therefore to his people the
King is accountable.

The Answer.
Did the maker of this objection rightly set down the words of Fortescue, he
might easily answer himself. For it is not barely Rex, a King; but Rex
hujusmodi, such a King; meaning a King whose government is merely politic.
But the government of England is not merely polit^que* nor merely regal, but
mixed partly regal, partly politic; as he says pres^ntly after; Regnum
Angl^e, ex Bruti comitiva Trojanorum, in Dominium politicum and regale
prorupit; The Kingdom of England out of Brutus his retinue of the Trojans,
first grew into a politic and regal Dominion. And in the 9 cap. Rex Angliae
principatu, nedum regali, sed and Politice, suo populo dominatur. The King of
England governs his people by Dominion, not only regal, but also politic.

How it is regal, and how politic, does plainly appear by what has been
before spoken: For in regard all power and authority is from him, and he holds
his Kingdom, and therewithal his power from God only, it must needs be that
his government is regal; And in regard he is tied to the observance of the
Laws of his kingdom, (whereby Potestas regia lege politica cohibetur, Fortos.
c 9 the power regal is restrained by a law politic) it must needs follow
that this government is politic. So that in ref^rence to his power, he is a
regal King, in reference to his duty he is a politic King.

The objection therefore being grounded upon Fortescues words of a kingdom
merely politic, does not concern our kingdom.

Another Objection.
He who i^ under the Law, may be called to account for his actions, but the
king is under the Law, Bracton, fol. 5. 6. Ipse Rex non debet esse sub homine,
sed sub Deo, and sub Lege, quia Lex facit Regem. The King himself ought not to
be under man, but under God, and under the Law, because the Law makes the King.

The Answer.
We must here call to mind, that there is a twofold power in the Law, A
directing power, and a correcting power.

In respect of the former, the King is under the Law, that is to say, the Law
is the line and rule whereby the will of the King is guided and directed; and
in this sense Bracton spoke. In respect of the latter, the King is not under
the Law. For how can we possibly conceive, that he who gives life to the Law,
should by the Law offer force unto himself, and compel himself?

He that is under the former power only, is accountable to God only for his
actions; as the King. But he that is under both powers of the Law, is
accountable both to God and the Law: as is every Subject.

In respect of the former, the Law is the object and rule of Justice, and so
the King is under the Law: In respect of the latter, the Law in the instrument
of Justice, and so the King is not under the Law; but the Law is a means
serving the King to govern his people.

Take an example. A servant who guides and directs his ma(...)r, as he is a
guide, is superior to his master; but consider him as an instrument and
servant unto his master, and though he be never so wise and upright, yet his
master is above him.

And as the Law is said to be above the King, so: in the same sense. His
Council may also be said to be above him, that is, in respect they guide,
direct, and advise the King in the governing of his people. For so says Fleta,
l. 1. c. 17. de Justice. substit. Rex habet in populo regendo superiores Legens
per quann factus est and curiam suam, videlicet, Comites ^ Barons. The King
has superiors in the governing of his people, the Law, by which He is made,
and His Council, to wit, the Earls and Barons.

A Doubt.
But here a scruple may arise, what Fleta and Bracton should mean, when they
say, The Law makes the King.

Resolved.
I answer, There are two singular and excellent benefi^s which by the Law
redound unto the King. The one is, The Law does declare and publish unto the
people the Kings right unto the Crown, so that they quietly and willingly
receive Him as their King, and submit unto Him. The other is, The Law does
support and strengthen Him in His Throne. In both which respects it may well be
said, That the ^aw makes the King; and so my Lord Cook spoke right, when he
told King James, That the Law set the Crown upon His head.

The Objections being fully answered, that I may avoid all needless
repetitions, I shall leave thee, Reader, to compare what has been now proved,
with what has been before delivered out of the Scriptures; and thou shall
clearly find, That the King of England is such a King as the Scriptures make
mention of.

And if it be so, how then can thou take up arms against Him? If He be
wicked, what advantage will it be to thee to be worse? If He break His Oath,
will thou also break thine? Or, can thou say, that thou swearest Allegiance
unto Him on condition of His good behavior? Does the Statute 25. Edw. 3. c. 3.
declare it to be treason, only to leavie War against a good, a just King? Why
then did not the Protestants take up Arms against that bloody Idolatrous
Queen Mary? Why then is it treason to compass the death of an Usurper of the
Crown? Dalt. 227. Was not Spencer banished for affirming, That if the King did
not demean himself by reason, in the right of the Crown, His Lieges were
bound by Oath to remove Him? Stat. Edw. 2. called Exilium Hugonis de Spencer.

Oh! take heed of new coind distinctions: take heed of the sleights of men.
There is no wickedness but has found some excuse.

In that great insurrection in Richard the seconds time, the Commans had a fair
pretense. Their int^nt was (as they said) to abolish the Law of villainage and
servitu^^ and to slay the corrupt Judges. And they took an O^th, Quod Regi and
Communibus fidelitatem servarent: To be true to the King and Commons: and that
they would take nothing but what they paid for: and they punished all these
wi^h death: yet in the Parliament of 5. Rich. 2. n. 31. and 32. they were
adjudged Traitor^.

Perkin Warbeck. that vile Rebel, in his Proclamation to the people, could
tell them, That the King had put apart all well-disposed Nobles; had none in
favor and trust about his person, but Caitives and Villains of birth: which by
subtle inventions, and pilling of the people, had been the principal finders,
occasioners, and Counselors of the mis-rule and mischief now reigning in
England. He tells them of the great and ex^crable offenses daily committed and
done by the King and His Adherents in breaking the Liberties and Franchises of
our Mother the holy Church; to the high displeasure of Almighty God: Besides,
of manifold Treasons, abominable murders, manslaughters, robberies, extortions,
the daily pilling of the people by dismes, taxes, tallages, benevolences, and
unlawful impositions, and grievous exactions. From all which grievances he
promises redress, if the people will join with him. Is not here a fair show,
and yet this was a foul rebellion? Speed lib. 9. c. 20.

The Earls of Northumberland and Westm^rland, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
could In the Queens name command the Country to follow them in arms: sometimes
pretending the safety of her Majesty's Person in danger (they said) by treasons
in working; and sometimes in case of conscience for restoring their former
Religion. And in this zeal they hasted to Durham Minster, where they tare the
Bible (and Communion Book^, and such other things as there were, says Stow) in
great contempt. Yet these were mere Rebels and Traitors. Speed. l. 9. c. 24.

Werefore examine, search diligently into the cause, every thing is not as it
seems: All is not gold that glisters.

A Reformation is much spoken of; plain it is there is an alteration. Are not
all our fixed Laws turned into this one Law, Salus populi, The safety of the
people? Are not our Goods, Lands, Liberties, seized on, yea, and that Legally?
To wit. Lege necessicatis, by the Law of necessity? Is not disobedience to the
Commands of our Prince termed Loyalty? Infinite are the evils which these sad
distractions have produced; but I forbear, because they are fitter to be
lamented then rehearsed.

If yet there remain one scruple unremoved concerning the power of Parliament,
I shall herein refer you to a Tract of Sir Wa. Raleighs, entitled, The
prerogative of Parliaments in England: and for thy present satisfaction shall
desire thee to consider these four things:

First, all agree. That the Parliament is as one Body, and the Head of this
Body is the King. So Dyer fol. 60. a. The Parliament (says he) consists of
three parts: to wit, of the King, the chief Head; and of the Lords, the chief
and principal Members of the body; and of the Commons, Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, the inferior Members: and these make the Body of the Parliament.
Vtigitur in naturalibus, capite detruncato residuum non corpus, sed truncum
appellamus: sic and in politicis, sine capite communitas nulla enus corporatur.
Fortesc. c. 13. As therefore in things natural, when the head is cut off, we
call not the residue a body, but a stump or stock, so likewise in things
politic, a Communalty without a head is in no wise corporate.

Secondly, the Oath of Allegiance does equally bind a member of the
Parliament, as him who is not of the Parliament.

Thirdly, what power they have, is derived unto them by their Writ, by which
the King calls them to Parliament. Now the Writ runs, Ad tractandum and
consulendum, To treat and advise. And should any exceed their Commission?

Fourthly and lastly, no Bill, though it be passed and consented unto by all
the Lords and Commons in Parliament, can or ought to be taken as an Act or
Ordinance. without it receive life from the royal Assent. Crompt. Iur. of
Courts, fol. 7. b. Smith Common. l. 2. c. 3. Weigh and consider these things.

To conclude.
Thou see, Reader, the unlawfulness of taking up Arms against thy
Sovereign proved, the O^jections and Evasions answered, all Doubts resolved,
and even the least scruples (which I could possibly imagine) removed. Oh! then
return unto the Lord, obey his voice, walk according to his rule. Thou art now
called, and the Lord knows whether ever thou shall have a second summons.

And let me seriously ask you, you I mean who are counted reforming Ministers,
whose lips should keep knowledge, Mal. 2. 7. How dare you in the dreadful
presence of the Almighty God, before the face of his Congregation, speak a
vision of your own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord? Jer. 23. 16.
How dare you by wresting the Scriptures stir men up to rebellion? in stead of
Faith, teaching Faction; in stead, of Duty, Disobedience; then which there is
nothing more odious in the fight of God, and yet by you nothing more frequently
preached unto the people.

It Is strange that Gods Church can be no way preserved, the Subjects Liberty no
ways maintained, but by sin. Who ever heard, unless from a Papist, that the
way to Heaven was through Hell? Shall we do evil that good may come? Romans 3.
8.

If you are sent from God, why do you not turn the people from their evil
way? Jer. 23. 21, 22. Why do you not condemn the reigning vices of these times?
Pride, Ambition, Envy, Hatred, Uncharitableness, Bloodshedding, Disloyalty,
P^rjury; the scandalizing of Gods Church and ripping up her very bowels,
abominable Lying, Sacrilege, Railing Cursings, Revilings, forcing of men's
Consciences, contempt of Superiors, D^ssembling, Treachery Covenant Breaking,
the renewing of ol^ Herelics, and the raising of all manner of Schisms. Is
this the way to have Peace and Truth together, by suffering such crying sins to
^ nourished, and gounreproved?

Why do you flatter your Disciples with the titles of Saints, Children of God.
Elect, Holy Brethren, and the like, when your Consciences (^ they be not
seared) must needs tell you they are not such, so long as the live in that
horrid and execrable sin of Rebellion.

A sin do I say? nay, Rebellion is the sum of all sins, for it ^ always
accompanied with Murder, Adultery, Fornication. Theft, Cursing, Swearing,
Looseness of life, Drunkenness, Cruelty, Vain-boasting Idleness, and all
manner of wickedness whatsoever.

Why do you call that Gods cause, which Gods Word will not warrant? remember
the Woe which the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 5. 20. pronounces unto them that call
evil good, and good evil, that put darkness f^ light, and l^ght for
darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. And Solomon tells
you, He that says unto the wicked, Thou art righteous, him shall the people
curse, nations shall abhor him, Prove* 24. 24.

But unto thee, thou poor seduced soul, who have been led away wit^ the
outside holiness, of these false prophets, and art now pricked ^ thy
Conscience, crying unto the Lord, Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy
Statutes, Psalm. 119. 5. Let me give this exhortation of Solomon: Fear thou the
Lord and the King: and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their
calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the r(...) of them both? Prove.
24. 21, 22. Against the King there is no rising up: if thou have done foolishly
in lifting up thy self: or if thou have thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy
mouth, Prove. 30. 31, 32. Rent thy heart and turn to the Lord thy God, for he is
gracious and merciful, flow to anger, and of great kindness, Joel 2. 13. and
he has promised that when the wicked m^^ turne^h away from his wickedness
that he has committed, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save
his soul alive, Ezekiel. 18. 27.

Halelu-jah.

