THREE MONTHS Observations of the Low Countries, Especially HOLLAND.
CONTAINING A brief Description of the Country, Customs, Religions, Manners,
and Dispositions of the People.

Printed Anno 1648.

The PRINTER to the READER.
Reader,
THough relations of those Countries with whom we have had long and frequent
Commerce, (which supposes us knowing of things either curious or needful) may
be esteemed superfluous; yet for the better understanding of these short
observations, it seems very necessary; for it is supposed they were intended by
the Author (whom you will find ingenious) either to please himself, or delight
the fancies of those that are acquainted with the fashions of the Country.

He renders the Hollander an ingenuous subtle people, and if he be a little too
free with them in their vices, it is pardonable; for when he observes their
virtues, he endeavors to make requital.

To commend it were to detract; that were pity, for it is too little already:
but being so, you may with more ease try whether it deserves it.

To make large preambles, were not only to be unlike our Author, but to erect
a great gate to a small Cottage.

It was thought deserving the Press; I have done my part, do you but yours;
that is, peruse it, and add it to thy Library.

Farewell.
THREE MONTHS Observations of the Low Countries, especially HOLLAND.
THey are generally a Sealand: there is not such a marish in the world that is
flat. They are an universal quagmire; epitomized, a green-cheese in pickle:
such an Aequilibrian of earth and water, that a strong earthquake would shake
them into a Chaos: they are the ingredients of a black pudding, and want only
stirring, else you would have more bread then greets: then have you no way to
make it serve for any thing, but to spread it under Zona Torrida, and so dry it
for Turfes. It is an excellent place for despairing lovers, for each corner
affords them Willow; but if Justice should condemn one to be hanged on any
other Tree, he might live long and confident. It is the but tock of the world,
full of veins and blood; but no bones. Had St Stephen been condemned there to
be stoned, he might have lived still; for (unless it be in their paved Towns)
gold is more plentiful than stone. It is a singular place to fat monkies for
there are spiders as bigg as shrimps, and (I think) as many. You may travel the
Country without a guide, for you cannot go out of the rode without hazard of
drowning. A King that hated crowding, might have run away without staying for
his Usher, for he can go no whither but his way is made before him. Had they
Cities as big as their walls, Rome were but a bauble to them. Twenty miles are
nothing to be hurried over in one of their wagons; where, if the Voerman be
sober, you travel safe, But descending from thence, you must have better faith
then Peter had, or you sink immediately, if your way be not his: thus it hangs
in the water, and at the approach of the wagon, it will shake as if it were
aguestricken. The Duke D' Alva taxing the tenth penny, frighted it into a
Palsy, which all the Mountebanks it had bred and had, knew not how to cure.
They do some things which seem wonders; for they fish for fire in the waters,
which they catch in nets, and transport to land in their boats, where they
spread it smooth, as a Mercer does his Velvet when he rooks an Heir of
eighteen. Thus being in a meddow, you would suppose it a cantle of
green-cheese, spread over with black butter. Their ordinary Pack-horses are
framed of wood, carrying their bridles in their tails, and their burdens in
their bellies, and a strong wind and stiff gale are the spurs that make them
speedy. They dress their meat with aqua coelestis; for their water springs are
not like ours, from the earth, but come to them as Manna to the Israelites,
from heaven. the Elements here are at variance, the subtle overflow the
grosser, the fire consuming the earth, and the air the waters; for they burn
Turfs, and drain their grounds with Wind-mils, as if the Colic were a remedy
for the Stone. The land they have is kept as neat as a Courtiers beard, and
they have a method in mowing. It is so interveyned with waters and rivers, that
it is impossible to make a Common amongst them. Even the Brownists are here at
a stand. The poor are never complained of for breaking of hedges; surely had
the men of Gotham lived here, they would have studied some other prison for the
Cuckoo. Their ditches they frame as they list, and distinguish them into
noecks, as my Lord Majors Cook does his custards: they cleanse them often, but
it is as Physicians give their potions, more to catch the fish, then cast out
the mud. Though their country be that of the main, yet every house stands as it
were an Island, and that (though a Boor dwell in it) looks as smug as a Lady
new-painted. A gallants masquing suit fits not more neatly than a thatcht
cottage of many years wearing: if you find it dry, it is embraced with vines,
and if lower seated, it is only a close harbor within a plump of Willowes,
and pleasant enough, as long as the dogdaies last; but they overpast, you must
practice wading or swimming; or remain prisoner till the Spring; only a hard
frost with the help of sledges, may release you. The Bridge to this is an
outlandish planck, with a box of stones to poise it with, like a Quintin; which
with the least help, turns round like a Heads-man, and when the master is over,
stands drawn, and then he is in his Castle; it is sure his fear that makes him
suspicious; therefore that he may see who enters, his window is ever over his
door; But it may be to show his Pedigree; for (though his Ancestors were never
known) their Arms are there, which in spite of the Herald, shall bear their
achievements with the helmet of a Baron at least; marry the field perhaps
shall be charged with baskets, to show his Fathers trade pourtrayed. When you
are entered, the first thing you shall encounter is a looking-glass, the next,
the Vessels marshalld about the house like watchmen, all as near, as if they
were in a Ladies Cabinet; for (unless it be themselves) none of Gods creatures
lose any of their native beauty there. Their houses (especially in the Cities)
are the best eye-beauties in the Country, and in cost and sightliness, far
exceed our English, wanting only their magnificence; Their lineing are richer
too, than their outsides, not in hangings, but Pictures, which the poorest
there are furnished with: Not a Sowter but has his toies for ornament: were
the knacks of all their houses set together, there were not such a
Bartholomew-fayr in Europe. Their Artists (for these are as rare as thought)
for they can paint a fat-Hen in her feathers, and if you want their language,
you may learn a great deal on the Signe-posts; what they are, they ever write
under them; in that only they deal plainly, and by this device, hang more
honesty than they keep. Their rooms are but several hand-boxes, wherein you
must either swallow your spittle, or blush when you see a Mopp brought in.
Their beds are no other then Land-cabbins, high enough to need a Ladder or
stairs; once up, you are walled in with wainscot; and that is good discretion,
to avoid the making wills every night, for once falling out, will break your
neck perfectly. But if you die in it, you leave your friends this comfort,
that you died in clean linen. Whatsoever their estates be, their linen must
be fine; therefore from Amsterdam they have banished Sea-coal; and least it
should soil their buildings, of which the Statelier sort are often sententious,
and in their fronts carry some conceit of the Author. Their houses they keep
cleaner than their bodies, and their bodies than their souls. Go to one, you
shall find the Andirons shut up in Network; at a second, the warming pan
muffled up in Italian cutwork; at a third, the skimmer laid in Cambrick. For
their propension to Venery, it is true, their women are not so ready at a
spurt; for neither are they so generally bred to it, nor are their men such
linen lifters. Idleness and Courtship have not banished honesty thence. They
tattle much, and do less, yet their blood runs high, and their veins are full,
which argues strength; and if the Court turn them Gallants, they will take up
the custom of entertaining Ladies: and having once done it, I believe they will
be notable: for I have heard they trade more for love than money, but it is for
the trick, not the man: and therefore when they like the labor, they will
reward the workman: otherwise their gross feeding and clownish education has
spoiled them from being nobly minded. But I give you this on bare report,
experience not having made me wise. They are generally boerish, yet may be bred
Statesmen, none of them being so nice of Conscience, but they can turn out
Religion, to let in Policy. Their Country is their God they worship, war
their heaven, peace their hell, and the cross Spanjard their Devil, Custom is
their Law, and Will their Reason: you may sooner convert a Jew, than make an
ordinary Dutchman yield to arguments that cross him. An old Friar is sooner
turned Puritan, than a Waggoner persuaded not to bait twice in nine miles. His
soul is composed of English beer, and his body of pickled herring, which
renders him costive and testie: these two with a little butter are the
ingredients of a mere Dutchman, which a voyage to the East Indies, by the heat
of the Aequinoctial consolidates. If you see him fat, he has been cooped in a
root-yard, and that has blubberd him. For their conditions, they are churlish,
and (without doubt) very ancient: for they were bred before manners were in
fashion. They should make good Justices, for they neither respect persons nor
apparel. A Boer in his butter-slopps shall be equally entertained with a
Courtier in his bravery. They are seldom deceived, for they trust no body; so
by consequence they are better to hold a Fort than win it, yet they can do
both. Trust them you must if you travel; for, to call for a bill to them, is to
dive into a Wasps nest. Complement is an idleness they were never trayn'd up
in; and it is their happiness that the Court has not stolen away their minds:
Their being Saylors and Soldiers, has marred two parts already; and if they
be bathed once in Court-oyle, they are painted trap-dores, and shall suffer the
Jews to build a City where Harlem-mere is, then cosen them of it. They shall
abuse a stranger for nothing, and after a few base terms, scratch one another
to a Carbonadoe, as they flea Rochetts. Nothing can quiet them but money and
liberty, which having gotten, they abuse both; but if you tell them so, you
awake their fury; and you may sooner calm the Sea, than conjure that into
compass again. They are all in a manner Aquatills, and therefore the Spanjards
call them water-dogs. I agree not with them, yet I think they can catch a duck
as soon. They love none but such as do for them; and when their turn is served,
neglect them. They have no friends but their kindred, which meet at every
wedding-feast, like Tribes among themselves. All that help them not, they hold
Popish; and think it a piece of honesty to rail against the King of Spain.
Their shipping is their Babel they boast of, for the glory of their Nation; it
is (indeed) wonderful, and they will have it so. But, we may well hope, they
will never be potent by Land, lest they show us how doggedlie they can insult
where they get the masterie. Their Navies are the scourge of Spain, and pills
wherewith they purge the Indies. Nature has not bred them so active by Land as
others; but at Sea they are Water-Devills, and attempt things incredible. Their
Ships lie like high woods in winter; and if you view them on the North side,
you will freeze: for they ride so thick, that through them you can see no Sun.
Sailors with them, are as common as beggars with us. They can rail, swear,
juggle, steal, and be lousy alike; but to examine the rest, a gleeke of their
knaves are worth a mourmeval of ours. All of them are Seamen born, and like
Froggs can live on land or water. Not a thresher amongst them, but can handle
an Oar, steer a Boat, raise a mast, and ken you over the roughest passage.
Their Government is Democratical, and there had need be many Rulers over such a
rabble of rude ones. Tell them of a King, and they will cut your throat in
earnest; the very Name imports servitude; they spite it more then a Jew does
Bacon, or a Wood-man, old age. None among them has any authority by
inheritance; that were the way to parcel out the Country into Families. They
are all chosen, as we choose Aldermen, more for their wealth than their wit,
which they so over-affect, that mijn Here shall pass the street like an old
Ape, without a tail after him; and if they may be had cheap, shall daube his
faced gown with a stiver-worth of pickled herring, which himself shall carry
home in a string. The common voice has given him pre-eminence, and he loathes
it, living as when he was a Boer: but, if pardon be granted for what is past,
they are about to think it time to learn more civilitie. Their Justice is
strickt, if it cross not policy; but rather than hinder trassique, they will
tolerate any thing. There is not such a Den of subtle Foxes as Amsterdam,
there you may be what beast you please, so you push not the State with your
horns. It is an Universitie of all opinions, which grow in it confusedly; as
stocks in Norway, without order or pruning. If you be not settled in your
Religion, you may there try all, and at last take what you list. The Papists
there must not Mass it publicly, not because it is most hated, but because
the Spaniard abridgeth the Protestant; and they had rather show a little
spleen, than not cry quittance with the Enemy: This is their warrant, which
they retaliate justly; and for this reason, rather then the Dunkerks shall
want hanging, Amsterdam, which has none of her own, will borrow a Hangman of
Harlem. In their Families they are all Equals, and you have no way to find
the Master and Mistress, unless it be in bed together; It may be those are they,
otherwise Maulkin will prate as much, laugh as loud, and fit on her tail as
well as her Mistress. Had Logicians lived there first, father and Son had not so
long passed for Relatives, they are there wholly Individualls, for no
demonstrance of duty or authority can distinguish them; as if they had been
created together, and not successivelie born: the Mother bidding her Daughter
goodnight, and kissing her, is a punctual blessing. Your man shall be
malepertlie saucie, and you must not strike him; if you do, he shall complain
to the States, and have recompense. It is a dainty place to please boys in,
for the father will bargain with the schoolmaster not to whip him, if he do, he
will revenge him with his knife, and have law for it. Their apparel is civil
enough, and good enough, but very uncomely; usually it has more stuff than
shape: only women's Trinkets are commodious in winter, but it is pity they have
not the wit to leave them off when Summer comes. Some of their women would have
good faces, if they did not mar them in the making. Men and Women are
starched so blue, that when they grow old, you would verily think, you saw old
winter standing up to the neck in a barrel of blue starch. The men are
tolerably clad, unless they incline to the Sea-fashion, and then their slops
yawn at the knees, as if they were about unmercifully to devour their shanks.
They are far from going naked; for, of a whole woman you can see but a piece of
her face as for her hands, they show her to be a shrewd labourer, which you
shall always find, as it were in recompense, laden with rings, to the
cracking of their fingers: and she will rather want meat, than a Cartrope of
silver, hung with keys. Their gowns are fit to hide great bellies; but they
make them show so unhandsome, that men do not care to get them. Marry this you
shall ever find to their commendations, their smocks are ever whiter then
their skins, much cleaner, and far sweeter. They railat us for our various
change of habit, but plead for their own more earnestly than lay-Catholicks
for their faith, which they resolve to keep, because their Ancestors lived and
died in it. For their diet, they eat much, and spend little; when they send out
a fleet to the East Indies, they live three months on the Offalis, which here
would surfeit a swine. In their houses, roots and stock fish are staple
commodities. At their feasts when they have flesh, they have the art to keep it
hot, as long as our fleet-lane cooks do incasell'd Porke. To a Feast they come
readily, but once set, you must have patience, for they are longer eating their
meat, than we in dressing it: You conclude Supper betimes, if you get away by
daybreak. It is a piece of good manners (if there be any) to carry away a
piece of Apple-pie in your pocket; their time they spend in eating well,
drinking much, and prating most.

In this progress you have seen somewhat of their evids; now observe them.
Solomon tells us of four things very small, but full of wisdom; the Pismire,
the Conie, the Spider, and the Grasho per, and they are all for providence.
They are the Pismires of the world, who having nothing but what the grass
yields them, are (yet) for all provisions become the storehouse of
Christendom. They are frugal to the saving of Egg-shels, and maintain for a
maxim, that many an old thing mended, will last longer than a new. Their
Cities are their molehills, whence their ships and flyboats creep and return,
laden for winter with store. For dwelling in rocks, they are Comes; where have
you under heaven, such impregnable Fortifications, where Art beautifies Nature,
and Art makes Nature invincible? Indeed herein they differ; the Conies find
rocks, and they make them; and, as if they would invert Moses miracles, they
^aile them in the bosom of the waves of Bemsters land, where within these
eighteen years; Ships furrowed the pathless Ocean, the peaceful plow embowells
the fruitful earth. For war they are Grasshoppers; for they go out without
Kings. There is not in Europe, such a School of martial discipline. For
Industry, they are Spiders; and live in the Palaces of Kings: None have the
like inteligence. Their merchants are this day the greatest in the Universe.
What Nation is it, where-into they have not insinuated themselves? nay, which
they have not Anatomized and discovered the intricate veins of it? All they
do, is with such labor, as it seems to be extracted out of their own bowels:
and by them we may learn, that no rain fructifies like the dew of sweat. You
would think (being with them) you were in old Israel; for there is not a beggar
amongst them: if he be unable, he finds an Hospital; if he would depart, he
shall have money for his Convoy; if stay, he shall have work. And, lest you
should (...) in fruitless mourning, their burials end by two of the clock. Even
their Bedlam is a place so curiously kept, that a Lord might live in it: Their
Hospital might lodge a Lady; their Bridewell a Gentlewoman, and their common
prison a rich Citizen: But, for a poor man, it is the best refuge; for, he
that cast him in, must keep him there. Even their dwelling is a miracle: for,
they live lower than the very Fish in the Lap of their floods, and incirculed
in their watery camps, they seem like the Israelites passing the Red Sea. Their
Walls wall them in: and if they open their Sluices, they drowned their enemies.
Again, they are the Indian rats, gnawing the bowels of the Spanish Crocodiles,
into which they got when they gaped to swallow them: they are the Serpents,
wrethed about the legs of that Elephant his almost invincible innumerable
Kingly titles, they are the Sword-fish under the Whale: they are the war of
that great Empire which increased in Isabella, and when Charles the fifth was
at the full. They are the Glass wherein Kings may see, that nothing makes am
ore desparate rebellion, than Prerogatives too far urged; that oppression is to
heat an iron, till it burn your hand; that an extreme taxation, is to steal
away the honey, till the Bees leave the hive; that their own tyranny is the
greatest enemy to their estate: that a desire of being too absolute, is to
press a thorn that will prick you; that to debarr an Estate of ancient
privileges, is to make a stream more violent by stopping it; that unjust
policy is to shoot (as they did at Ostend) into the mouth of a charged Canon,
and to have two bullets returned for one; that admonitions of a dying man are
too serious to be neglected.

To conclude, the Country it self, is a moated Castle keeping two of the
richest jewels in the world in it, the Queen of Bohemia, and the Princess of
Orange. The people are all Jews of the New Testament and in fine have changed
nothing but the Law for the Gospel.

FINIS.

