THE CONTINUATION OF CHRIST'S ALARM TO Drowsy Saints.

WITH A Treatise of Effectual Calling. The Killing power of the Law. The
Spiritual Watch. The New Birth. A Christians ingrafting into Christ. A
Treatise on the Sabath.


Which were never before published.

BY The Reverend and Faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. WILLIAM FENNER,
Late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell at the Fountain in Cheapside, and Tho.
Parkhurst at the three Crowns against the great Conduit at the lower end of
Cheapside.

MDCLVII.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
HE that should speak to the praise of this Author should commit the same
soloecism that he did who writ De laudibus Herculis, of the praise of Hercules,
whom no man ever dispraised. Should all men be silent, stones would speak for
him; those at least, of whom through Gods mercy he raised up children to
Abraham. He was a man of great abilities, great experiences, and great
industry; which three concurring, must needs make him a workman that needs not
be ashamed. He was a man well seen in the state of souls, and one who knew
with wonderful prudence and judgment to accommodate himself to men's various
conditions, which is a chief part of a spiritual Physician. The subject here
presented to thee is of great worth, and great difficulty; it is about the best
created object, a Saint, and de corruptione optimi, the corruption of the best,
the eclipses of those Lights; the falls, or rather the tremblings of those
pillars: a point wherein, if in any, there is need of great accurateness, lest
a man (...), whiles he avoyds one extreme Quae Deus abscondit, ne scrutemur;
quae in apertum protulit ne negligamus; ne aut una ex part nimiae
curiositatis, aut altera ingratitudin is damnemur.
runs into another: Need of great wariness, lest a man either harden the hearts
and strengthen the hands of evil doers, or sadden the hearts of those whom God
would not have made sad. It is one of those points which, it is like, many
think fitter to be smothered in perpetual silence, because of the sad
consequences will almost unavoidably follow upon it. But surely there is a
great deal of truth in that saying, To search into those things which God has
thought fit to conceal is boldness, and curiosity; to neglect those things
which God has revealed is gross ingratitude. And therefore leaving events to
God, for our parts we conceive the pains of this Reverend Author are to good
purpose, and such a subject deserved to be handled by such an hand. The former
part (setting aside what concerns the Ministers of Christ, etc.) speaks to dead
Christians, to the sect of Nominales, such as had merely a name to live, but
were dead; and distinguishes between the dead child and the living. This
second part speaks to the distempers of living Christians, who, though they
shall not see death, yet may with Epaphroditus be brought nigh unto death; yea,
with Eutychus may be taken up for dead, and so judged by the standers by: You
have here a Christian in his Autumn, or his winter, wanting not only the
blossom of a glorious profession, but also the fruit of a pious conversation
for ought that either himself or others conversing with him can discover.

Surely this is one of the saddest and most amazing meditations that a gracious
heart can pitch upon: it is one of the (...), the hidden things of God, which
we shall never thoroughly understand the reason of, donec Elias venerit, until
the coming of Elias: for the prosecution of this point, the Author takes that
course which a prudent Physician does in the cure of bodily distempers: First,
he opens the natures, shows the causes, gives the signs both Diagnostick and
Prognostic; and then comes to the Therapeutick part. And all of them handled
so substantially, and seriously ( pro more suo) that we doubt not, those that
fear God will look upon it as a singular providence of God, that has brought
such a Treasure to light. We may well conjecture that it will be a Book wherein
the people of God will be seriously conversant, the subject matter thereof
being of such constant and necessary concernment.

To this is added a Treatise of Effectual Calling; and other Treatises,
wherein you will meet with diverse things worthy of the Author. And although
all of us who have subscribed this Epistle have not perused the whole, yet
we have good cause to hope that it is a book, which if it be read with
prayer and consideration will add to thy spiritual stature and comfort in
Christ: only remember that it is not enough to be a formal reader, without
personal and practical application. But we will not detain thee by our
Preface from this profitable piece, which with thy self we commend to the
rich blessing of the Almighty, through our dear adored Savior, in whom we
are thine in the service of the Gospel,

Simeon Ash. William Tailor. Matthew Poole. John Jackson. John Seabrooke.

London, October. 21. 1656. Imprimatur

EDMUND CALAMY.





Errata in the Continuation of Christ's Alarm.

PAge 1. l. 44. r. it may. p. 5. l. 20. r. strive with: p. 70. l. 4. r. sinning
against. p. 78. l. 27. r. are bidden.

Errata in Effectual Calling.

Page 4. l. 25. r. of Darkness. p. 7. l. 6. may r. must. p. 14. l. 21. r.
restore unto me the joy. p. 33. l. 50. r. and what. p. 39. l. 17. r. a
Reception on man's side. p. 44. l. 35. r. no possibility. p. 47. l. 1. r. define
faith. l. 45. r. throw thy self. p. 51. l. 40. r. Hope of. p. 56. l. 21. r. to
task. p. 58. l. 53. r. to pray. p. 60. l. 36. r. have him. p. 69. l. 29. l. 29.
r. thine hand. p. 72. l. 27. r. that a justifying. p. 77. l. 2. r. that has
affiance. p. 79. l. 5. r. every man.

Killing power of the Law.

Page 5. l. 8. r. Damnable. p. 11. l. 53. after meaning dele e.

A Table for the Second part of CHRIST'S Alarm to Drowsy Saints.
Point 1.
WHy a child of God may think himself dead when he is not p. 1 Causes of false
liveliness. 1 Novelty of religion and grace p. 1 2 Violent commotions p. 2 3
Indiscretion 3 4 Presumption 5 Activeness of natural disposition 6
Extraordinary assistance 5 7 Freedom* from temptations 6
Point 2.
How far forth a child of God may be dead showed in these particulars 6 1 All
by nature are dead 2 The liveliest of Saints have some deadness 7 3 The
dea^^st of Saints have some life. 4 The point is t^cklish and dangerous i^ had
be no^ taken 8 1 It may embolden the adversaries of the Church 2 It may harden
such standers by who ar^ dead in sin. 3 It may render such people dead and
careless who were once stirred.
5 The point though dangerous yet needful 9 6 How far forth a child of God may
be dead 9 1 He may lose his zeal 2 He may lose all his affections 10 3 He may
grow to be senseless of sin and grace 11 4 He may gr^w notoriously vain,
worldly and guilty. 5 The service of God may be a burden to him 12 6 He may be
so dead that nothing can quicken him.
Quest. If a Saint be thus dead where is grace all the while? Ans. It cannot he
taken away, because 1 The seed of God remains still in him 13 2 Supernatural
habits remain. 3 He ever has an anointing. 4 He has remaining some little
strength.
Use 1 To stir us up to labor against sin 14 2 Let the best of Sains stand on
their guard. 3 Comfort for those who are dejected with dead hearts. 7 A child
of God may fall into foul sins 15 1 Into Idolatry 2 Aposta^y 3 Persecution of
Saints
8 A child of God may be hardened in sin 16 9 He may be long in sin. Reas. 1 In
regard of Satan. 2 Of themselves 17 3 Of God himself who leaves them to
themselves that 1 they may be patterns to others (18 2 to punish their
carelessness. 3 that so they may see they stand merely by grace. 4 that they may
be sensible toward their brethren 19 5 to humble them 20

Use 1 How to order our speeches concerning grace, which though it be
sufficient 1 to bring a man home to God 2 to keep him from falling away finally
3 from falling away totally 21
Yet Gods people are to stand upon their guard, because 22 1 Grace looks for
this 2 Promises are conditional 23 3 Experience in all ages proves the falling
of Saints upon Gods withdrawing 24
Qu. Is grace then indifferent in particular passages? Aus. No. For 1 Grace
sets up in the soul an universal principle to serve God in every particular. 2
It sets up a watch in the soul.
Use 2 To work out our salvation with fear and trembling 25 Use 3 Not to
stumble at this doctrine. Use 4 Not to raise false comfort to our selves from
this doctrine. 26 Causes of deadness. The cause in General is giving way to
sin, which is
1 A soul-killirg thing 2 It grieves the holy spirit 27 3 It pulls a hard task
on the soul to go through 4 It defiles the conscience 28 5 It weakens all
assurance of welcome with God 29
Causes in particular. 1 The nigardliness of people in Gods service 2 Their
unwatchfulness 30 3 Contenting themselves with a low kind of religion 31 4 The
vanity of men's minds 32 5 Mutual example. 6 Covetousness and worldinesse. 7
Spiritual sloth 33 8 Neglect of secret duties 34 9 Neglect of inward duties 35
10 Contenting themselves with what they have attained unto 36
Means of quickening. 1 Believing and looking up to Christ 37 2 Learning of the
word preached 38 3 Shunning all causes of deadness. 4 Being earnest with God
to quicken us 39 5 Diligent in all Christian duties and worship 40 6 Exercising
that grace we have. 7 Considering former and present examples 41 Motives to
shake off deadness 40 1 Consider the ingredients of this sin of deadness 42 As
1 Dullness and blockishness of mind to good. 2 Awkness and averness of heart to
the ways of Jesus Christ 43 3 Senselesness of conscience. 4 Coldness of
affections. 5 Faintness of endeavors. 6 Drowsiness of the whole man.


Mot. 2 Consider that while we are dead we cannot pray nor hear, etc. Mot. 3 We
can have no true sign of true grace 44 Mot. 4 We cannot grow in grace 45 Mot. 5
We shall grow deader and deader. Mot. 6 This sin of deadness worse then other
sins in these respects 46 1 Deadness is in all the whole man. 2 It is against
all Gods Commandments. 3 It is deeper in the soul then other sins 47 4 It is an
estate of sin. 5 It is a second death. 6 More special threatenings against
deadness.

Considerations to quicken us. 1 Consider that we owe to God our life and
affections 48 2 All the world is alive in their owe courses, let Christians be
alive in theirs. 3 Consider the worth of what is l^st by deadness 49 4 If we be
quickened, nothing will be hard. 5 We shall have much joy and comfort 6 All
Heaven will rejoice at our quickening. 7 We shall be enabled thereby to do good
to others 50
Remedies against deadness. 1 Be watchful 51
Observe. It is an excellent and sovereign thing for a Christian to watch 52
Reas. 1 In regard of our selves, our selves are false to our selves. 1 We
should watch our hearts. 2 Our thoughts 53 3 Our affections. 4 Our consciences.
5 Our tongues.
2 In regard of the world, lest it get into us ibid. 3 In regard of Satan 54
Because he is 1 A subtle enemy. 2 Diligent. 3 Strong. 4 Malicious. 5 Has
nothing else to do p. 55
4 In regard of the wicked. 5 In regard of good things 55 1 Our graces that we
may preserve, increase and exercise them 56 2 All good duties: before, in,
after duty ibid 3 In regard of God. For 1 Sometimes he comes nearer us then at
other times. 2 Sometimes does extraordinarily help us. 3 Does sometimes afflict
us 57

Use 1 Lament the neglect of this duty ib. 2 Be exhorted to take up this duty
ib. 1 Consider the misery of them that do not watch ibid. 2 The good of
watchfulness. 3 That men do watch in outward callings. 4 We have examples of
the Saints.
Remedy 2 Strengthen the things that remain 58 Mot. 1 Because they are
remainders. 2 Because those remanders are ready to die 3 Because thy works are
not perfect. Doctrine. It is a Christians duty to labor to be strengthened,
especial^y if he has formerly had more grace 58 2 Weakness. 1 Of people
unconverted. 2 Of Children of God, which is double 1 In beginning. 2 In
declining. Reas. 1 We can have no other comfortable argument of true grace 60 2
Else we can do no act of new obedience. 3 Nor overcome temptations 61 4 Nor
recover after a fall 62 5 Nor obey God with ease. Use 1 To condemn. 1 Those
that have no strength at all. 2 Those that do not strengthen the good things
they have 63 Use 2 To direct us what to do that we may strengthen, etc.
Direction. 1 Labor to have strong minds and understandings 64 2 Strong wills
66 3 Sound affections 67 Dir. 2 Labor to believe 3 Fly all occasions of evil.
4 Maintain a constant purpose to please God. 68 5 Frequent the Ordinances of
God. 6 Put forth your selves to the utmost in good duties 69 7 Remember we
always need new supply of strength. 8 Take heed of sinning against knowledge 70
9 Make conscience of useing and improving Sacraments. 1 Baptism. 2 Lords
Supper, which is of great use to strengthen believers. For 1 It is the nature
of the Sacraments. 2 It is a seal of Gods covenant 71 3 It is Communion with
Jesus Christ 4 A Sacrament of Communion with the members of Christ. Therefore 1
Let us so come to this Ordinance that we may be strengthened 72 2 This condemns
the most Christians. 3 This shows reason why we do not receive good by the
Sacrament. Reasons why men do not receive good by the Sacrament 73 1 Because
they come not with lively sense of their wants. 2 Without true repentance 74 3
Without faith. 4 They do not seek to God to bless the Sacrament to them 75 5
They do not behave themselves well at it. 6 Do not afterward examine what
good is got by it. 7 If they get good, they do not interpret it to be by the
goodness of God in the Sacrament. 8 They do not stir up the Sacraments that
they formerly pertook of 76 Doct. A child of God cannot fall from Grace 77
which is 1 Not from any thing in himself. 1 Because the best is bid to look on
himself as one that may fall into any sin in himself 78 2 Because they are
bidden to fear themselves 78 3 To take heed that they do not fall away
totally. 4 Because they are commanded to grow in grace 79 5 Because ex^mples of
Apostates are propounded for the Saints to take warning by. 6 Because people of
God are fain to pray God to keep them. 7 Because ^no grace received can hold
out without continual influences from heaven. 80 But 2 from the mere favor
and goodness of God 81 Qu. What is it that does and shall ever remain in a
believer 82 Ans^. An anointing from the holy one: for 1 A child of God if he
sin cannot carry it away as others 83 2 cannot stand it out as others do. 2
Lusting against every known sin 84 For 1 He never sins but against his standing
purpose. 2 Against the study and composure of his heart. 3 Something or other
breaks the fullness of the voluntariness of it. 1 Ignorance. 2 Inconsideration.
3 Possion. 4 Violent temptation. 4 Cannot make a trade of sin 85 5 Has an
apness to rise again. 3 A tender disposition to look after God 86 For 1 he
cannot lie down in spiritual distempers. 2 He has a feeling of his hardness.
3 He cannot be so secure as to forget God. 4 A love to the Image, mercy,
holiness, goodness and Ordinances of God. 5 A disposition to check and chid^
his soul for sin 87 6 The habit of grace. Use 1. For confutation of those that
hold falling from grace 88 2 For comfort to people of God against fears,
temptations, perserutions. 3 Labor to make sure that we be godly. Doct. A
particular Church may perish 89 Four notes of a true Church that may be lost. 1
Sincere preaching of the Gospel 90 2 True and sincere use of the Sacraments 92
3 Sincere prof^ssion of the Word of God 93 4 True discipline. Seven marks of a
falls Church 94 1 Antiquit^, 2 Universality, 3 Succ^ssion of Pastors, 4 Unity, 5
Miracles, 6 Pomp, 7 Outward prosperity 95 Reas 1. because the Church is
Catholic, not tied to any place 96 2 God needs no place or person. 3 No
particular Church has a promise of continuance. Use 1. To confound the Church
of Rome. 2 To warn all particular Churches 97 Doct. The second Covenant
requires works Works necessary, 98 1 By necessity of presence, 2 By necessity
of inseparable effects, 3 By necessity of signs 99 4 By necessity of
commandment. 5 By necessity of end. 1 to glorify God in the world, 2 to do
good unto others 100 3 to purify our selves, 4 to qualify us for heaven, 5 to
proportion our reward. 6 By necessity of thankefulness 101 Use 1. See how the
Papists wrong us, by accusing us to be against good works. 2 Let Ministers call
on people to have a working faith. 3 This discovers them to be graceless who do
not follow Christ in doing good. 4 Be exhorted to good works. Mot. 1. Good
works are signs of our condition and state. 1 Of election, 2 Effectual
calling, 3 Justification, 4 Adoption, 5 Of our love to God 103 2 The reason why
we pray no better is because we are not abundant in good works. 3 They would
cheer us in an evil day 4 The want of them the cause of temporal judgments 1^4
Doct. The covenant of grace require^ pe^fect works ibid: Not a perfection of
degrees, but of sincerity. Difference between Legal and ^vangelicall
perfection 105 1 The law requires performances, as well as the will and desire.
2 The perfection of the L(...) stands on quantities as well as qualities. 3 Upon
full measure, whether a man have power or no. 4 Admits no failings 106 5 M^kes
nothing of repentance. Doct We should labor ^o b^ perfect. Reas 1. From the
nature of God 107 2 Because God has commanded us to be sincere. 3 Because God
knows our hearts. 4 God will let down the C^venant no lower. 5 All Gods Saints
have been perfect. Use 1. To reprove the want of uprightness 108 2 To humble
the people of God 109 3 To exhort us to be upright. Mot. 1 God delights only in
an upright heart. 2 This is the total sum of all that God requires p. 110 3 The
least grace with uprightness is better then all the goodly performances in the
world. 4 God will bear with grievous faults where there is uprightness. 5
Vprightness will help us to profit by all ordinances 111 6 Is most excellent
ground of comfort. 7 Will make us and our posterity blessed. 112 Use 4 For
examination. Signs of uprightness. 1 An upright man is universal in regard of
all Gods commands. 2 In regard of all graces. 3 Of all places and company 113 4
Of all times. 5 Of all his parts, understanding, will, memory, etc. 114 6 Of
all conditions 115 7 Of all relations. 116 8 Of all the circumstances of his
actions 117 Doct. As we must be perfect, so we must be perfect before God 118 1
Not so as God should approve our works in strict justice. But 2 On account of
his mercy in Jesus Christ. Reas. 1 Because God has so commanded. 2 Otherwise a
man has no faith 119 3 This is the end of Christ's redemption. 4 This is the
end of election. 5 Because God will search us out 120 6 God only does esteem of
the worth of holiness, etc. Use 1 To condemn the ceremonious devotion of many.
2 For humiliation 121 3 For exhortation to be upright. Doct. God will search
whether we be perfect 122 Difference between Gods searching and man's. 1 Man's
searching may be without finding. 2 Has ignorance foregoing. 3 Is properly so
called. 4 Is necessary for knowledge. 5 Is for himself 123 God searches five
ways. 1 By his own spirit. 2 By the spirit of man. 3 By conscience. 4 By his
word 124 5 By his providence. Whereby God discovers men's secret works. 1 By
letting his people suspect men 125 2 By letting his people injure wicked men. 3
By guiding his Ministers to home preaching. 4 By their own lusts and corruption
126 5 By persecution. Reas. 1 It is Gods prerogative to teach us. 2 God will
have hypocrites discovered 127 3 It is for Gods glory to search men out. 4 It
is for Gods truth. 5 For his justice. Use 1 To reprove those that consider not
that God will search 128 2 Take heed of hiding our sins from others and our
selves 129 Use 3 For comfort to people. 1 Against others that judge them. 2
Against their judging themselves 130 4 To stir us up to be able to stand when
God searches. 1 When offenses come. 2 When afflictions and persecutions come:
3 In time of difficult commandments 4 At judgment. 131 5 Let us search our
selves. Mot. 1. Otherwise we can never repent of what is amiss in our selves
or our works. 2 It Is a mark of a child of God to search himself. 3 If we do
not, it will be the worse for us.
DOctr. It is an excellent thing for a man to be able to say, that God has
effectually called him. p. 1. 1 Because then a man may reflect^on all his life,
and see Gods love to him in all. p. 3. 2 This interests a man in all the
promises. 3 Sweetens all the promises. 4 Helps a man to pray. 5. Encourages to
all good undertakings. p. 4. 6 It is a foundation for a godly life. 7 It is an
help to rise after a fall. Reas. 1. Because it is an argument of election. 2
Sure pledge of all Gods acts of mercy. p. 5. Use 1. Then a man may know his
effectual calling. Proved. 1 Because it is the office of the Spirit to make
known the things of God. p. 6. 2 Because we are commanded to make our calling
sure. p. 7. 3 Because we are required to be thankful for it. 4 Because the
making known our calling is one of the ends of the Word of God. p. 8. 5 Because
the soul has a power of reflecting and knowing its own state. Obj. Why then
are those who are called so doubtful? Ans. 1 Because this knowledge is gradual
2 Experimental. p. 9. 3 Spiritual. p. 10. 4 Because it may be hindered for a
time 1 By a lothness of heart to leave some lust. p. 11. 2 By ignorance. 1 Of
the voice of the spirit. p. 12. 2 Of the work of grace. 3 Of his Christian
liberty. 4 Of the tenderness of Christ. p. 13. 3 By melancholy. 4 By the
unskilfulness of a Minister. The evil of wanting this knowledge. p. 14. 1
Conscience must needs charge sin on you. 2 You can have no joy in Christ or his
promises. 15. 3 You cannot tell what to make of Gods mercies. 4 Thou know
not what to do in time of affliction. 5 Thou can not pray with courage 16 6
Thou can not go on sweetly in the ways of God. 7 Thou see no d^fference
between thy self and a very unbelieving wretch. 17. 8 Thou art of all men most
miserable. 9 If thou be totally ignorant, it is a sign thou art not yet
effectually called. Qu. What difference between the uncertainty of believers
and unb^lieveris 18 Ans. 1 As a believer cannot say it, so he cannot deny it. 2
Believers question their calling only in their haste. 3 They will let others
question their grace. 4 They most love them that urge th(...) to seek this
knowledge* 5 Their uncertainty breaks that hearts. p. 19. 6 Though at present
uncertain, yet they believe they shall be certain. 7. Their faith is of a
contra^y nature to their doubting, 8. Christ is to them the power of God. p.
20. Doct. Effectual calling is the first gathering of men unto Christ. Reas. 1
Before effectual calling the soul is without Christ. p. 21 2 Before this all
was within God. 23. 3 All other works follow this calling. 4 From the names
given to effectual calling p. 24 5 Because it is the first extract of election.
p. 25. Use 1 Then very dangerous to err about this. p. 26. Reas. 1 Because
this is the foundation. 2 Because a believer must often hate recourse to it. 3
Because it is the beginning of Gods works on the soul. Use 2. See the reason
why Scripture so urges the making this sure. p. 27. 1 Because it is a work but
once done. 2 Because all the promises meet here p. 28 3 Because this is the
first of all obedience. 4 This is the only way to go forward p. 29 5 Because
this is the main ground to keep from falling away.
Matthew. 11. 28.
Doct. There is a preparatory work unto effectual calling p. 30 Proof. 1 From
Texts full of terror p. 31 2 From the spirits office. 3 Because the Gospel
follows the Law 4 From Christ's design in coming to save that which was lost. 5
From Gods working with believers after gross sins p. 32 6 From Scripture
examples. Reas. 1 To declare Gods justice p. 33 2 To sweeten mercy p. 34 3 That
God may bring men home to Christ p. 35 4 To wean men from sin. 5 To knock men
off from every thing else. p. 36 Use 1 To reprove daubers. 2 Be content to hear
the curses of the Law preached p. 37 3 To comfort those that have had this
work p. 38
2 These. 2. 14.
Doct. The Gospel, or general tender of grace is that by which God calls men
home p. 40 Reas. 1 Because this is the sweet ground of faith p. 41 2 Because
this is the best answer to Satan p. 42 3 Because this is true before all acts
in man. 4 This is the only thing which every man is bound to believe p. 43 Obj.
Christ is given only to the elect. Ans. Yet the Gospel must be preached without
restraint to election. Reas. 1 Otherwise the elect would have no ground for
faith. 2 Because in reference to men, calling is before election. p. 44 3
Because there is a difference between men and Devils. Use 1 To comfort and
encourage believers p. 46 2 To confute those that define faith by assurance p.
47 3 To encourage all that are without p. 49 4 To terrify the obstinate.
Col. 1. 23.
Doct. God in the general tender of mercy works some hopes in the soul p. 51 1.
What is this hope? Ans. It arises from the faith of possibility p. 52 2 How
does this hope agree with that which follows justifying faith? Ans. 1 Both are
of God. 2 Both are wrought by the Gospel. 3 Both set the soul on work. 4 Both
are the anchor of the soul. 5 Neither of them shall make a man ashamed p. 54 3
How differs this hope from that which follows justification? Ans. 1. This
arises out of the seeds of grace, the other out of grace it self. 2 They come
from several apprehensions p. 54 Reas. 1 To prevent despair 55 2 That a man may
not be disabled looking after heaven. 3 Because God will not do all at once. 4
That he may be sought to for every mercy p. 56 Use 1 To show the graciousnesse
of God. 2 To comfort believers: 3 To enform how God works this hope p. 57 1 By
rooting out all vain hopes. 2 By setting a look upon the Gospel. 3 By removing
all impossibilities. Use 4. Labor not to diminish this hope p. 58 Dir. 1 Look
to the power of God. 2 To the freeness, indifferency, universality of the
promises. 3 Send often unto God by prayer.
John 6. 45.
Doct. When God calls the soul, he makes it hear a particular voice p. 60 Reas.
1 Else no man could come to Christ p. 61 2 That we may have a ground for our
faith. Qu. Why is this act attributed to the Father? Ans. 1 Not as though
Christ did not speak p, 62. 2 Not as though we should set up a conceited
distinction of works in the Trinity p. 63 Qu. What is this voice of the Father.
Ans. Neg. Not distinct from the word preached. Aff. 1 It consists in the
opening a man's senses. 2 In taking away a man's lameness 64 Called a voice. 1
Because joined to the Word. 2 Because it has a similitude of a voice. Qu. How
may we know whether the soul has heard this voice p. 63 Ans. 1 There is a
power goes along wi^^ this word. 2 This voice makes a man hear more then any
creature can speak. 3 It is the irrefragable propounding of the promise 66 The
second act of faith which is the believing that in Jesus Christ he shall have
eternal life 67 To distinguish, 1 A natural man may believe the power of God 67
2 An unrooted confidence of the will ibid. 3 Presumptious confidence p. 68 2
Confidence of the godly ibid. 1 In special persuasion of Gods love ibid. 2 A
constant expectation ibid. Confidence in Christ for life and salvation is
justifying faith p. 68 Arg. 1 From the several expressions of faith in
Scripture. 1 Trusting. 2 Relying. 3 Staying on God. 4 Rolling ones self on God.
5 Adhering. 6 Believing on God p. 70 Arg. 2 From the offer of Christ. Arg. 3
Because faith is a coming to Christ p. 71 Arg. 4 Because the Doctrine of
justifying faith is no proposition but Christ himself p. 72 Arg. 5 Because true
faith is faith of union p. 73 Use 1 No absurdity to say faith is in the heart
as well as in the mind 75 Use 2 A believer may not be sure in regard of sense.
True faith may be without sense and feeling. Arg. 1 The event is not the object
of justifying faith. p. 77 Arg. 2 The event is conditional till a man believes
p. 78 Arg. 3. and 4. p. 79 Arg. 5. Not the truth but the strength of faith
apprehends the event p. 80 Doct. It is faith that makes a man obey the call of
God p. 83 Reas. 1 Because faith sees Gods purity and mercy to be inseparable
attributes p. 83 Reas. 2 Because faith looks on Christ not only as a Savior
but as a Lord p. 84 Reas. 3 Because faith cleaves the heart to the
commandments as well as to the promises p. 85 Reas. 4 Because faith looks for
a f^tness for heaven as well as a title to heaven p. 86 Reas. 5 Is eminently
all that a man is to do p. 87 Qu. How does faith make a man obey? p. 88 Ans. 1
By setting before a man his corruptions. 2 By carrying a man to God p. 89 3 By
making a man improve all his abilities p. 89 4 By making a man rely on Christ,
p. 90 Qu. How does faith fetch power from Christ? p. 90 Ans. 1 As an
instrument. 2 In a moral way. Use 1 See what little faith is in the world p. 93
Use 2 Of examination of our obedience. 1 It is willing p. 94 2 Works
resignation to God. 3 It puts forth all a man's strength in God p. 95 Use 1. To
condemn security 42 2 to reprove the neglect of it in the godly 3 to direct how
to walk. Dir. 1. Count watchfulness your life 43 2 Watch universally. 3
Proportion it to the duty in hand. 4 Take heed of hindrances, 1 Vain company, 2
spiritual drunkenness. 5 Set God before your eyes 44 Use 4. To exhort to
watchfulness. Mot. 1. Otherwise it will be ill with us at last. 2 Our souls
are sickly. 3 We are already awakned 45 4 The badnesse of the times, places,
families we live in.
The New birth. John 3. 6.
Doct. The Spirit of God regenerates all the Saints 47 Qu. 1. What is
regeneration? 48 Ans. 1. A renewing of a man. 2 A renewing of the whole man 49
3 It is done by degrees. 4 It is according to Gods Image 50 5 It is Gods Image
in Christ Jesus. Qu. 2. Why called Regeneration? 51 Ans. 1. To show the great
corruption of nature. 2 Because great resemblance with generation. 1 In both
there is a father. 2 In both there is a mother 52 3 A shaping in the Womb
before life. 4 Pain in bringing forth. 5 A new being attained. 6 New kindred
gotten. Qu. 3 Wherein does it consist? 53 An. 1 There is a passive receiving of
Christ. 2 An active power to become Sons of God. Qu. 4 Why does the Spirit work
regeneration? 54 Ans. 1 It is the good pleasure of God. 2 No other agent can
do it. 3 Man of himself is totally against it 55 Qu. 5 How does the Spirit
work regeneration? Ans. 1 By the Word of life 56 2 By a secret supernatual
power. Use 1 To confute Papists, Pelagians, etc. 2 To inform of our need of the
spirit 57 3 To exhort. 1 Not to grieve the spirit. 2 To do any thing for God.
3 To pray for the spirit. Use. 4 For examination whether we be regenerated 58
Sign 1 When doing good is natural. 2 When heart is a good soil for grace 59 3
When a man cannot live in sin, 4 When it is pleasant to do Gods will 60 5 When
grace gets the upper hand. 6 When a man loves the children of God 7 When a man
loves to profit others spiritually.
Christians ingrafting into Christ.
Qu. 1 What is Christ's body into which men are ingrafted 62 Ans. 1 It is the
Church of God. 2 It is gathered out of all Nations. 3 Predestined unto life
63 4 Begotten again by the Word. 5 Knit and combined to Christ. Q 2 What is it
to be put into this body 64 Ans. 1 It is part of the ingrafting into Christ. 2
It is done by faith. 3 It makes us have a common life with all the rest of
Christ's members 65 4 It makes a man be of one consent with all the people of
God everywhere 5 Is for mutual help, care and sympathy 66 Qu. 3 Why does the
spirit of God do this? 67 Ans. 1 None else is able to do it. 2 None else fit.
Qu. 4 How does the spirit do this Ans. 1 By being one and the same spirit in
all the members of Christ. 2 By tying a knot between these members. Use 1
Informs that the want of the spirit is the reason of the difference of men in
the World 68 2 Let none put asuuder whom the spirit joins. 3 Try our
acquaintance hereby. 4 Stir up Sympathy 69 Qu. 5 How shall we sympathize with
Christ's members. Ans. 1 By informing our selves concerning one another. 2 By
visiting fellow members. 3 By laying to heart their afflictions.
Of the Sabbath, Exodus 20. 19.
Prop. 1. There must be some set time for the worship and immediate service of
God. 70 Reas. 1 All actions cannot be done at once. 2 Because of our dullness.
Prop. 2. There must be some set time every day. Reas. 1. Else we live like
beasts 71. 2 Every morning God renews mercies 3 God is the beginning and
ending of all things. Prop. 3. Every day is in some sort a Sabbath. Reas. 1.
Gods covenant with us requires it 2 Not to do so is a brand of hypocrisy 3
Blessedness consists in it 72 4 This is the sum of the law of righteousness.
Prop. 4. There must be a particular special day, Reas. 1. That in this life we
may have an Emblem of Heaven. 2 Gods honor requires it. 73 3 God sometimes
calls for extraordinary days, 1 Of rejoicing. 2 Of fasting. 1 When judgments
are feared 74 2 Mercies wanting. 3 Souls tempted. 4 Some notable work
undertaken. 4 It is most equitable 75 1 That God should have one day, 2 That
our souls should have one day. Prop. 5. One day in seven is to be set a part
for Gods worship. Reas. 1. Gods positive command 76 2 It is Gods day. 3 That
servants, cattle, etc. may have rest. 4 God has sanctified it. 5 Because we
are apt to be worldly, etc. Prop. 6. That day of seven is to be kept holy on
which God rested 76 Prop. 7. All that is in the fourth Commandment is not
essential to it. Prop. 8. The fourth commandment continually to abide in
force. 78 Reas. 1. Because the Sabbath was instituted before there was room for
ceremonies. 2 The Sabbath was kept before the Law given. 3 It was written by
the finger of God 79 4 God often urges this Commandment as well as any other.
5 Else we have not ten Commandments. 6 Christ plainly tells us so. 7 The
Heathens have ever kept a Sabbath day 80 Prop. 9. The first day of the week is
now the Lords day 81 Reas. 1. From Psalm. 118. 24. 2 From Rev. 1. 10. 3 Christ
calls himself Lord of the Sabbath 82 4 Christ commanded the Apostles to keep
this day. 5 Christ's wisdom would not leave such things uncertain. 6 Who should
institute this day, but be that is the head? 7 All Christians have kept this
day since the Apostle time. 8 Gods judgments on the prophaners of this day do
evince it 83 Use 1. Then we are to keep an whole day 84 Reas. 1. We have six
whole days for our selves. 2 God rested an whole day. 3 From Levit. 23. 32. 4
God never instituted half holy days. 85 5 It is the judgment of Divines in
all ages. Use. 2. Then sports are unlawful on this day. Reas. 1. Because
working is otherwise commanded, sporting only permitted. 2 Working does less
distract the mind.
The Second Part of CRISTS Alarm to DROUSIE SAINTS.
REVEL. 3. 1. Thou have a name that thou live, and art dead.
I Have spoken of the life of the affections, and now I should come to the next
thing, namely, to show how far a child of God may be said to be dead; but
before I handle this, there 1. Point why a child of God may think he is dead,
or deader then ever when there is no such matter. Seven cases of false
liveliness. 1. Novelty of Religion and grace.
is another point that would be spoken to in a word or two; and that is this,
Why a child of God may think himself to be dead when he is not, and think he is
grown deader then ever he was, and there is no such matter; and others may
think he is grown cold and negligent, and yet the truth is, he is more
affected, and more alive toward God then formerly; this is a very needful
point, and there be several causes of false liveliness which a child of God may
have, and when they go away he may seem to be deader then he was, whereas
indeed he is not so.

The first is novelty of Religion and grace, when grace is yet new, and the
word comes fresh to a man, and the promises of eternal life look freshly into a
man's heart, they will affect him much, and not only raise his sanctified
affections, but his unsanctified too; for the unsanctified affections will stir
at a novelty; a man that has no grace at all, nor any life, will be stirred at
a new thing; as when the Apostle preached new doctrine to the Athenians, Acts
17. 32. we will hear thee again of this matter, say they; they cared not how
often they heard this, because it was news to them; so when Christ preached up
and down, O what new doctrine is this! say they, never man spoke as this man,
Joh. 7. 46. it was a new kind of preaching, new gifts, this stirred them
mightily; so it may be with a true Christian, when the word of God comes first
to him, and grace comes first to him, the novelty of grace may affect him; when
God first opens his eyes, how strangely will he be moved in prayer? how
strangely will he carry himself at a Sermon? his very bowels yearn at a Sermon,
and he will cry out, Oh the infinite mercy of God to my soul! what a beast was
I before? I was an hell-hound, a child of the Devil; and now the Lord has made
me a child of God; I went on in the high way to perdition, and now God has
brought me into the right way; this is admirable; but do you think these are
all good affections? there is a great deal of corruption in these; as new Beer,
when it is first tunned, it has a great deal of working then, but when it is
staler, it does not work so much, yet then is the Beer more powerful, and has
more life; as it is with a man's first entrance into an hot bath, it does so
stir him, as if it did sealed him, but after he has been in a while, he is
sensible of little or no heat; the heart is as much as it was at the first, and
works upon him as much, but he feels it not so much; so a good Christian does
not seem to be so much affected afterward as formerly; are his true affections
therefore down? no, but his unsanctified ones are down; may be a man has not
lost a jot of his true, and sound, and sanctified affections, but only his
unsanctified ones; for when grace comes first into the soul of a new convert,
there is a greater Army raised up for God then is likely to continue; there are
a company of mercenary Soldiers steping, and seem to go out and to fight for
God, as well as the (...)t; you shall have more fears in that man, then are
true; and more de^^res after grace then are true; carnal desires, and joys, and
delights, these will be all up at the first, and will go out, though they never
go to the journeys end; it is with a new convert, at his setting out toward
heaven, as it was with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt,
there was a mixed multitude went up with them, Exodus 12. 38. why? the plagues
of God had wrought upon many of the Egyptians, and they would go up with them,
but they would not go into the land of Canaan, but returned back again; the
true Israelites, that were affected truly, they only went into the Land of
Canaan ^ but a mixed company went up with them; so when a man sets forth
toward heaven, there is a mixed company in that man's bosom, goes along with
him, mixed joy, and fear, and hope, and even corrupt nature is raised up at
first; for you must think the fears of God lying upon the soul, and the newness
of Religion, (he was in hell before, now he is in heaven) that will raise up
even corrupt nature, for a time a man will seem to be so affected and so
lively; now after a while these mercenary Soldiers, this mixed company go back
again, and leave nothing but the b^re sanctified affections; and now the man
seems to be deader then he was; as if he had lost all; and may be he complains
he is not the man he was, he was thus, and thus moved before, and enlarged to
good duties, now he is down the wind; I say this does not follow, it is even as
if a man that has bought a bushel of pease at the Market, when they are
shell'd, and the pods are off, and none but the bare pease left, should
complain he has less then he had at first; so it is here, there is nothing
gone but the mere trash and husks; when a man is first converted, there is a
great deal of trash with it, a great deal of corrupt nature that will leave a
man in the lurch afterward: yet it follows not, but the man has the same
sanctified affections he had formerly.

Secondly, Violent commotions may stir a man, and make him seem to 2. Violent
Commotions.
be more affected then he is; there are many seem to be full of life, whereas,
if they were searched to the bottom, there is nothing but violent commotions,
that will come to nothing; a child of God at first setting out, may be
marvellously quickened and stirred, and seem to be mighty zealous and fervent,
when in truth the greatest part of this is nothing but violent commotions; a^
little grace will seem a great deal when there are these violent stirrings;
this man will make a greater show, then the same godly man afterward, when he
has more grace a great deal; as James and John seemed to be very zealous, Luke
9. 54. as zealous as Elias; you will say were they not affected? when they saw
the Samaritans would not receive Christ, oh thought they, they deserve to be
burnt down to the ground; Will thou that we command fire to come down from
heaven to consume them, as Elias did? they could have been content to have
fired whole Towns that would not receive Christ; you will say this is
admirable; but these were nothing but violent commotions; now when Christ had
stilled these violent commotions, will you say they were grown cold and dead,
and not so lively as formerly? you know the torrent, though it run not so
violently as in a great flood, yet still it runs; so it is here, may be a godly
Minister at his first entrance puts forth himself more, and preaches as if he
would fly in the face of the ungodly; afterward he preaches more gently and
evenly; shall we say he is grown more dull and dead, and not so well affected
as before? no, he may be more affected; so for a private Christian, it may be
so soon as ever God turned his heart and inclined him toward his heavenly
Kingdom, and made him look out for the good of his soul we shall have hm pray
with such violence and such extended passages, he will reach forth himself in
the confession of sin, as if he would trample upon himself, and in his
petitioning for grace, as if he would wrestle with God; and in his
acknowledging of Gods goodness as if he were affected more then thousand
Christians besides; but afterward when he comes to have his eyes better
enlightened, to see what a deal of froth was in these things, and how dead he is
in regard of true saving life, now he begins to be ashamed of himself, he does
not lay them down, but he would have them in more truth: Now shall we say this
man is more dead and less affected then he was before? no, but this man has
less violent commotions.

Thirdly, Indiscretion will make a man seem to be more affected then indeed 3.
Indiscretion.
he is; as a godly man that is rash and indiscreet, let this man reprove a sin,
he will be so zealous and earnest, nay, he will be so choleric, that if you do
not yield presently, he is in a combustion; afterward, when God gives him more
knowledge of his ways, and more discretion to reprove sin, he will not be so
choleric, and in such a passion; has this man lost his affections now? no,
this does not follow; he may keep his affections still, and it may be hates sin
a thousand times more then he did before, but he goes another way to work, and
deals more composedly, and gravely, and zealously, for the good of the man's
soul; as when Paul saw the Philippians so loving in the midst of all his
afflictions and sufferings for the Gospels sak^, sending him so many hundred
miles a great present to relieve him in his necessity, what does he do? does he
bid them abate their love? no, eu(...)use in it more and more says he, but let
it be with knowledge and judgment, Phil. 1. 9. a man that is of a loving
nature, when he has pared off all foolish charity, and all vain and proud
charity, whereby he does things out of pride, ostentation, and vanity, as he
will do when he comes to have more understanding; if he do not discern and
compare himself with the word of God, he may seem to abate in his love, but he
is not less loving but more judicious. So Samuel at first, he was so zealous
against Saul, when he had sinned against Gods commandment, that he would, not
stay with him by any means; no, says he, you have rejected the word of the
Lord, when Saul confessed his sins, and entreated him to stay, and was very
earnest; no, by no means; what, stay with a wretch that has rejected the word
of the Lord? 1 Samuel 15. 26. yet afterward he did stay; will you say now Samuel
was grown cold, and less affected against sin? no, but he was more judicious;
he begun to consider, certainly if I do not stay, it will be a disparagement to
the Lords anointed; I may disparage the Lords ordinance, and disparage the
Kings Authority, and cause the people to scorn him; he began to see that Saul
spoke with sense, honor me before the people; and he did stay then; now he was
not less affected, but more judicious.

Fourthly, Presumption may make a man seem to be more affected and 4.
Presumption.
quickened a great deal then indeed he is; as Peter, he seemed to be so mightily
transported and enlarged toward Christ, and so full of zeal for him; though
all men forsake thee, yet will not I: he thought he was so affected, that he
could compare with all the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ, and go
beyond them all; but afterward when Christ asked him, Peter, love thou me?
see his answer, Joh. 21. 15. his answer was nakedly, Lord, thou know that I
love thee; he would make no more comparisons; though Christ put him upon it
there, yet he would not be brought to compare any more. Now was he less
affected toward Christ? no, but he was less presumptuous.

Fifthly, Activeness of natural disposition may make a man seem to be 5.
Activeness of natural disposition.
more affected then indeed he is; for a man the more active his nature is, and
the more spirits he has, the more stirring he has; a man that has such a
disposition, will go further then another of a slower spirit; there is a great
deal more grace required to make an heavy dull natured man to speak a word for
God, then to make a choleric man strike a blow for God; men's natures differ,
some men are more active naturally; may be one man is full of activity and
stirring, another man is of a dull dispostion; will you say this man is deader
then he? no, this man may have more life of grace then he; it is as if one man
should swim with the stream, and another against the stream he that swims with
the stream, will more easily swim a mile, then he that swims against the
stream, will swim half a mile; will you say that this man cannot swim so well
as the other? no, he may be a better swimmer of the twain; for this is the
thing, we are not to judge of the life of our grace, by what we do, but by what
labor we take in doing, as the Apostle says, remembering without ceasing, your
work of faith, and labor of love, 1 These. 1. 3. may be another man is of a
more loving nature then this man, but the man that is more unkind naturally,
and harsh-natured, he labors a thousand times more abundantly then the other;
who has most grace of love now? the other has most natural love, but this man
has more grace of love, as Paul proves he had the life of grace in him,
because he labored more abundantly then they all; it is not what thou do,
but what thou laborest to do, he that swims down the stream, does not labor,
if he should do nothing but stir his hands and feet without any labor, the
stream will carry him, so when a man has nature to help him, he need not
labor much, but when a man must fetch all out of the hard flint, how is he
fain to labor? there thou may try the life of thy affections, not by what
thou prayest, but by what thou labourest in prayer, not by what thou remembrest
at a Sermon, but though thou have a blockish memory, how do thou labor to
remember? so it is not the not doing of sin, but the laboring against sin,
hereby thou may know whither they zeal and affection be abated in thee: So
again for a man's self, may be he was more active heretofore, had a more nimble
spirit and temper of body, now he is grown more sad and melaneholy, his head is
distempered and grown more weak, his memory fails, and his understanding
decays, that quick disposition of his body is taken down, and he cannot do as
he did before, is the man therefore not so quickened as he was before? is he
grown more dead? may be the man complains, certainly he has cause to suspect
himself, and he does not think he is right; formerly he could remember a
Sermon, be fixed in meditation, be attentive at the word, be fervent in prayer,
and put forth himself in this fashion; now he cannot, he was so lively before,
now he has not the same activity, and therefore begins to call all into
question, certainly all is not right. I answer, this does not follow; it is
true, in many a man it is the deadness of his heart, and the decayedness of his
spiritual estate that causes this, but it does not follow that it is so with
thee, but the cause is this, may be thou have worn out thy tools, therefore no
marvel thou can not work so well as formerly; take a skilful Musician, whose
instrument is cracked and marred, he cannot make so good music upon this
instrument, as he could when it was sound; does it follow, he has lost his
skill? no, give this man ^ sound instrument, as he had before, and he will play
as well as ever; all our operations, not only external, but also internal, do
much depend upon the disposition of the body; as for meditation, may be when
the body was lively and active, a man could fix his meditations upon a thing,
now it is weakened he cannot; may be he has the same desire and delight as he
had before, but he cannot do it; so may be he has as great a desire as ever to
remember the word, but his memory is gone; so may be he has as great a desire
to put forth himself in any ordinance of God as ever in all his life, but his
body will not bear it; I say, the spirits depend much upon the body; you may
see this in natural operations; let a man's eyes fail, will any man say, that
the soul of that man is less able to see then it was? no, the soul is as able
to see in a blind man, as in a seeing man; in an old man whose eyes fail him,
as in a young man that has the quickest sight; if this man had an excellent
eye given him, he would see as well as any body else; the soul is able to do
it, but it wants a tool; so many Saints of God, cannot do many duties as they
were wont, not for want of love and zeal, and affections, but for want of
tools; it is said 2 Samuel 21. 16. that when David waxed old, they would not let
him go out into the field; did they look upon David now as less worthy then
before? no, they looked upon him as more worthy then before; the text says,
they looked upon him as the very light of Israel, though he could not fight for
Israel so well as he did before; so you shall see many a godly man, and
reverend father upon his death bed, shows no great matter in his dying; what,
because he is dead, and is not the man he was? no, but because he has worn out
his tools; he is not the man in regard of operation, though he has the same
affections he had formerly.

Sixthly, Extraordinary assistance may make a man seem to be more lively 6.
Extraordinary assistance
and quickened then indeed he is; for God does assist his people extraordinarily
in their beginning, it is true some of his people he does extraordinarily assist
all their life long, but he does not usually do it, he does choose rather
extraordinarily to strive and help his people at the first, and afterward he
helps them only ordinarily, leaving them to fight with their own corruptions;
why? because it is an extraordinary case; when a child is young, his parents
will extraordinarily help him to go, and will not let the weight of his body
lie upon any one step, but help him in every step; afterward they help the
child, but more ordinarily they look the child should go alone, and may be now
he gets more knocks then he did before, and falls oftener; will you say the
child is now grown weaker? no, he is stronger then he was, but there is a
difference, he had extraordinary assistance before, now he is left to himself
and to his own legs; so it is with God toward his children; at first, when
they are new beginners, when they are nowly born again, he takes compassion
upon them extraordinarily, helps them in prayer, and against their corrupt
lusts; and if the Lord should not do thus, it is impossible they should stand,
as the Lord says of Ephraim, when he was a child I loved him, and taught him
to go, Hos. 11. 1, 3. he carried him in his arms as a child, when he was young;
afterward he looks he should go alone; not as if any of Gods children could go
alone, they have need of his help every day; but they must go alone in respect
of extraordinary help; for God has given them access to the throne of grace,
and has given them understanding, and some strength; and he looks they should
use these things not as though they could use them without his assistance, but
without extraordinary assistance; now when God leaves his child to walk by
himself, he will fall oftener then before; you shall have many grown Christians
fall oftener then young beginners; why? because they are weaker and less
quickened? no, but because they have not such extraordinary assistance; they can
go alone. I speak not as though it were without the assistance of God, but
without extraordinary assistance; and though for want of care and watchfulness
they get a fall, yet they are not weaker; few new beginners ever fell as David
and Peter fell afterward; no, the Lord bears them in his arms, but afterward
he lets them go alone; now when the Saints of God feel duties to come on so
heavily, extraordinary assistance being gone, they think they are grown dead
and lumpish; why? the load lies heavier upon their own backs then ever it did
before; yet it does not follow they are more dead; a child whom his father
bears in his arms, may be carried along from one end of the house to the other,
sooner then another child that goes alone, can go it in thrice as much time;
will you say this child is weaker then the other? no, this child goes alone,
and the other is extraordinarily helped; so the people of God, when they are
first converted, they must know they are extraordinarily assisted, and they
must take heed left they be proud and conceited; oh they may think they have
gotten such a deal of grace and life already; no, no, alas you shall see what
you have when you go alone.

Seventhly, Freedom from temptations may make a man seem to be more 7 Freedom
from temptations.
quickened then he is; as a heavy dull tempered man, may go faster a great deal
having no clog, then the nimblest man in the Country with a clog at his heels;
a man at his first conversion, God will not let him be tempted, he is but in
his nonage, in his entrance into the Kingdom of God, and if God should let
temptations presently fly upon him, before he has more grace and judgment,
and more experience of the vileness of his own heart, and the goodness of God,
he would break his neck; now God will never suffer a man to be tempted above
what he is able; therefore when his people are first converted, he frees them
from temptations a while, and then they go roundly on; afterward when they
have been ten or twenty or thirty years in grace, may be they are foully
overtaken, and go heavily on; shall they therefore complain they are deader
then they were? as an horse, when he carries single may go roundly; afterward,
the same horse being put to carry double, he goes more heavily; will a man say
the metal of the horse is grown worse? no, but he carries double; so it is
with the Saints of God; may be formerly they carried single, now they carry
double; the Lord lets more temptations fall upon them then he did before; will
you say that Joseph was grown cold, because he had gotten that vile custom of
swearing in Pharaohs Court? he never swear at home, alas he had no temptations
at home; if he had had those temptations at home, and had had no more grace
then he had then, it would have been the bane of his soul; no wonder he goes
on more heavily, because he has more temptations; you may see how heavily
David drew on, 1 Samuel 27. 1. shall one day perish by the hand of Saul; formerly
he could believe admirably, and trust in Gods promises wonderfully; he fought
against the Lion and the Bear, and was mightily affected with God, but now he
goes heavily on; what has he lost his faith? no, but he is more tempted then
he was before; may be the man had more grace of life in him then before, but he
was more tempted, and carried double.

We come now to the next thing, to show you how far forth a child of How far
forth a child of God may be dead.
God may be dead and lose his quickening, not only seem deader, but be deader
indeed then he was; and this point we will show you in these particulars.

1. That every man by nature is dead to all goodness. 2ly, That the liveliest
of Gods servants have some of this deadness still remaining in them. 3ly, The
meanest of Gods servants that have least grace, have some life, and cannot be
quite dead. 4ly, We will show you this is a very ticklish point, and very
dangerous; a world of mischief may come of it by reason of the corruption of
men's hearts. Yet 5ly, It is a very necessary point. 6ly, Those particulars
wherein he may be dead. 7ly, The uses of the point.

First, We are all by nature dead, we have no heart to seek reconciliation 1.
All by nature dead.
with God, no heart to get his image in our hearts, and to have communion with
him, and approve our selves unto him; we see naturally, how the world slights
these things; they seek how they may live, and do as others do, but to look
after righteousness, and holiness, and pleasing of God, they have no heart to
these things; and though God afford them good motions; and checks of
conscience, and all helps, yet people have no life at all to these things, Ephesians.
4. 18. they are as Paul speaks there, alienated from the life of God; and as
^he father speaks of his prodigal son, this my son^ was dead, quite dead; by
nature we have not the son of God, and therefore have no life; as Christ says,
the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, and live; he speaks of the
elect people that naturally are dead to all good; for though a man be alive to
many of the acts which the Saints of God do naturally, yet to those works that
a Saint does as he is a Saint, he is altogether dead; as a beast, though it
has a life of its own, yet it is dead to the life of a man; indeed it can do
many things a man does, a beast can see and hear, and go up and down as well
as a man does, but for those acts a man does as he is a man, he is altogether
dead to those acts a beast cannot discourse; how many things are in a man which
a beast looks not after? it is altogether dead to them; so a natural man is
alive to do what the Saints of God do as they are men, because he is a man
himself; but as they are Saints of God, and have the life of God in them, he is
altogether dead to that; he cannot carry himself as the Saints do, he cannot
curb himself of all his lusts as the Saints of God do; you cannot if you would
never so fain bring a natural man to these things, you may as well bring a dead
m^n to walk up and down among men, as to make a natural man to be so strict and
precise as a Saint.

Secondly* the liveliest of all Gods Saints have some of this deadness
remaining 2. Liveliest of Saints have some deadness.
in them, the child of God, though in one part, sc. the spirit, he be alive,
yet in the fle^h he is dead, P^u^ himself tells us, I am not perfect, neither
have I yet attained, Phil. 3. 13. David was as lively a man as any in the Old
Testament, yet he cries out Psalm. 143. 11. quicken me O Lord for thy names
sake; the Saints are like to a man sick of the numbe palsy, he is dead on one
side; so the Saints are dead on one side; like the Moon, that side the Sun
shines upon is light, but the other side is dark; so when God shines upon his
Saints by his Spirit, there is light: but they are dark on one side, for though
justification be perfect in this life, yet sanctification is still but
imperfect; the guilt of sin may be fully forgiven here, but the power of sin is
never here fully destroyed; none of the Saints of God but find some clog, they
go not so quick as they should or would do: Paul himself groans under this
burden, Romans 7. 24. and Christ does not quicken his servants all at once, Joh.
10. 10. Christ does put life into his people, yet so as that it goes gradually
on, he gives them more and more, he makes them more and more agill and quick in
good duties; the best of Gods Saints are like to a goodly tree, that may be
has a hundred dead boughs upon it, though the root and body be alive; may be a
young tree has fewer dead boughs, yet it is weak, and there is less strength a
great deal in it then in the other, and less fruit; so I say for a Saint of
God, though he be consolidated and settled, and grown substantial, yet there may
be abundance of dead boughs.

Thirdly, The meanest of Gods Saints, the deadest of them all have some 3.
Deadest of Saints have some life.
life, they cannot lose all their life, they have an eternal life, Joh. 1. 36.
he that believes on the son has everlasting life, a child of God, though he
may lose all his liveliness yet he cannot lose his life, there is a difference
between liveliness and being alive, as Exodus 1. 19. the Hebrew women there are
said to be lively; any woman is alive, but not lively: so all the children of
God are alive, they may lose their liveliness but not their life; as the wise
Virgins all slumbred and slept, but yet their oil was not gone out; though old
Eli was grown marvelous dull, and heavy, and lumpish, and had no zeal for God
and liveliness in him, yet he was not altogether dead, as appears by his answer
to Samuel, and his care of the Ark of the Covenant; for the life of a Saint of
God, is like a vessel of Canary that cannot be quite frozen up; a child of God,
though he be never so cold and frozen, yet he shall not be altogether frozen
up, he shall have some life still, the seed of God remains in him, 1 John 3.
9.

Fourthly, This is a ticklish point, and mavelous dangerous, unless 4.
Dangerousness of the point.
great heed be taken; those that hear it, that hear how far a child of God may
grow dead, may recieve much mischief by it; and I was once of the mind not to
have spoken of it, in regard of the evil consequents that may grow upon it.

For first, This may greatly embolden the adversaries of the Church of God. In
some sense it were well that the adversaries of the Church did think the Church
were more lively then they are; it might be a great ^eans to curb them of doing
that they do; as it is noted of the Scribes and Pharisees, that conceiving that
the people were more more lively then they were, it did withhold them from what
they otherwise would have done; as when Christ spoke of John's baptism, they
would have vilified it, but that the^ thought the people were so affected to
his ministry, that they would sto^e them; I do not think they were so affected
and wrought upon; I do not think there would have been such a stir in the
Country, but this was well they thought so, for it saved a great deal of
mischief, Mat. 13. 25. when the go^^ m^ns servant, were asleep, then the
enemies sowed tares; so when the enemies of the Church shall see thee grown
dult and careless, and sleepy, the Sabbaths are little sanctified, and the holy
ordinances of God, and powerful preaching little looked after, nay even such as
were strict people are grown cold; this does embolden them to bring in errors,
and broach what they list, when they durst not do it if the Church were lively;
so that it is something dangerous to tell this in Gath, and publish it in the
streets of Ashkalon.

Secondly, This may hearten abundance that are standers by, that are dead in
sins and trespasses, to be hardened under their deadness, and to be secure; for
when a Minister shall show how that the children of God may be marvellously
dead, and may be quite off the hooks, and their zeal be quite gone, the life
and liveliness that has been formerly is not seen; when they hear this, this
may help them to ho^e, it is true I am dead, and my heart is like a stone in
prayer, and like a block at the hearing of the word of God; I have no spirit,
nor heat, nor affections in the ordinance of God; yet Gods blessing on the
Ministers heart; I heard him say a child of God might be dead like a dead tree,
and I hope I may be a child of God for all this no question when a carnal heart
shall read how Christ upbraided his own Disciples with unbelief and hardness of
heart, no question when they read such passages, but they have a great deal of
succor to their own consciences; for when their consciences fly in their
faces for their untowardness and heartlesseness in any thing that is good, they
think the Saints of God have a great deal of heartlesseness, and so reckon
themselves to be Saints of God; and so the Church of God when it was grown to
be mavelous remiss, and profane, and loose ( Jer. 7.) though God had told
the ten Tribes that he would cut them off, yet they comforted themselves; how
did they comfort themselves? they comforted themselves in this, they thought
verily they were a Church; so people, if they can get any word that falls out
of the Ministers mouth that may make for themselves, they catch at it; if any
word drop out from a Ministers mouth, or if any miscarriage or distemper be
seen in a godly man's life, they lie at catch for these things; therefore it is
dangerous.

Thirdly, It is dangerous because it may teach people how to be dead; nay,
people that were stirred at their deadness, and saw an infinite need of laying
it aside, and took pains to do it, yet when they hear this Doctrine, through
the corruption of their own hearts, they may grow careless, and think, what
need I keep such a pudder? I am a child of God still, though I am so dead and
heartless, and have no more feeling under Gods word, yet I may be a child of
God; I heard a Minister make an excellent Sermon upon that point, that a child
of God may be very dead; but let me tell you, if any of you came to Church this
day with a kind of joy and delight, oh, this day we shall hear how a child of
God may be dead; if it be thus, you may justly fear that you have a rotten
heart; for what is this a sign of? but that your hearts lie at catch, and if
you have but any argument to make you think you are a child of God, this is
enough; I know this may be a comfort to the children of God, but they are such
as are absolutely dejected and cast down, and wrought upon; and whatsoever they
hear out of the word of God, they use it for their help, that they may be
recovered out of their deadness; but if any of you hear this to the end you may
be secure, this will be your bane.

Fifthly, Though it be dangerous* yet it is a necessary point to be insisted 5
Needfulness of the point.
upon, the people of God may* have need of it; but you will say, it is pity
such a Sermon should be preached to show how far a child of God may be dead,
there be so many stumbling blocks, and such a deal of mischief; I answer,
whatsoever truth may tend to the establishing of the people of God, and the
building of faith, is not to be omitted, though thousands of reprob^tes break
their necks a^ it; as Christ, when the Pharisees stumbled at his doctrine, Mat.
15. 12. see how he answers, ver. 13. Every plant which my heav^^ly f^^her has
^ot planted, shall be rooted up; so I say we must hazard that; we must tell
people what danger they may catch if they take not heed* and we must deliver
the truth, for it is helpful to the people of God; we know that the credit of
his servants is precious in his sight; and yet he has disgraced his servants
in the Scriptures as it were, and has left their dullness and untowardness upon
record, that the world may know it; as who should s^y, it is o^ such use to all
generations to know this, that it may not be concealed from the world; you may
see those horrible sins of David, and fowl offenses, that one would think the
spirit of God would cast a vail over; yet he is so far from hiding of that his
murder and adultery, and making V^iah drunk, that he does not only record his
murder and adultery once, 1 Samuel 11. but again, Psalm. 51. and committed the
Psalm to the Musician, to be sung in the Church to the end of the world; so
Peter's denial of his Master, one would have thought the Scripture would have
said nothing of that; what a Disciple of Christ to deny his master, and curse
and ban himself? yet the spirit of God is so earnest to have this known, that
he will have all the Evangelists set it down; you have things of great
importance, that our eternal life depends upon, yet there is but one Evangelist
touches them; but every one tells us of peter's fault; how sh^mefully he did
forget himself, and how he was carried away with his lusts, so that it is very
needful to be known: now then to come to the sixth thing, how 6. How far forth
a child of God may be dead.
far a child of God may be dead; for this we will show you these particulars.

First, he may lose all his zeal; you know zeal is a thing that God baptizeth
his pe^^le with, not only with the holy Ghost, but with fire; yet a child of
God if he stand not upon his guard, and looks to himself, if he grow secure and
drowsy and give way to sin, he may come to this, to lose his zeal; it was the
case of many o^ Gods people in Laodicea, though the chiefest bulk in the Town
were lukewarm; yet it is plain that many of th^se that were neither hot nor
cold, were Gods own children; for he says, Rev. 3. 19. as many ^^ I love, I
rebuke and chasten: so in the days of Saul, when Religion went down the wind,
and the Ordinances of God were slacked, every thing went to wrack during his
government, you shall see how the Church of God had lost their zeal, 1 Samuel 17.
16. it is said there, that when Goliath of Gath came into the host, and all
Israel were there, and the main bulk of the Church of God were looking on, and
hearing what this fowlmouth said, there he stood defying and blaspheming the
Army of God, and he showed himself so forty days together, and all Israel
heard him, and they were all dull and blockish, and not a man stepped out to
hazard his life to appear in Gods cause, until it pleased God to make a little
child take up a weapon, and sight against him; so our Savior Christ shows us
in the last times (which is strange) for in the last times knowledge shall
abound, the love of many shall wax cold, Mat. 24. 12. you know what zeal is; it
is when a man does not only walk in Gods commandments and do them, but uses
Gods arguments, and uses them with all his heart, and stirs up himself to
take hold on God; he presses hard after the mark; he is a man that stands upon
his guard; a man that will be precise and strict in every thing; he will eschew
every evil; if he find any lust rising, he is never at quiet till he get it
down again; if this man be in company, he will not stand upon courtesy to see
who will begin to speak, but if others will not, he will; and he will not stand
upon terms and difficulties* but come what can come, he will stand for God; now
it is strange how this zeal may be taken off, in a man that is otherwise a good
man.

Secondly, He may lose all his affections, which is a strange thing; you know
what the affections are, they are the wings of the soul; if the wings be off,
the bird cannot fly; now a child of God may lose all his affections; as it was
with Sardis, they had not only lost all their zeal, but their affections, Rev.
3. 2. strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die; they had lost
all, and but a little remained, and that little was ready to die; what a poor
heartless* lifeless creature was Asa? he was grown to 2 Chro. 16.
that pass, that though God sent his Prophets to him, yet his affections were
not stirred; nay, they were stirred the clean contrary way; he was angry with
him; and when God laid afflictions upon him, he was so little affected with his
sins, that he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians; a child of God may
lose his sorrow and grief for sin; though he be privy to a world of corruption
and distempers, and dullness, and blockishness, yet he is not able to relent and
grieve for them, there is no sorrow in his heart; as David, when he had
committed those horrible sins, there were no affections in him; when Joab sent
him word that Vriah was dead, which he had a hand in, one would have thought it
should have made him cry and roar, and made his heart to burst; but he was so
far from being affected with remorse, as that he made nothing of it; oh says
he* tell Joab, the sword kills one as well as another, 2 Samuel 11. 25. so a
child of God may lose all the affection of shame. It is one of the duties we
owe to God, that all the corruptions, and untowardness that is in us, we should
be ashamed of them; now a child of God may lose this shame; David when he had
committed adultery, he was not ashamed of it, he did not blush, nay he was
impudent, he durst let his servants know it, and be privy to his villainy; he
could say to them, go and fetch me the woman, 2 Samuel 11. Again, he may lose all
his delights in good duties, and the ordinances of God* he may go to them, but
with poor delight; what poor delight do you think David had in good duties for
the space of ten months, till Nathan came unto him? we may well think what a
blockish and seared heart he had; again, he may lose all his desires and
yearnings; he may pray, and have no heart to lift up his soul to God, and be
earnest for the having of those graces he stands in need of, but pray so
coldly, as if indeed he would teach God to deny him; again, he may lose all his
fear, he may grow to be so mavelous venterous and bold, he may grow to be
familiar with sins, he may grow to come near the occasions of sin, and thrust
himself upon temptation* again, he may lose his affections of love, and have
hardly any love at all to God, as Christ complains of Simon, who otherwise was
a good man; he forgave his sins, and yet he complains he loved him but a
little, Luke 7. 44. sc. in one word, a child of God may lose all his affections.

Thirdly, He may grow to be even senseless of sin, and of the grace of God; I
may show this in diverse examples; to instance in the Patriarchs, they conspired
the death of Joseph, afterward flung him into a ditch, which was a most
horrible and unnatural thing; one would think this should have been as an arrow
unto their hearts, and they should have been ashamed of themselves; but were
they sensible of this, or moved at it? no, but they sat down to eat and drink
when they had done, Genesis 37. so for the children of Israel in the wilderness,
when they had committed that horrible sin, of making a golden calf, and the
Text shows that many of the children of God were guilty of it* when they had
done, did their hearts smite them? were they affected with their sin? did it
work any impression upon their hearts? no, they sat down to eat and drink, and
rose up to play, Exodus 32. 6. so David, when he had committed those horrible
heinous sins of murder and adultery, sins which deserved death by the Law, his
fault was aggravated by many circumstanc^s; he had wives of his own, he was not
a young man, but well grown in years, he was no novice, he was not ignorant of
God, but an old disciple, and one that had had a great deal of experience of
Gods goodness, ^^e that was the most noted man in all Israel for forwardness
for God, one that as himself confesses, had more understanding then any one in
the world, more then his teachers; these do aggravate his sin, but when he had
done, was he sensible of this? no, he was so far from it, that he labored to
father his bastard upon Vriah; Vriah had been a great whiie from his Wife, and
must have known it to have been a bastard, if he had not sent him down to his
house; now thought he, if I can but get him to go down to his house, and lie
with his Wife, the child may be thought to be his child, and not mine; nay,
when Vriah spoke words that might have burst his bowels, when he bade him go to
his house, you may see what a gracious answer he gave him, 2 Samuel 11. 11. The
Ark and Israel, etc. as who should say, I had more need to be at prayer, and
keep a fast; all Israel is in the field against their enemies, therefore I had
more need to seek God, then look after my pleasures, and pampering my body; now
one would think this should have been as a dagger to David, heart, and made him
ashamed; yet he was so senseless that he labored to do it more and more, and
was never at quiet till he had made him drunk, thinking he would go home; thus
we see that a child of God may be senseless of his sins.

Fourthly, A child of God may grow to be notoriously vain, and notoriously
worldly, and to be notoriously guilty of sin. I do not say to live in s^^, but
to sin notoriously, thar a man that has but half an eye may say, Yonder man is
notoriously proud and conceited of himself, he is marvelous froward and given
to his passions; yonder man is marvelous remiss in his place and calling,
marvelous dull and idle, and sluggish; and even those that are without may see
this, much more the children of God; thus it was with many of Paul's brethren
and companions he had at Rome; though he did conceive these were the children
of God, yet they were grown notoriously and grossly worldly; when Paul had
occasion to send some Minister or other to fight against the false Apostles, he
spoke it seems to all his brethren and acquaintance, to entreat them to go to
Philippi, but he could not get one of them to go; what excuse they made we know
not, whither they were loath to be at that charge, or whither they loved their
own ease, but Phil. 2. 21. he breaks out into this speech, they all seek their
own, and none the things that are Christ's: Not as Calvin notes upon the place,
as though they had no grace or life in them, but they were grown marvelous
worldly and earthly, and carried away with their lusts, marvelously tender of
their profits, seeking their own, and not the things of Christ; though Paul
told them, it was the cause of Christ required it, yet it was against their
profits and ease, he could get none of them to go; so David, that sin of
numbering the people, it lay upon his heart nine months, and he came not to
repentance; yet Joab saw this thing, and he used gracious arguments to divert
him; he saw plainly that he was transported with some lust or other.

Fifthly, The child of God may grow to that pass, that the service of God may
be a burden; it is true, it cannot be absolutely a burden to any child of God;
so the wicked only are absolutely without zeal and affection, they are
absolutely wicked and worldly; therefore this cannot be absolutely in a child
of God; yet it may be horribly and grossly, even to be tired and jaded under
Gods service, even to count it a burden, to cry out with those Mal. 1. what a
weariness is it Lord! even to be loath to go to prayer, to go to it dully, as a
trewant goes to his book; and when they are at it, to be blockish and without
any spirit in it, and have no life, not so much as to heave up their hearts to
the Throne of grace; nay, they may think it too long, and wish it were done;
and they may think the opportunities to do and receive good come too often;
this is an horrible thing, yet thus it may be; what was the reason that the
Galatians were so open-eared to the false Apostles that came with another
Gospel, that separated from the Gospel of Christ? what is the reason that they
opened the ear to them, and were even poisoned by it? O says the Apostle, be
not weary of well doing, Gal. 6. 9. as who should say, you are weary of well
doing; you were once affected with the word* and would have plucked out your
eyes to do me good; you were wonderfully wrought upon, and went on in a right
manner in some measure; Oh be not weary of well doing; as who should say, the
cause of your yielding is because you were weary of well doing; you seek out
for new opinions, and errors, and are ready to receive false doctrines,
contrary to the doctrine of Christ; therefore, take heed that you be not weary
of well doing.

Lastly, A child of God may be so dead that nothing can quicken him; nay, the
whole Church of God may be so dead, that the Gospel may be going away, and God
may be ready to depart, and show signs of his going away from them, and yet
they may have no heart to humble themselves, and seek the Lord, to be moved and
stirred to get more life, and entreat God to turn away the plague, as God
says, Isa. 59. 16. I wondered there was no Intercessor; he sent Prophet after
Prophet to tell them that he would take away his Kingdom from them, and scatter
them among the Nations; but though he had told them of these things, over and
over again, yet there was none to stand in the gap; he speaks in the general,
there was not a man (though otherwise good) that could cry to God in this
distress; so that I say, a man may grow to this pass, that nothing can quicken
him; all the ordinances of God cannot, nay, though he have many judgments of
God upon him, and his conscience lies digging in his side from day to day, yet
nothing may work upon him, unless the Lord be more strangely merciful to his
soul; till a whale was provided to swallow up Jonah, there was no bringing of
his heart to relent.

Qu. But you will say, Where is the sign of Gods grace all this while? may a
child of God be thus dead? certainly the life of the children of God is
eternal; and when God gives his children grace, it continues for ever, it is
springing up to eternal life; now if a Saint may be thus dead, where is grace?
is he unchilded again?

Ans. I answer, the grace of a child of God can never be taken away, not for
any goodness in himself, but through the goodness of God.

For first, there is the seed of God remaining still in him, 1 John 3. 9. a
godly man cannot commit sin, says the Apostle, for the seed of God remains
in him; that is, he cannot commit sin as the wicked commit it, he can never
grow to be a wicked man again, to do as the wicked do; why? the seed of God
remains in him; you know seed is a little thing, there is a little thing left
still in that man, that shall still difference him from ungodly men, that he
cannot commit sin with that fullness of sway as the wicked do; now by this seed
the Scripture means regeneration; regeneration is immortal, it is that seed
which remains for ever, 1 Pet. 1. the last.

Secondly, As there is a seed of God remaining in him, so there be supernatural
habits; and the difference between this seed, and these supernatural habits is
this; this seed is immediately in the soul, though it runs through all the
powers of it; but these supernatural habits are immediately in the powers and
faculties of the soul; now these habits are such, whereby they have heavenly
inclinations to good, and inclinations against evil; and these shall never be
quite extinguished, though they be not like to moral and natural habits; for
they do actually incline but supernatural habits do never actually incline that
way, but upon concurrence of special grace; though they be in the soul yet they
do not actually incline but upon concurrence of grace; now these habits can
never be taken from a child of God, as David says, Psalm. 37. 24. though the
righteous fall, yet he shall not utterly be cast down; he may fall upon his
hands and knees, but he shall not quite fall; he shall have something or other
to moderate and break the fall.

Thirdly, A child of God ever has an anointing, 1 John 2. 27. that is, a gift
and grace of God whereby he does enlighten his eyes by the spirit of
revelation, whereby he looks upon God, and all sin and iniquity, and the
ordinances of God, with an heavenly eye; now I say, this eye can never be taken
away; let a child of God be at the lowest ebb, he looks upon sin, and Gods
ways after another fashion then other men; he looks upon corruption after
another manner then any other man; so he looks upon Gods holiness, and
righteousness, and graciousness, he looks upon these so as no natural man does;
if a man do but talk with him, he will see that he has anointing at the lowest
ebb; he will not talk of the ways of God as a natural man; he will discover
that he has something of God, something of this ointment left in him still.

Fourthly, There is a little strength in his heart, as the Lord says, Rev. 3.
8. A child of God, take him at the lowest ebb, yet he has a little strength;
I speak not here of actual grace, for a child of God may have no actual grace
stirring, it may be quite in a swound; as David; I hardly think there was any
grace stirring in his heart when he lay with Bathsheba; but I speak of the
frame of a child of God; when he is grown dead in his general bent, frame, and
inclination, he has yet a little strength; he does a little fear God, though
it be much born down; he has some good desires, though but weak and in a great
measure ineffectual; he has a little endeavor to please God, though the
pleasing of his flesh and corruptions be so much, that his grace does scarcely
appear.

The first use is this; Is it so, that a child of God may thus far grow dead?
lie and swear now and then; in many things we offend all, and we are all
sinners; the Minister told us to day how dead a man may be, and yet be a child
of God for all this; this is a damned use of this doctrine; there is no
doctrine, no example recorded in all the whole Bible, to encourage men to sin;
therefore when we look into the lives of Noah, of Abraham, of Lot, etc. and
read of their great falls, this is not to encourage any man to sin, but rather
to stir up a man so much the more to labor against sin; for if the children of
God that have his favor, and have got into his covenant, and have got power in
grace, and have traded in Religion, and have waded far in mortification and
newness of life, and have gone many degrees toward Gods Kingdom; if these men
give way never so little, may be dead, if sin may get dominion over these; how
should others quake and tremble, and reason thus, Did David and Peter fall? how
then shall I stand? how careful should I be? David had a thousand times more
grace then I, and was more mortified then I, and had a better heart then I; if
he were so weak to overcome sin, when he had given way to it; if he could not
preserve his affections from being deaded; and if he could not preserve his
soul from being a block in Gods service; if he had so many advantages beyond
me, and yet giving way to idleness and drowsiness, were born down in that
fashion; oh how should I take heed then?

Secondly, If a child of God may be thus dead, then let the best of Gods Lam.
5. 21. turn us O Lord, and we shall be turned; therefore art thou never so full
of life? take heed, despise not prophesying, despise not preaching, despise not
prayer, despise not any ordinance of God, despise none of these things, never
grow secure; if thou do, woe unto thee; may be God will help thee up again,
but who can tell? the covenant of grace is certain for nothing but for eternal
life; if a man take heed, and stand upon his watch, he may the better build
upon God, that he shall not fall, Pro. 28. 4. therefore take heed that you pass
the time of your so journing here in fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17. and having these
promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
etc. 2 Cor. 7. 1. as who should say, let us labor to have this holy fear in
our heart, ever to consider how weak and impotent we are; if we grow drowsy
and careless at any time, we give advantage to the Devil; we let him in, and
God knows when we shall get him out again; therefore let this work fear and
trembling.

Thirdly, This may be for comfort to those people of God, that have Romans 15. 4.
so these Scriptures that speak of the falls of Gods Saints, are written for
such peoples learning, that they may take comfort in the Scriptures, that they
may not be altogether out of heart, but have something to lay hold on; as Paul
speaks of his sins of being a persecutor, and a blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.
he says, it is recorded, that I afterward may be an help to them that shall
believe; and as the sins of Gods elect before conversion are recorded, that
this may be a means to persuade Gods elected (not yet converted) that they may
find grace, though they be never so vile sinners; for God has left a pattern
and pledge, he has been merciful to heinous sinners; so the fall of Gods
Saints and children after conversion, are recorded to this end; and I can tell
you in time of temptation, when conscience shall be awakned, and the wrath of
God shall stick in a man's soul, a man cannot spare any one sweet proposition in
Scripture, nor any one example in Scripture, nor any tittle of comfort; it will
be little enough to bear up the soul from despair and from being overwhelmed;
all will be little enough to assure the soul of Gods favor, and that he can
and will pardon such transgressors; therefore I say look upon this doctrine, it
is for those that are dejected with their dead hearts, that they may yet
receive some comfort to their souls.

The last day I showed you how far forth a child of God might be dead; The
deadness of a child of God amplified.
but some may say, I cannot believe a child of God may come to this; and thou
art confident thou shall not come to this; therefore I will speak a little
further of it.

And first, Let me tell you, there is not the sowlest, haynousest,
abominablest, A child of God may fall into very foul sins.
the most notorious, scandalous sin in the world, but the most devout, godly
mortified man upon the face of the earth may fall into it, if he take not heed,
(except the sin against the holy Ghost) I will instance in some particulars.

First, For Idolatry, gross Idolatry; will you think that ever a child of God,
that believes in his name, and is acquainted with his word, and his goodness
and mercy, and his jealousy against this sin and iniquity, should fall into
it, should fall down and worship a stock, a stone, a creature? you will never
believe it; yet you shall see the wisest man that ever was, and one that was
beloved of God, did fall into this sin in a great degree, 1 Kings 11. 4,
Solomon's wives drew his heart away from God; they drew away his heart from God
in an high degree; and they did not nakedly draw away his heart from God, but
they drew his heart after other gods. If a man should say, I hope I shall never
fall into this sin; I say let us hope so still, and go on in using the means;
if we be so confident, let us take heed that none of us come to bow to the
creature; let our own hating and abominating of it, be a watchword to us to
take heed.

Secondly, What say you to apostasy? nay, almost total apostasy, that a child
of God should grow to be an apostate, which of you would think it; that he
should come to curse and bann himself, if ever he knew Jesus Christ, or loved
him, or ever did countenance him? yet you may see a child of God* and a notable
one too, fell in this fashion; Peter, he did curse and ban himself, that he
never knew the man, Mark 14. 71. this is very far.

Thirdly, What say you to persecution? to persecute a man that is godly; do
think that a man that has the image of God in him, that has the knowledge of
the Scripture, that has the fear of God before his eyes, and a sympathy with
all the Saints of God in the world, that this man should ever persecute one
that is godly, and for his godliness too? would you think this? yet directly
thus it is; Asa, a godly man, for a fit, as long as the time lasted, when the
Prophet reproved him for his sins, and dealt roundly with him, what was this
but gracious dealing? yet the man did not only not submit to the Prophets
reproof, but hi^ very heart rose up against him, and he cast him into prison,
he was a persecutor of him 2 Chro. 16. 10. in one word, what enormous
flagitious sin in the world is there, but a child of God (if he look not to
himself) may actually fall into (but the sin unto death?) Noah a Preacher of
righteousness, the holiest man upon the earth, the world had not his fellow,
yet he fell to be once drunk; David a man after Gods own heart, a man of
admirable experience, a man that traded as far in mortification, in holiness
and righteousness, and walking with God, and acquaintance with him and his Laws
and promises as ever any Saint in the Old Testament; yet he fell into the sin
of murder and adultery, yea, to make a man drunk, and that otherwise a good
man too, one of the worthiest of all the Kingdom; you see this is clear, there
is no sin so desperate (the sin against the holy Ghost excepted) but a child of
God may fall into it; therefore he had not need to be carnally confident.

Secondly, When a child of God has fallen thus into some sowl sin, he 2. A
child of God may be hardened in sin.
may be much hardened, woefully deaded and benumbed, and grow blockish and
untoward to call upon God, and go on in any of his ways, become marvelously
unfitted and indisposed to the use of Gods ordinances; nay, he may be grown to
that pass that he should never rise up more, but that for the infinite goodness
of God that does bring him again home, and lift him up again by renewing his
faith, and his repentance; you may see when Jehoshaphat had struck with Ahab,
and helped the ungodly, and loved him 2 Chro. 19.
that hated the Lord, though he were smitten in the field, and were like to
have lost his life, and saw what danger he was in for joining with Ahab, yet
all this did not humble him; the Lord sent after him by hue and cry, rousing up
his conscience by his Prophets; if he had not done thus, God knows how long he
might have lain thus; so David he found a deadness in all goodness, when he had
committed those foul sins, he found no working of Gods blessed spirit, his own
spirit grew dull, his own heart grew dead, he was as if he had never known what
grace meant; create in me O Lord a new heart, Psalm. 51. 10. his sin was like to
a sweeping rain that leaves nothing; like to a consumption that wastes all; it
was even like a Thief, that breaks into a man's warehouse in the night, and a
man knows not what he has lost, till he casts up his accounts, and then he
sees he has lost almost all his estate; so it is with the best of Gods
servants; if they give way to sin, contrary to evangelical obedience, God knows
what a Thief they let into their soul; they know not what they have lost, till
God give them an heart to cast up their accounts, and then they may see that
they have lost almost all that they have; who knows what God may do? it is a
fearful thing; you see a child of God may not only fall into foul and fearful
sins, but he may lie in them.

Then Thirdly, To go further, when a child of God is come hither, then you 3. A
child of God may be long in sin.
will say, certainly this man must rise up again quickly, grace will not let
him lie dead; it is true, God will not for ever let him lie dead; but for how
long he shall lie dead, no man nor Angel can t^ll; as the Church speaks
concerning her misery, there is never a Prophet, never an ordinance of God, all
is gone to wrack, and there is none among us can tell us how long, Psalm. 74. 9.
so when a man has fallen into sin, and has pulled distempers into his soul,
there is none among us can tell us how long; it is true, Peter got up again
within a few hours; but David got not up again till after ten months; and may
be another not till after ten years, may be twenty, forty, nay, who can tell
how long? grace is free; therefore no man can prescribe any time, the wind
blows where it lists, and how long it lists, and how long it will John 3.
Reasons of the point. 1. Reas.
be ere it blow again who knows?

The Reasons of the, first in regard of Satan, he fights most of all against
the children of God, his ^ingers itch to be at them, and at them most; his
greatest spite is against them, the very bowels of the enmity is between him
and them; the children of God come to take his place that he once had in
heaven; the children of God are set up against Satan, as David was put in the
room of Saul; therefore I say, all the strength of hell is still a working
against the Church of God, and the Saints of God, and every one of them, from
that very moment that the woman was delivered of a Rev. 12. 13.
man child, he sought to destroy it: Simon, Simon, (says Christ) Satan desires
to winnow thee, etc. Luk^ 22 31. he is the god of this world, and his
temptations are welcome enough with any body but the children of God; none
resist his dominion but they; he is the Jailer, and has all the world in close
prison, but only them; they are the only ones that have broken loose, that have
gotten away out of the power of Satan; therefore all his malice, and all the
gates of he^l, they are up to send hue and cry after them, to hook them in
again if they can; he is ^ust like a Pyrate; a Pyrate will rather set upon one
rich ship, then upon a thousand beggarly barks, because there he may have a
rich prize; so the Devil knows he can advantage his Kingdom, if but on^ fall
that is a Saint, more then by the falls and the notoriouse^t falls of millions
of others; therefore no wonder that a child of God should grow remiss and
carele^s at any time, that he may have a mischief; for it is all the Devils
business, he has nothing else to do but do mischief, to be busy to get a
child of God down, and if he have him down, to hold him down if he can.

Secondly, Another reason is* in regard of the children of God themselves; 2.
Reas.
they carry flesh about them as well as other men, they have a Traitor in their
own bosoms, that li^s in scout every moment to work them woe; as Paul says, I
find another law in my members, etc. Romans 7. 23. though a child of God has
wounded all his lusts, nay, though he has given them their deaths wound, yet
there is never a one but may revive and make head again, if he take not heed,
and that in a woeful degree; as the Lord says of the Caldeans, Jer. 37. (I
quote it only for a similitude) ver. 10. though you had smitten all the whole
army of the Caldeans, yet they shall come and fire the City; when Judah had
provoked God, though they had wounded all the Caldeans, yet those wounded men
should come and fire the City; so let a man take heed he does not give way to
sin; for though his lusts be mortified, and he has given them their deaths
wound, yet these wounded Caldeans may come and fire all his soul, if he take
not heed.

Thirdly, In regard of God himself; God is pleased to try his people, to 3.
Reas.
withdraw himself now and then from them, to leave them to themselves, and the
grace they have received; to let them alone with that; and when he does thus,
no wonder though they fall; for every man has some vileness and rottenness in
his heart; the wholest simplest heart in the world has a deal of rottenness in
it; I say, the Lord does sometim^s leave his children to themselves, as he did
Hezekiah in the business of the Ambassadors, 2 Chro. 32. 31. as the Church
says, Cant. 5 6. my beloved had withdrawn himself; the lovingest mothers may
sometimes let their little child go alone, though they know he will fall; they
provide may be a rouler about his head that whither they fall backward or
forward, or any way, they may not break their skull, and do themselves a
mischief, to undo themselves; but when they have done thus, they will sometimes
leave them to themselves to go, though they know they will fall; so the Lord
does put a rouler upon his people, that when they fall, they may not fall
totally and finally, as the wicked men do; they shall never strike into a
wicked course, as the ungodly of the earth do; that he takes order for; but he
does many times leave them, not out of any ill will to them, but he leaves them
to themselves, though he knows they will fall; and that for diverse reasons.

First, That they might be patterns to others of Gods people, that if they
should fall (as they may do) when they are down, they may have wherewithal to
get up again; I say, the Lord leaves the eminentest of his people to
themselves, to fall into lamentable miscarriages, that they may help inferior
people, and they may have something to encourage them that God will recover
them, and relieve them again, and that God will not cast them off for ever; as
Paul shows 1 Timothy 1. 16. says he, for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me
first, Jesus Christ might show forth all long suffering, for a pattern to them
who shall hereafter believe; as who should say, there may be a persecutor, a
blasphemer smitten, a vile wretch, a fighter against God and Jesus Christ, such
a one may be smitten, and come to see his damned estate; a thousand to one, but
this man will be overwhelmed and drowned in despair; but says he, The Lord,
though I was one of his elect, yet he let me fall to this pass, that I might be
a pattern to them which shall afterward believe; so we may say of Gods
children after conversion; David may say, For this cause among the rest the
Lord left me to my self; the Lord let me fall so foully, and lifted me up again,
that I might be a pattern to many poor people to the end of the world, that
they may see the loving kindness of the Lord, and the infinite compassions, and
bowels of mercy that is in the father of mercy toward them that trust in his
name; we should never believe the mercy of God, the freeness of his grace, the
goodness of his nature toward his beloved, toward those whom he has
effectually called, were it not for such examples.

Secondly, The Lord does this for to punish the carelesseness of his people,
and their security many times; what sin is there that is more apt to grow upon
them then security? it is a stealing sin, it is a secret and cunning sin, that
comes closely and slightly upon a man, before he is aware, if he look not to
himself; now when a man grows to be secure, the Lord takes this course many
times to eat it out, to punish the security of his people; Peter when he had
gotten faith in Christ, and affection to Christ, when he felt that his bowels
did yearn after Christ, and his heart was enlarged toward him, he grow secure
upon it; though all forsake thee, yet will not I; he was Mat. 26.
confident, but it was carnal confidence; for though the thing a man trusts in
be the grace of God, yet as long as it is grace received, it is trusting in a
man's self; he therefore was carnally confident; now he would venture himself
into the high Priests hall; though he thus, affections will never be drowned;
he might go any whither; well, he comes into the high Priests hall, and there
comes into the very mouth of temptations and dangers; he does not dream how
easily his heart may be caused to deny Christ, he did not dream what a ticklish
heart he carried in his bosom, he grew to be bold and venturous; now the Lord
to heal this security, let him fall in a desperate manner; he let him get a
knock almost to beat out his brains, even Mat. 26. 74.
to curse and ban himself; not only to deny Christ, but with abjuration; the
Lord sees it is needful to do thus when people grow secure; we ought always
to carry a covenant about our eyes, to take heed where we look; and when we are
in company, to have a bridle in our mouth, to take heed what we speak; now if
we grow careless and negligent, and this bridle is gone, and this covenant is
gone, and our watch is taken away, no marvel though the Lord be provoked
against us, to punish us, and that soundly, and let many of his people get a
knock; and who knows how great a one? and how hard to heal again?

Thirdly, the Lord sometimes leaves his people to themselves, that so they may
see they stand merely by grace; I do not mean by grace received, though they
had all faith, though they had never so much knowledge, never so much
experience and interest in God, never so much sense and feeling of him, never
so much life, and zeal, and quickening, whatsoever it be, all the enlargements
that ever any man had, I do not mean this; for a man never stands by this, but
by the free favor of God, that is the grace a man stands by, the free good
will and love that God does bear unto him. Now when a child of God shall have
received a great deal of grace, a great deal of knowledge and faith, etc. he is
apt to be remiss in seeking of God to direct him in that thing he knows; he
thinks he can direct himself: we see, let a man have very good parts and
knowledge, and be able to preach, how apt is he to be the less in prayer to
God to help him to Preach, and guide him to deliver the Word? So let another
man have a great deal of knowledge, may be the man will be the less sensible of
his own wretchedness and ignorance, and aptness to mistake and err, and go
aside, and so to be less eager and earnest with God for his continual aid, and
teaching, and assisting of him every moment: So let a man have a great deal of
zeal, and life, and quickening, he is apt to discern the less pronenesse to
cool again: And suppose a man has mortified a lust, nay, all his lusts, he
can hardly feel he has any desire after such a sin; hardly any motions or
stirrings in his heart; I tell you this man, if he takes not heed, will be a
venturing; oh he thinks he is cock-sure! he is so taken off from the lusts of
the flesh, that he can never catch hurt, and he may be sometimes will admit of
occasions, and admit of drawing something near the pits brink; he is so
mortified, he fears nothing. Now the Lord in his infinite goodness to his
people, leaves them to themselves; are you so mortified? come, let us see how
mortified you are, and so leave him to himself, to see what the man can do
with all his knowledge, and zeal, and mortification; and now this man falls:
Look how far God leaves a man, so far he falls; he will have his people see
that they stand not by grace received, but by the free grace and favor of God:
It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows
mercy. Romans 9.
No, though a man have never so many gracious endowments, and heavenly virtues,
it is not in him that wills, but in God that shows mercy; it is in the
fountain of mercy and loving kindness in God. Let a man keep close to God, let
a man still observe the pleasing of God, that there may be a continual fountain
open, running down upon him from day to day; for if he grow secure, and look
not to himself, he exposes himself to woeful dangers.

Fourthly, The Lord leaves his people sometimes thus fearfully to themselves,
that he might teach us to be sensible toward our brethren; to be mild, and
meek, and piteous, and full of bowels and compassion toward the weakest and
meanest of all the Saints of God; if we see but any thing of God, nay, but any
likelihood that a man is of God, to be tender, for fear we should wrong a
child of God; the Lord does this of purpose to breed bowels, and meekness,
and gentleness toward his people: As God lets men fall horribly before
conversion, that they may carry themselves meekly toward those that are
unconverted, for fear any of them should be of the Elect of God; so he lets
them fall after conversion, that they may carry themselves so toward them that
are converted; I say the Lord lets his people fall horribly into woeful evils,
that though they see a man fall never so much, yet they may no^ omit any thing
to do him good, that they may not be taken off from their bowels and
compassion; who knows but this man may be of God? for I was as wretched as he
once, as Paul would have the Cretians take notice of this, they were horrible
sinners before conversion, liars, slow-bellies; now says he, Tit. 3. 2. Speak
to them that they show all meekness to all men. Mark his reason, ver. 3. We
our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, etc. We our selves were
thus, therefore let us show meekness to all whatsoever, and let us be kind,
and full of bowels and compassion to^ards them, studying how to do them good,
and prevent all manner of evil, and labor to win them, if it be possible, with
all meekness and condiscending* who knows but they may be of God? for we our
selves have been mal^cious and spightful, ignorant, haters, and have served
diverse lusts and pleasures* so it is with people after conversion; the Lord
lets them fall into horrible sins, and distempers, that so they may be
gentle, and that they may have the spirit of meekness toward all men; a man
is apt to be severe, and rude, and rigid toward others, if he has gotten any
thing himself; if he has gotten a little knowledge, a little zeal, a little
faith, a little humility, a little ability to please God, he is apt to think it
such a deal, and he is apt to cry down every one that is not as he is, You are
so proud, and so thus and thus; and to take off his heart from doing those
duties which he owes toward him; ^ man is apt to be very insolent in the
Church of God; many are thus, till God does take them down; therefore the Lord
by this means does teach his people gentleness and meekness; indeed God
teaches people many ways besides this; if they will take warning by his Word,
or some other course, they save him a labor; but if that will not do, God
takes this course with a man, to make him see his pride, and conceitednesse,
and his want of mercy, and unlikenesse to Christ, in bowels, and pity, and
compassion toward his brethren.

Fifthly, The Lord leaves his own children to themselves sometimes to fall so
foulely, that he may humble them, and bring them down low* that he may make
them see yet further into the corruptions of their own hearts, that so he may
make them capable of more grace; for he gives grace to the humble. Now when he
would give more grace to a man, may be he lets him James 4.
fall into some horrible sin, that he may be the more humbled, and see the
naughtiness of his own heart, that he may be driven to God, and may be deeper
in mortification; may be he thought he could go no furthrer; he did please
himself in his prayers; as I have heard of one that said, when he had prayed,
he could hardly see any sin in his prayer. Now when the Lord is pleased to
bestow* upon them more grace, he does show them the corruptions. You know how
often God let his people fall in the Wilderness, and that horribly, by
murmuring, and repining, and infidelity; though they were his own chosen, yet
he let them all at the waters of strife, and at the red Sea he let them fall;
he let them fall concerning Manna: why was this? the text says, The Lord thy
God he proved thee, he led the^ up and down in all this ^arren wilde^nesse,
where were Scorpious and fiery Serpents, that he might humble thee, and do
thee good in thy latter end, Deuteronomy. 8. 15, 16* Meaning, the Lord let them fall
into those horrible evils, that he might humble them, that they might see the
wickedness of their own hearts, and the infinite need they had of grace, and
the fear of God, and standing upon their guard; this d(...) to humble them, and
do them good in the latter end.

The first Use may seem to condemn those speeches that commonly go up and down
in Christians mouths, let me tell you they are wicked speeches; O* say

First, Certainly grace will bring a man home to God that belongs to him; it
will put him into Jesus Christ; it will certainly make him a new creature, and
bring him* out of the estate of sin; he shall not live in the estate of sin;
grace will do that, and God in the covenant of grace does set down that it is a
fundamental promise, he will do this for every one; as the Apostle says, Ephesians.
4. 7. this grace will surely undertake that a man shall be a believer (if he
belong to God) and he shall be justified and sanctified in some measure, he
shall hate sin, and love goodness in some measure, and delight in Gods
ordinances in some measure; he shall be in the estate of grace, and not in the
estate of sin; grace will do this; this we may boldly say, if a man have grace
he, must do this, for God will teach him to do it.

Secondly, Grace will undertake that a man shall not fall finally away; that is
certain, that we may boldly say, if a man be of God, grace will teach him that
he shall not fall away finally, grace will uphold a man and maintain him; when
we see a man fall away finally, we may conclude he had no true grace; Gods
children shall never fall finally away, God will preserve and keep them; whom
he loves he loves, to the end; of all those that my father has given me I have
lost none, says Christ, Joh. 17. neither life, nor dea^k, things present, nor
things to come, shall ever be able to separate us from Joh. 13. 1.
the love of ^od in Christ Jesus, says Paul, Romans 8. ult. that is most
certain, blessed and happy is he that has his part in the first resurrection,
for over such the second death has no power, Rev. 2 26. that is, such a man
can never come to be damned, he can never fall finally away, or perish
everlastingly; there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, that walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8. 1. and v. 30. whom God has
predestined, them he has also called, etc. there is an individual necture of
all the links of the chain of predestination; in all the several buckles of it,
there is an indivisible connection; if a man be called, he shall be justified,
and if he be justified, he shall be sanctified; and if he be sanctified, he
shall be glorified; so that grace will undertake this, that a man shall not
^all finally away.

Thirdly, We may say that grace will not suffer any man that is of God to fall
totally away; as not finally for ever, so not totally; he shall not be
altogether without grace, from that moment he began to have it for ever and
ever; he that drinks of this water shall never thirst, etc. Joh. 4. 14. that
is, he shall never thirst with total indigency again, he shall never thirst
with total want; he shall ever have some grace, and some of the image of God,
and some of the fear of God, and some of the love of his truth, and some desire
to his name, and some hatred of sin, though in a poor degree, yet he shall have
something of God in him; there shall be the seed of God remaining in him at all
times, 1 John 3. 9. my feet were almost gone (says David) Psalm. 73. 2. they
were but almost gone, they were not quite gone; as it is said of the Church of
Philadelphia, she had a little strength; so let a child of God be at the lowest
ebb, yet there shall be a little water of life, it shall Rev. 3. 8.
not be quite exhaust; though he fall he shall not be utterly cast down, for
the Lord will uphold him, Psalm. 37. 24. so that all this you may boldly say,
for in these things it is not conditionally Gods covenant, but absolutely for
God will give thee strength and power, and faith, and direction, and
assistance; he will not only give thee the thing, but the condition also here,
that a man shall be a believer, and a new creature; and if a man be once a new
creature, he shall never be an old creature again altogether; the covenant of
grace is so, which is an everlasting covenant; God will forgive their sins, and
remember them no more: but now for particular passages; for a man to say that a
man cannot be proud and distempred, but grace will heal him; a man cannot have
an hard heart, but grace will soften it; these are ill speeches, men know not
what they say when they say thus; for in particular passages the children of
God have no promise, but only upon condition that they stand upon their guard;
but to be defended from particular evils, and to be saved from particular
distempers, and horrible distempers, without standing upon their guard, and
taking heed, and cleaving unto God, without carefulness, and watchfulness, and
having a diligent eye to their ways, they have no promise for this; as the
Prophet told Asa; you know Asa was a good man, it seems he was of this mind,
grace will teach a man and so forth; but see what the Prophet told him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. the Lord is with you, while you are with him, etc. lie does not
mean that the Lord would forsake Asa and all his people in regard of eternal
life, that they should not have eternal life that forsake him, that they should
be altogether without grace, but he speaks here of particular passages of this
or that sin, or this or that danger, this or that mischief either in soul or
body; says he, the Lord is with you, as long as you are with him; and if you
seek him, he will be found of you; but if you forsake him, he will forsake you:
this is most certain; it is true, God does not do thus always, but when he does
not do thus, it is more then we can expect; for if we be careless and
negligent, we can look for nothing at Gods hand; we may look up to him that he
would not undo us, and cast us off for ever, but we cannot look that he should
free us from this sin, or this distemper, from this dullness and untowardness in
going on; we cannot look that God should free us from these sins, unless we
draw near to him, and cleave to him, and keep by him; if we forsake him, he
will forsake us; as for instance, suppose the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
were to be administered; now a true believer may comfortably look to have peace
and comfort, to have the promise sealed to his soul, and to have his faith
strengthened, and his spirit revived, and his graces enlarged by the Sacrament,
for there be promises made to him for this purpose; but how are they made? not
simply and absolutely, that howsoever he comes it shall be so, but let him
prepare himself for the Sacrament, let him examine himself, let him whet his
heart, and be sensible of his wants and necessities, let him be earnest with
God to be with him in his ordinance; but if a man do neglect this, when he has
been at the Sacrament, he shall no^ have peace and comfort, nor the promise of
God sealed to him, but he shall be more doubting then he was before, and more
with the wrath of God in his soul, and shall have more distempers and
overwhelmings then he had formerly; says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 31. speaking
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we must judge our selves, and then we
shall not be judged of the Lord; the Lord will bless us, we shall eat and drink
salvation to our selves, we shall eat and drink to our own peace and comfort,
and glory, and to our increase in grace; but if we do not judge our selves, we
shall be judged of the Lord; here is a condition; so for the preaching of the
word, we have the ministry of the word among us up and down; we hear it day
after day, line upon line, precept upon precept; this is very good, there is a
promise for the children of God to grow up in knowledge, and that they shall
thrive under these blessed ordinances, and be strengthened by them, for
temptations, miseries, and woeful times, they shall be well stored with a great
deal of knowledge and experience; it is true, if you be careful while you have
the word, and receive it with thankfulness and good affections, and stir up
your selves to prize the word of God, and stir up in your selves an eager and
earnest hunger and thirsting after it, and will not suffer in your souls
awkness, and untowardness, and formality to creep upon you; but if you hear
Gods word, and do not apply it aright, God knows what woeful miseries you may
fall into, if you look not to these Why Gods people are to stand upon their
guard* 1 Reas.
things; in all these things the Lord looks his people should stand upon their
guard.

The first reason is, because grace looks for this; it is true, Gods covenant is
everlasting; but for particulars, grace must be stirred up; if thou have any
faith thou must provoke thy faith; if thou have any promise belonging to thee,
thou must make use of that promise; if thou have any fear of God, thou mu^^
^ook to cheri^h it, and nourish it, and look that it does not die and decay;
for grace is of that nature, it must be stirred up, 2 Timothy 1. 6. as it is ^ith
a bowle^ though the bowl be made never so right, and fit to run this way, and
th^^ wa^ yet if a man do bowl it on the ground overgrowne with grass, i^
will have an hundred rubs, and will not go; so i^ thou let thy hear^ be
overgrown with lusts and corruptions, grace will move dully; unless you make
way for it, and stir it up, it will gather ^rust, and a rusty k^y will not
readily open the door; a rustly grace, a neglected grace will never work
kindl^; Take faith, or knowledge, or experience, or any other grace, i^ yo^
n^gl^ct it, if you stir it not up, it works but poorly, not as though (...)ns
stirring did the thing; no, it is grace that does all.

Secon^ly Another reason is, because there is no promise in all the Bible 2
Reason.
for the keeping of the children of God from this or that sin absolutel^ but
only upon condition; there is no hold that a soul can have upon God to bear him
up, if he be careless; it is certain that God in his infinite wisdom has not
left the conversion of people, and their standing in grace in this fashion,
that in case they will be converted, so; if not, let them die and ^erish; no,
but he will convert them, and he will give them a will to yield; he will make
them of unwilling to be willing, and will turn them home unto him; and when
they are converted, he does not say, this man I will bring to my ^ingdome and
Glory, if he stand upon his guard, and be careful if not, he shall perish; no,
God is absolutely minded he shall be saved; and though he has played the
undutiful beast, He will chasten him 2 Samuel ^. Jer. 32.
with rods, but his loving kindness he will not take away for ever; nay, be
will give him an heart to cleave to him for ever, that he shall not go quite
away from him; and this is the infinite goodness of God, that he does not hang
their eternal life upon their own wills, if he did, no ^lesh would ^e saved;
here is the goodness of God: but now for particular passages, they have no
such hold of God, but they are turned to the use of the means; a man is turned
to the use of the means in the other too; a man cannot think to stand in grace
to hold out at all, but he must look to the use of the means; but in ^ase men
have ne^lected, God will not take his people upon the lurch; but here he may
^ake them, and for ought we know, he will take them upon the lurch, if they
gr^^ careless; when we meet with a temptation, we venture upon it, suppose it
be to be earthly, and vain, and omit good duties, take heed; who knows what
God may do? how he may break our hearts, and rend us, and tear in pieces; who
knows what may fall for dullness, and deadness, and untowardnesse, and want
of peace of conscience, for irksomenesse and awknesse, that a man has an
hellish life from day to day; we may fall into this; the best of all Gods
people, if they stand not upon their guard, nay, watchfulness is the thing
that is commended to us. God has showed us when we may have all grace, and be
kept from all deadness; and when we man have life, and comfort, and
quickening, and when he will be found of us, namely, when we seek him with all
our hearts; but let a man be careless of seeking of God, he will be careless
of him; and if a man do not stir up the grace of God, let him know he falls
into the hands of a consuming fire; he is not only so to the Reprobate; but
even to his Sain^s and children, if they grow careless; therefore when Paul
was about to leave the world, he gives Timothy this charge, O Tim thy, preach
in season and out of season, etc. what follows? watch thou in all things; as
who should say, may be you shall meet with many temptations and
discouragements, and therefore watch in all things, 2 Timothy 4, 5. as Christ
says, What I say to you, I say to all, Watch, Mark 13. 37.

Because we see this by experience in the Sain^s of God in all ages, that
sometimes God leaves his people; and when he does leave them, they fall into
grievous sins; this cannot be denied; for experience proves it in every
generation: You see Jacob himself, how grievously he sinned, he yielded to his
Mother to tell a lie, thinking to get a blessing by an untruth, by saying he
was Esau, when he was not; and you see what misery he brought upon himself by
it; even twenty years bondage that one sin did cost that poor man; he thought
to get the blessing; for it was Gods promise; but by his unlawful going about
it, God kept him from it in a terrible manner, and brought him a wide way
about; and so we might instance in many other Saints of God; for this is most
certain, let a man be the dearest of Gods servants, yet if sin be yielded
unto, it will disuse a man of Gods Ordinances, and make a man untoward to good
duties; it will make a breach between God and the soul; it will drive him, and
carry him into thickets and bushes, as Adam; the Spirit of God will turn away
the gale of his breath, and then how uncomfortable a man shall be in good
duties, we may think with our selves, and reason the case in our own souls; it
will be so, for God is an holy God; for though he love his people that re^oyce
in his name, yet he has said, that all their ways should be with trembling,
Psalm. 2. 11.

But you will say, Is grace indifferent in regard of particular passages? God
forbid; that man has no grace that has such thoughts.

For first grace when it comes into the soul, it sets up an universal principle
Psalm. 119. 3. The people of God are described by this, They do no iniquity,
they walk in his ways. He speaks of this principle, not that they may not
fall, but if they do, it is merely against the principle; if a man has true
grace, he has a principle to love and fear God, not only for the main, but in
every particular passage.

Secondly, It is plain that cannot be the meaning of it, that grace is
indifferent, because that if grace be truly in any man, it does set up a watch
in the soul to preserve it, that the man shall be eager not to sin in any
particular, and desirous in some measure, and careful in some degree, to do
all manner of good; if a man give way to the lusts of the flesh, his care may
be brought to a low ebb; but grace sets up a watch in the soul, and breeds
care, and desire, and purposes, and resolutions, and revenge upon his own
lusts, and abundance of things, as you may see 2 Cor. 7. 11. So that grace will
not let a man be indifferent; therefore when we say for particulars, God does
not undertake this or that; the meaning is not as if grace would only convert a
man, and keep him from falling totally and finally away; but for particulars it
is indifferent; this is to blaspheme the grace of God; but the meaning is,
though a man be the child of God and never so much mortified, if this man
should grow careless, and remiss, and secure, and give way to sin, grace does
not undertake to keep a man from the fearfullest falls that can be, nor from
the fearfullest distempers. Indeed when a man has played the beast, God may
preserve him, but a man cannot look for this at the hands of God; who knows how
God will deal with him, if he be unthankful to God for his grace and goodness,
and mercy vouchsafed unto him?

The second Use: Is is so that a child of God may be left to himself to Paul,
Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2 12. Has any man
gotten quickening? go on with fear and trembling; has any got softness of
heart? in the fear of God go on with a trembling heart, and consider how
brittle your hearts are; they are like glass, you had need go charily and
tenderly up and down; grace is a fine delicate thing; if it be cherished and
preserved, and stirred up, what a deal of good may a man attain unto? if God
has been good to any of us, to give us any saving grace, we are very fools if
we look not to it; it is a dainty and delicate thing; it cannot enter indeed
into a man's heart to conceive what a great mercy God has vouchsafed unto him,
if he has bestowed any grace upon him; therefore be chary of it, and remember
Lots Wife; remember those fearful examples; remember how David brake his bones;
remember the miserable, distressed, uncomfortable condition thou may bring
thy soul into* if thou do not take heed to thy self? and if thou be in
such a condition, consider what gracious promises there are to help thee up
again, and what gracious examples, to make thee think with thy self, there is
yet grace, and mercy, and quickening for me; and if I seek God, he will
assuredly be found of me.

The third Use. Is it so, that a child of God may fall so foulely? Then no
mind to God, and the things of eternal life; is not this our conversation from
day to day? nay, the very world sees it, they see how heartless good people are
grown.

The last use may be to rap all men's fingers off, that think to comfort

Now we come in the next place to show what are the causes of this deadness
Causes of deadness. 1. Gener.
of men's hearts, in these times wherein God has revealed himself more fully
and clearly; the general reason of this is the giving way to sin, and not
looking to themselves to abstain from sin, and have a care of the commandments
of God, and walking before him as they ought to do, which thing is an horrible
deader of the heart; as Solomon speaks concerning the adulterer, he knows not
that the dead are there; when a man gives way to Prove. 9. 18.
sin, to worldliness, or passion, or any other corruption, he does even go
where the dead are, and there where the guests of hell are; if a man gives way
to pleasure, to be carried away with sinful delights, this will dead a man's
heart; as the Apostle shows of the Widows that lived in pleasure, 1 Timothy 5.
6. they were dead while they were alive; as soon as ever David gave way to his
sinful corruptions, his heart was deaded presently upon it, as may appear by
the prayer he had afterward, when he came to himself, and to look out for
quickening, uphold me with thy free spirit, Psalm. 51. 12. as who should say, I
feel a base dull slavish spirit come upon me, that former liveliness that was
in me it is woefully decayed; sin had made a mighty breach in his soul, it had
knocked off his wheels and made him dull, and therefore he is fain to pray that
God would give him a free spirit again; so it was with Peter, as soon as ever
he had given way to his curiosity, and security, and presumption, he would
needs go and see sights, he would go into the high Priests hall, and see how
the business went; he did not see the proneness of his heart to be carried into
sin; now you may see how woefully it deaded his heart in a moment, as soon as
the damsel spoke* thou also were with Jesus of Galilee; a man would wonder how
no life at all almost appeared in that man's heart; if he had had any life,
would he have carried himself in that fashion? his life was so gone, that he
cursed and swear that he never kn^w the Mat. 26. 47.
man; if he had any life in him, he would rather have said, what if I were with
Jesus of Galilee? I was with him, and I am with him, and I will be with him, I
am ready to dye with him, I profess my self to be his Disciple; he had no heart
in the world to stand for Jesus Christ; he had no heart to appear in pleading
for him, and expose himself to danger for him; he was now called to it, but he
had no heart at all; sin it is even like ashes cast upon the fire, the fire
cannot then send sorth its heat; so sin does even cast ashes upon the soul,
that it cannot express such life as otherwise it would.

The first reason is, because sin is a soul killing thing; it is like Mare
Mortuum, the fishes dye as soon as ever they come there; so when the Devil
hooks a man into sin, he hooks him into the dead sea; as the Apostle says of
the Ephesians, you were dead in sins; if the Devil can but hook a man into Ephesians.
2.
sin, he is presently in the dead sea; Hos. 13. 12. it is said of Ephraim, when
he offended in Baal he died, etc. before, when their affections were up, and
they trembled before God, they were lively; but when they gave way to sin and
iniquity, the Church presently died, they withered away more and more till they
came to nothing; therefore the Apostle calls the Law of sin, the Law of death;
the Law of the spirit of Christ has freed us from the Law of sin, and of
death, Romans 8. 2. sin does even bring a man to deaths door; it does weaken all
the powers and faculties of the soul, that a man cannot stir to any duty; it
makes a man like a snake that is frozen with the cold, it cannot stir; so it is
with a man when he gives way to sin and iniquity, it freezeth all the powers
that are in him, and lesseneth all the powers of Gods spirit; it is even like a
weight, as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 12. 1. If a man should have a great
weight upon his back, fetters upon his legs, how can that man go? he must needs
go very dully; so it is with sin and iniquity; when a man gives way to it, it
is like plumets of lead, like great weights and burdens that clog a man's heart
and affections, it makes them dull and lumpish and heavy to any thing that is
good; as Christ speaks of the cares of this life, if a man give way to them,
they will overcharge the heart; they will lie heavy that the heart cannot stir,
Luke 21. 34. sin poisons all the soul, it poisons the mind, that a man cannot
look upon things as he did; it poisons a man's heart, though his heart were
deeply affected toward God; it is strange, if a man give way to sin, how it
will take off the affections from God, it separates between God and the soul,
and comes between God the fountain of life and the soul, and therefore must
needs be a killing and deading thing.

Secondly, Sin is a deading thing, because it does grieve the holy spirit of
God that dwells in a man; you know all the quickening of a Christian consists in
the gracious assistance of Gods spirit; as long as Gods spirit is pleased to go
along with us, and work our works for us, then we can pray and deny our selves,
then we are fitted to every good word and work; but if the spirit of God
retire, if it withdraw and suspend his actions, and forbear his operations,
what can a man do? a man is even a block without the spirit of God; now though
the spirit of God delight never so much in doing good to the Saints, and
delight in accompanying of them, and assisting of them, and enlarging of them
in all their ways; yet if they give way to sin directly, he will be grieved,
and sent sad back again to heaven, as it were; and when the spirit of God is
grieved, all must needs go sad and heavy with the child of God; suppose a child
of God give way to vain talk and discourse; you shall see what the Apostle
says, this will grieve the spirit of God; grieve not the spirit of God,
whereby ye are sealed to the day of redemption* Ephesians. 4. 13. he speaks of that
very sin, if a man give way to it, the spirit of God will be grieved; though
formerly he was pleased mightily to help, yet now he will withdraw; and then
how dully shall a man goon? so if we should give way to the suffering of our
hearts not to be affected with God and his truth, not to see God in all his
ways, in all his goodness, and dealings, that we should not be thankful, this
will quench the spirit of God, it will quench its motions; as if a man should
pour pail-fuls of water upon the fire, so this will quench the spirit of God, 1
These. 5. 18, 19. there is a manifest dependence between all those exhortations;
and this is certain, let a man once not be affected with God, let him not see
Gods goodness in all his ways, let him not be affected with Gods mercy and
loving kindness, it will quench the spirit of God; and then consider what a
lamentable case a man shall be in.

Thirdly, Sin must needs dead a man's heart, because it does put a most woeful
bitter hard task upon the soul to go through; for you know hard tasks stir up
reluctance against them; when a man has an hard task to go through, the very
thought of it dulls him; it is like a stone upon his heart; now let a man sin
against grace and the goodness of God, and Gods gracious dealing, let a man sin
against these, it does put a man to a most hard task to go through, to go and
humble himself before Almighty God; and the soul shall find a world of
conflicts, that he is loath to come to it, loath to deal about this bitter
business, to go about to renew his repentance with bitter remorse for his sins;
it is like a desperate debtor that has run himself over head and ears in debt;
the very thought of coming to a reckoning is death to him, he cannot abide to
think of it; it is like a boy that has made false Latin; if his Master should
call him to construe and pearse it, and give a rule for every word, he knows it
is not according to rule, he has not looked after rule, and every thing is
false; now he cannot abide to come to construe and pearse it; so when a man
has provoked God by his sins, and has broken his covenant, and slighted his
ordinances, when God calls him to construe and pearse, what do you make of such
an action, and such a word, and such a thought? the heart is even afraid of
these things, as a dog is of a whip, it is an hard task to be brought to this;
as David, when he had yielded to his security, and idleness, and
unwatchfulness, and so had given way to Satan, you may see what an hard task he
brought upon his soul, and how his soul was ever afraid to go about
humiliation; how many frowning looks does a man cast upon the pykes he must go
through, if he mean to obtain mercy; it even deads him as a dagger at his
heart; David was loath to come to this, to come to a reckoning, to come to be
humbled; when Bathsheba sent him word that she was with child, then God called
him to a reckoning to be humbled; God told him to his face it is high time to
be humbled, and ashamed; God has been laying rods in brine for thee, and to
bring thee upon the stage, and to make thee odious and vile in the sight of the
world; yet he was loath to come to a reckoning, he shunned it, and shut his eyes
from seeing it, he devised tricks to send Vriah home to his Wife; and when this
would not be, but Vriah carried himself constantly, with feeling of the case of
the Church that then lay in the field against their enemies; this could not but
call for humbling, yet he shunned it still, and instead of humbling himself, he
went further into the briars, and made Vriah drunk, thinking then he would go
home; it is impossible but he should see the hand of God in all this, that he
gave him a warning to down on his knees; but he shunned it again, and instead
of humbling himself* he devised the death of Vriah, and when n^^s come Vriah is
dead, which one would think should have been as an ha(...)r to have knocked him
down, he puts this off, the sword kills one as well as another; and till the
Lord was pleased to set it on, he could not be brought to humble himself; thus
it is, sin puts an hard task upon a man; a man may easily slip into sin, it is
a merry way unto it; but when a man is once in, he cannot get out again,
without tearing and rending, and abasing, and casting himself down before God;
this is an hard task, and the soul shall find abundance of reluctancies, and
the very thought of it deads the soul, unless the Lord be the more merciful.

A fourth reason why sin deads a man, is, because sin defiles the conscience,
for sin is a dead work, and it goes into the conscience and defiles it, until
it be purged by the blood of Christ, Heb. 9. 14. sin is a dead work, and the
winding sheet of it is the conscience; presently as soon as a man does
iniquity, this dead work runs into the conscience; and catches hold, and this
defiles the conscience, and puts guilt into it; and nothing in the world more
deads a man then a guilty conscience; why because it knocks a man's fingers off
from that which should enliven and quicken him, it makes him see that he does
defile Gods promises if he meddle with them, Isa. 38. 16. the promises of God
are the things by which men live; now when the conscience is guilty, it does
even knock a man's fingers off from the promises, it tells him this guilt must
out first, before he can apply the promises, nay, the very hearing of the
promises deads his heart, and this is the reason why good people, as long as
they have not clear consciences, rather call for Sermons of judgment then of
mercy; and their consciences say the promises do not belong to me; I know God
is an holy God, and his promises holy, and it is no meddling with them without
holiness; therefore when a man gives way to sin, he must needs dead his heart,
because he defiles his own conscience; and therefore no wonder that there is so
much deadness up and down, when there is hardly a clear conscience in the
Country; nay, good people, how slightly do they deal in this case, and hinder
their own life and quickening, because they have not a care to come before God
with a clear conscience!

The fifth Reason is, Because sin does either utterly destroy, or mightily
weaken all assurance of welcome with God; and therefore no marvel if it dead
the heart; for if a man cannot look for comfort and entertainment with God when
he goes to him, it takes man off from that willingness to come into Gods
presence, it makes a man shie of God, and of Jesus Christ, and his Ordinances;
it makes a man that he has no desire to pray almost, nay, sometimes he has no
heart at all; nay, sometimes he totally omits the duty, he is so afraid, he
cannot go to God without carnal fears and mis-givings, and horrors; and this
takes the heart quite off for a time, that he cannot pray at all; it is like a
child when he has committed some villainy that he knows his father knows, he
is shy of coming into his fathers presence, he is afraid to come where his
father is, he knows be shall be chid, and hear of his doings; so it is in this
case; it is not thus with wicked and ungodly men; for they can look God in the
face; but Gods own people, when they sin against God; it must needs take off
that cheerful willingness to go before God, that delight to be in his
presence, that comfort in prayer; sin makes it an irksome thing; sin makes
a man to have little heart to deal with God; for the heart does not love to be
caught by God in Satan's company, or of any lust; as a servant cannot abide that
his Master should take him in any villainy or unfaithfulness; if he has been
unfaithful, it would kill his heart that his Master should take him in it; so
it is with Gods children, let them sin against God; it does dull and dead
their hearts, in regard of the throne of grace, it makes them have small heart
to come before it: See it in Jonah; when he had fled Jonah 1.
away from God, and had put off Gods charge, and was gone down to Jo^p^, and
was shipped into the Sea, see whether he had any mind to pray, or call upon
God or no; he had none in the earth; nay, he was afraid of God, and shy of his
presence, he knew he should be upbraided; indeed when God laid it upon his
conscience, then Jonah prayed; but he did not pray before that, if he did, it
was as good as nothing: So it is noted of David, when he had committed his
sins, he confesses he roared to God, but we can hear of no prayer; but when
God sent Nathan, then he could pray; it is the title of the 51. Psalm, A Psalm
of David when Nathan came to him; then he could pray; but all the while sin
lay upon his soul, he could not pray: or if he did, he did but roar, he came
before God with horror, and unbelief, and dismay, and had no comfort: Now when
a man is privy to sin, what man that has the knowledge of God, how ill God
likes these courses, how ill he likes a man's pride and security, and neglect of
worship and service; how can it choose but the thought of these things should
gall his heart? And thus we see for the general, that it is sin that deads
men's hearts, when they give way to it. 2 Partic^


Now for particulars, What are those sins that cause this deadness up and
down? First, the niggardliness of people in Gods service, they will do then be
wanting; there are many duties in Religion that we have no express text of
Scripture for, for such a quantity, or such a measure, or such a time, or how
often; as how often we should pray in secret every day, how often we should
meditate, and how long at a time, how much we should give out of alms, how
much we should do thus and thus; the duty is commanded, but the quantity for
time or frequency is not expressed in Scripture; there be a thousand things of
this nature. Now a man that loves his own quickening, will rather overdoe in
this case then underdoe; as it was with Philemon, Phil. 21. Paul you know was
to entreat him to do an act of kindness to receive Onesimus; now, says he, I
know thou will do more then I ask of thee, etc. He would rather overdoe then
underdoe: So it was with the Israelites, when God would have them offer to the
building of the Tabernacle; he did not tell them how much, but they would
rather overdoe then underdoe, Exodus 36. 5. They brought so much, that the Lord
was fain to say there was enough, and too much: So it was with the Macedonians,
2 Cor. 8. 3. Paul asked a little, they gave more: So it is with a man that
loves quickening; if God bid him pray twice a day, rather then fail he will pray
thrice a day; if God has required some time in his service, he will rather
give him more time then afford him smaller time, as Christ says, If a man will
have thy coat, let him have thy cloak also; as who should say, rather overdo
then underdoe, if thou be called to do any thing for the glory of God, and
the good of thine own soul, or the good of others; we should imitate God in
this; God gives his people above that which they ask; so we should do more
then is asked. I do not mean as if we could do more then God bids us; for God
requires all the heart, and all the mind, and all the strength; but I speak of
a frank and free heart; when he does not know Matthew. 22.
what measure God sets down in his Word, he will rather do more then less; he
will rather be with the forwardest then with the backwardest, if he love his
own quickening; but when a man grows niggardly in Gods service, and will do no
more then needs must, and takes advantage that he may do as little as may be,
this deads the heart; because there is no express place in Scripture for
prayer in this kind, he will take any advantage in the world, for his own
security, and worldliness, and littleness in Gods service, he lies at catch;
in this case this man sets open his heart to all deadness; therefore no marvel
he has no life; where is a man in town or country, that is like to Philemon,
that a Minister may say, I know then wilt do more then I say? It were well if
we could say, thou will do as much as I say; nay, it is come to this pass, we
may say, I know you will do nothing at all; I may bid thee do this and that,
but thou will do nothing at all; people will hardly regard the Communion of
Saints at all, they will hardly regard secret prayer at all, they will heartily
regard any of those duties upon which life and quickening so much depends; and
this is one cause of the horrible deadness that is everywhere.

Secondly, Another cause is unwatchfulness; people do not watch over their
souls, and over their ways, they do not ponder their paths, they have not an
eye to their ways; this is a great cause of deadness of heart; therefore here
when Christ charge the Church of Sardis with deadness, I know thou have a
name to live, but art dead: In the next words he gives a remedy, Be watchful
therefore; as who should say, here is the cause of thy deadness, thou have not
been watchful; if thou had been watchful, thou had escaped all this
deadness; if thou had sloop upon thy guard, and looked well to thy ways,
this had never been; if a man be quickened at any time, the Devil lies at
catch; and if he do not vvatch, he will be deaded again, as the Apostle
says, 1 Pet. 5. 8. A man had need be vvatchful, else he can never preserve
himself from the temptations of Satan; when a City is beleaguered with the
enemy, there are ever some Watchers and Scouts that lie in wait, that so if any
danger be toward, they may give warning, lest it be surprised on the sudden;
so when God does good to our hearts, how should we keep watch over our souls;
for we are beleaguered on every side, sometimes with presumption, and sometimes
with despair; we are every way in danger, therefore we had need to watch; no
sooner had Eve gone apart from her husband, and looked here and there, but the
Devil took her presently; no sooner had Noah begun to taste the liquor of the
grape he had planted, and delighted in it, but presently the Devil hooked him
in, which he might have prevented if he had been watchful; the Devil is that
Nimrod, that greedy hunter, that goes up and down, and makes pits, and lays
snares to catch souls, and if we do not watch, we fall into them, 1 Cor. 2.
13. Paul says, I was among you with much fear; he knew what danger he was in,
therefore he was in much fear; if we did love our own quickening, and the
cherishing of whatsoever grace we have received, we would watch over our
selves; but where is this? generally all the world is fast asleep, even good
men and all; the Devil may sow what tares he will, there is no watching in
prayer and in hearing of the Word, and doing good duties; no watching in
observing the Sabbath; no watching in company; no watching alone; what may not
the Devil do, when we are all as sleepy dogs, and love to snoar? and dullness,
and deadness, and blockishnesse, and worldliness, and unsetlednesse grows
upon us to the utmost; there is no body watching against temptations, they may
come flowing in like violent waters, there is no withstanding of them; people
are like to Saul, that was mavelous finely quickened at one time, he would not
go on in his envy against David, he should not die by any means; no, his
heart was so enlarged, that he bound his soul by a covenant, that he would be
as good as his word, As the Lord lives he shall not die. Jonathan had used many
arguments, and they so wrought upon him, that he could give the right hand to
David, and all his malice was out, and David was a great man at Court again, 1 Samuel 19. 6, 7, 8. But for want of watchfulness, within a little while the evil
spirit came into him, and he would have murdered him again; so Jonah, when he
had run from God, and God had humbled him, now he would never follow lying
vanities any more; now he would go to Niniveh and preach, let what danger
would come; but by and by, not looking to himself, he is as much out of tune
again as ever he was, as if he had never had these shinings, he was overgrown
with passions, I do well to be angry, even Jonah. 4.
to the death; I cannot tell which was the fouler distemper.

A third Cause of our general deadness, is the lowness of Religion, which men
generally content themselves withal; a low kind of Religion, that will never
reach half way to Heaven, that will never attain to any quickening; Religion, it
is a very high thing, Prove. 15. 24. it is a thing alone, a man must raise
himself aloft, when he means to come into the way of eternal life; it is an
high calling, Phil. 3. 14. It is said of Jehosaphat, that his heart was lifted
up in the ways of God; Jerusalem, that is above; all 2 Chronicles. 17,
godly souls that have true Religion indeed, are men above: Now people
generally content themselves with a low kind of serving of God, that does not
come out of the suburbs of Hell and condemnation; the suburbs of hell Gal. 4.
reach a great way, a man may go even to heaven gates, and yet be in the
suburbs of hell; but to get into heaven, and escape hell beneath, is an high
pitch; but men seek out a low way by the valleys, they think to come to heaven
this way, it would choke most people to say, that their conversation Phil. ^.
is in heaven, as the Apostles was; that they are strangers upon earth, as the
Patriarchs were, that they hate every sin, as all godly men do, that they go
mourning all the day long under their corruptions and failings, and that it is
the greatest grief of their hearts that they walk not according to Gods
goodness, and that they use all means to get rid of their sins; that they
delight in every ordinance, that they delight in Gods Sabbaths, and hunger and
thirst after righteousness; it is the greatest desire of their souls and hearts
to do thus; it would choke them to say thus, no they never attain it; this is
the way of life that is above, but it is too high for fools; therefore no
wonder that men never come to quickening, for they are not in the way of life,
for the way of life is above, and Pro. 15.
they grope after the things below, and have not their conversation above; now
how can we look for quickening, when we do not go in the way of life which is
above?

Fourthly, Another reason is the vanity of men's minds; this is the cause of
horrible deadness, Psalm. 119. 37. vanity when a man gives way to it, it does
horribly dead the heart; vain thoughts, vain speeches, vain expenses of time,
vain meetings together without benefit, these are deaders, they lock up men's
hearts, and exhaust all the good, and all the sap of any goodness in them; it is
true, the children of God may talk how things go in a far country in the Church
of God and other places, and they may talk of their business in the world, and
this may be like bottle-beer; when it is first poured out into the cup it seems
to be all froth, but by and by it turns to good liquor again; so though these
discourses about worldly affairs, and how things go are froth, if they go no
further; yet if they turn to good substance, and are sanctified, and brought
home to the heart, to edify and awaken, and bring a man nearer to God, now
they are good where there is a good use made of them; but otherwise they are
horrible instruments of death, and soul-murther among men.

Fifthly, Mutual example; we do even dead one another; for people are apt to
look upon one another; Ministers upon people, and people upon Ministers, and
Ministers one upon another, and if we be not much cast behind one another, we
hope all is well with us; this is that which deads peoples hearts; whereas
people should follow Gods light, Gods dealing with them, and not look upon
others; and if we look upon others, we should look upon those that are
quickened, Luke 7. 44. see thou this woman, etc. there was a woman was
quickened indeed, her bowels melted, her eyes were fountains of tears, her very
soul was affected, she was quickened indeed; see thou this woman? so if we
will look upon others, upon the Saints of God, see thou this woman? look upon
those that are most quickened; but when we look upon others, and say, such a one
does so and so, and why may not I? I may do as well as he; when we do thus,
this is apt to dead our hearts.

The sixth cause of deadness, is covetousness and worldliness; Christians that
have been weaned from the world, so long as they keep their minds off from the
world, and set them upon better things, they are full of life and quickening,
and are able to pray and confer sweetly; but when as once they come to let in
the world again, this does mightily dead and damp their hearts, this does
wonderfully lay bolts and fetters upon their soul, that it cannot go on as
formerly, as the Apostle shows, 1 Timothy 6. 10. as soon as ever a man gives way
to look after the world, presently, if he had any faith he erres from it, if he
had any quickening before, he is now deaded; this deaded Demas his heart; for a
time he was so full of life, that he was able to hold company with St. Paul,
but when this came once to take possession of him, Demas has forsaken me, he
was gone, he was able to hold 2 Timothy 4.
company with Paul no longer; worldliness will quickly take off all the
affections, and all the quickening that was in the soul, it will presently fail,
and die, and decay; therefore you shall see when the Lord would set down how
dull Ezekiels hearers were, and how heartless, he sets down this as a reason o^
it, their heart is gone after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. no marvel then they
went not after Ezekiels Sermons; for their hearts could not go after both at
once; so long as their hearts were after the world and profits, they must needs
be dead and untoward to the word of God; therefore the Apostle says, Ephesians. 5.
3. let not covetousness be named among you, as becomes Saints; as who should
say, it will utterly dead and kill all your Saint-qualities and dispositions
that are in you, if you suffer your hearts to grow earthly; the dames of the
earth as one says, does not more quench a candle and put it out, then the love
of the world does damp grace, and put it out presently; and this is the cause
of that deadness that is grown among us; we are grown worldly, and the world
carries us away; we are all for the world, so that all our words, thoughts,
affections, carriages, they are all little else but worldly; most people have
many businesses abroad in the world, riding abroad into the world; but who
takes that short journey into his own heart? people can tend business with
every body else but themselves; they know what is done beyond sea, and the
countries round about, and yet hardly any one marks how things go in his own
soul, whither he goes backward, or forward whither he gets, or loses; every
body can ask how others do, but no man looks how his own soul does; people are
grown at great distance from themselves; I speak not of drunkards or profane
persons, such as are absolutely dead in sins and trespasses, but I speak of
Christians in whom we should look for life; we are grown strangers to our
selves, we are out of our own reach, we are grown to a mighty distance from
looking to our own estates and conditions as we ought to do; our minds are
scattered up and down about other things; therefore no marvel we are so
heartlesse toward God.

Seventhly, The next cause is idleness and spiritual sloth, when men let their
minds go as a boat without a guide; the boat goes uncertainly when it has no
body to guide and steer it; so people let their thoughts, and hearts, and minds
run at all adventures; people do not take pains with their own hearts and hold
them to that which is good; we let our hearts be like the field of the
sluggard, any thing may grow in them for all us; we do not look to our hearts,
that we may have good things grow in them, and that we may fence our hearts
from those things which may make us untoward in the ways of God; if we have
any stirrings at any time, we are like idle huswives; when the liquor has done
working they forget to stop up the bunghole; so when men have any stirrings,
then they are in motion and action; but when they are gone, they let their
hearts get a vent and they are deaded again, as if they had nothing at all; as
Solomon shows, Prove. 19. 15. though a man has enough for the present, yet if
he grow idle, when that is spent he will samish and starve, and die; the idle
soul shall suffer hunger; may be he has something now, but if he be idle and
sluggish, that may be all spent, and then for want of supply he may famish; so
it is with the soul; though it has something for the present, yet if it be
idle, and sluggish, and slothful, and take not pains from day to day, it must
needs go to wrack; when God gives us knowledge of sin, we should improve that
knowledge to root out sin; when God gives us insight into graces, we should
employ it, that we may get those graces; if God give us his ordinances, if he
give us a Sermon at any time, we should presently work with it. As it is with a
graft that a man cuts off to plant and set, if he lets it lie till it be dead,
it will never grow, but if he presently plant it, it will take in the ground
and prosper so if a man would presently take a good motion when it comes, if he
would presently take hold of a reproof or counsel given him out of the word of
God, while it has life in it, and works upon his heart, the heart might
receive much benefit; but when people are blockish and* dull, they are not
willing to take any pains, no wonder though they go down as they do, Eccles.
10. 18. by much slothfulness the building decays, etc. it is so in the
spiritual building; if people be slothful, all gracious things must needs
vanish away, and go out more and more; and this is a most grievous thing; it is
generally among all people, nay, among the better sort; for wicked men that
live palpably in sin, they are struck dead in ^^n, and never had any color of
life; but I speak of those that have had some kind of quickening, yet
notwithstanding suffer themselves to be deaded through idleness; when we go to
prayer, we do not put forth our selves in prayer, our prayers are dead; when we
go to the word, we do not put forth our minds, and therefore our hearing is
dead; our hearts are like to a sieve; when it is in the water it is full, but
when it is once taken out again, not a jot remains; so it is while people are
at a Sermon, may be they seem to drink in something, and their hearts are
affected (yet these people are rare too) but when they are gone, all is gone,
all leaks out again for want of stopping, for want of observing the things they
have heard; this is the reason there is no more life among Christians, because
they are so idle and sluggish; thou evil and slothful servant says Christ;
when a man is a Matthew. 25.
slothful servant, he must needs be an evil servant; Christians will confer may
be now and then of grace, but with such loose thoughts that there is no
edification or quickening; nay, their hearts grow dull and sleepy under the
same; how is it possible a man should get any quickening, or keep it without
labor and pains? men must labor for it, as the Apostle says, give all
diligence to 2 Pet. 1. Phil. 3.
make this sure; it is said of Paul, that he followed hard after the mark;
there is nothing can be done in this thing without labor; as it is with our
outward callings, if a man will have a living in the world, he must labor for
it; the earth will bring forth no fruit unless he till it, and take pains about
it; so it is here much more; a man's heart by reason of sin, is cursed as the
earth is, and it will bring forth nothing but weeds, vanities, fooleries, and
vile passions, and inordinate affections, unless a man be still husbanding of
it; therefore unless a man be diligent in this work, he can never be quickened.

Eighthly, In the next place, the neglect of secret duties is the cause of the
deadness of our hearts in all duties of Religion; secret duties are the best
quickners; when a man goes alone, and serves God alone, as it is spoken of
Peter, when his heart was dead and untoward in the high Priests hall, if he had
had any life, he would have stood for Christ; What if I be one of them? what
say you to that? I am one, and I confess it, and if that be my fault, it shall
be my fault still; but he was dead and had no life; now what course did he
take? he went out (and went by himself) and wept bitterly; Matthew. 26.
he went to a private and secret duty, to humble his soul before Almighty God;
when a man is sick and would recover his health, he goes and be takes himself
to a chamber, and shuts the windows, and will not let the air come in; so if a
man would recover life and quickening, the saving health of his soul, he must
take himself to his chamber, and privately deal with God concerning his own
soul, as the Prophet speaks, Zech. 12. every family apart, the house of David
apart, and the house of Nathan apart; when Jeremiah would humble himself before
God, Jer. 15. 17. I sat alone, says he; so even go and sit alone.

But you will say, are not public duties better then private? it is true; they
are so, when we may have public duties as on the Sabbath day, or any other
day, when we may go to public ordinances, then to go to private duties, to
private prayer, etc. this is to despise Gods public worship; but if we be not
diligent in secret duties, in private calling upon God, if we be not frequent
in these, all outward duties of Gods worship will do us no good; the preaching
of the Word will do us no good, except we preach to our selves; the prayers in
the congregation will do us no good, if we pray not in our closets; now when
men neglect private prayer, and seeking of God; when a good motion comes into
their mind to seek God in secret, they put it off, they will do it anon, they
shall have more liesure another time, and if they do it, they do it lothly and
hoverly, even so, so, they do not do it roundly and thoroughly as they ought to
do; this deads their hearts, Lam. 3. 28. the Church sat^ alo^e; that is the way
to be quickened; if a man did love quickening, ^e would plot and study to be
alone, nay, he would search all the ^orn^^s o^ his house for privacy; if he did
love his own quickening, he would do thus, he would be frequent with God in
secret; it is noted that the greate^^ work that ever Jacob did, it was in
private, Genesis 32. 24. he had sent all his company away, and dispatched them
over the brook, he was l^ft al(...), and so went to ^ug with God all alone, and
there wrestled so hard, this he would not let the A^g^l go until he had blessed
him; so this were the way for people to take God aside, and go between him and
them, and th^re afflict their souls and acknowledge all their vileness, there
to be instant with him, and look up to him and bless him; as it is noted of our
Savior Christ, he would shift out of the way many times, and go and pray
alone, Mat. 14 23. We may do that when we are alone, that w^ cannot do in any
company; we may speak that in private, which is not fit for the Wife, or the
brother to hear; a man may do that alone, which he is not able to do when he is
in company; how many secret arguments has a man to move God in private many
secret businesses that only God and his own soul knows off; so that if he would
be diligent in private duties, he knows not what good h^ might do to his own
soul: Now the neglect of this blessed Ordinance of God, of se^king of him in
secret, is the cause of this deadness; nay, the want of this duty is the cause
why public Ordinances do ^^ no more good.

Ninthly, The next cause of deadness is the not looking after inward duties in
a man's own breast; spiritual life and quickening is an inward thing, and it is
inward duties that must cherish it; and the omitting of these duties does most
destroy it and let it die. I say inward duties; outward duties it is more easy
doing of them; as for a man to pray, and hear, and receive the Sacrament, and
externally to observe the Sabbath, or outwardly to confer and sing Psalms, an^
read a Chapter; these outward duties a man may do them with more ease; nay,
hypocrites may do them, and do do them, and yet never come to life and
quickening; they do them after their manner; but there is no man can do them
aright, but they that are quickened up to God; but I say men may do this, and
never be quickened but now there be inward duties, and these are the main
quickners of the heart, and the careles^^ess of these is a great cause of
deadness; but what are these?

It is the setting of God before a man's eyes, thinking when he goes up and
down of God, of his holiness, of his precepts, of the danger of being under his
displeasure, and of the happiness of being in his favor; it is for a man to be
striving against temptations, and opposing his own wickedness; if sin rise up
at an^ time, to beat it down; these be inward duties, which no man can see* if
a man were in the market cross, he might do these duties and no man see him; no
man can tell what a man thinks, what he is doing in his bosom; now I say, if a
man would be careful of these inward duties, what a deal of good might he gain?
these inward duties are they that raise up quickening, Mal. 2. 15. take heed to
the spirit; many take heed to their lips, they will not speak; and to the
outward man, they will not do evil; but take heed to your spirit, Ephesians. 5. 19.
speak to your selves, says the Apostle, we speak, may be, to others about God;
this is an outward duty; but we should speak to our selves; if a man loved
quickening, he would reason the case with his own soul, and speak to himself,
and ever and anon upon occasion retire into his own bosom, and recolle upon
his own heart, and commune with himself; this is it, to be inwardly resisting
the Devil, and cherishing of good motions; this is an excellent thing, and
nothing deads a Christian so much as the neglect of these duties. It is
observed of Nehemiah, when he was speaking to the King, he was doing of an
inward duty at the same time, Neh. 2. 4. At the same time that he spoke to the
King, he was careful of the inward duty to speak to God to bless him, and to
be with him: So when Moses was exhorting all Israel to believe in God, Exodus
14. 13, 14. At the same time when no body knew what Moses did, he was doing of
an inward duty, he was crying to God; as the Lord says, ver. 15. Moses, why
criest thou unto me? This was when he was conversing with Israel, and talking
with them; these inward duties may stand with any duty; they run along in
prayer, and hearing of the Word: they run along when a man is in company, and
when he is alone; when he is at home, and when he is abroad; when he is eating
and drinking; these inward duties, if men would make much of them, it would
make a man to have a gracious living heart. Now what should ayle us but that we
may do these duties? we have no excuse for the not doing of them; when we are
in company, what should ayle us but we may think thus? I will take heed now, I
will not speak words that my heart may reproach me for afterward, I will
behave my self as I ought; though a persecutor of Religion were in company,
can he know these thoughts? No man can persecute or mock him for any of these;
a man may think as good thoughts as he will, if he has an heart to them; and
this will keep up a man's quickening; when a man goes abroad, what should hinder
but he may be employed in inward duties, considering seriously, and thinking
solemnly, how it stands between God and his soul? what shall hinder a man from
these duties? Now the neglect of these is the cause of the deadness of men's
hearts; people come to Church, and hear Sermons; but what do ye do within? do
you set up Gods Ordinances in your bosoms? do you set up a Christian watch in
your bosoms? and prayer in your bosoms? how do you go up and down all day
long? is heaven in your bosoms? is the fear of God in your bosoms, preserving
and keeping of you? This is that which will quicken you; and a man can never be
quickened, if he make not conscience of this.

Lastly, Another cause of deadness, is peoples contenting themselves with what
they have attained unto; if they have g^tten any thing, they are apt to set up
their staves there, and content themselves as if all were well; this is the
cause of the deadness of peoples hearts, because every little suffices them;
if they have but any hope that they are of God, and fear his name; if they
find they have any thing in them, they are apt to be secure, and not to be
earnest to grow in grace from day to day. Now when this gets into a man's heart,
it will dead him presently; therefore the Apostle, when he perceived many of
the Hebrews deaded their hearts this way, he shakes them up, Heb. 6. 1. Leaving
the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection: As who
should say, Let us on, on, for shame unto perfection, let us proceed further,
let us not ever be learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth; let
us not be ever laying a foundation, and never building thereupon; let us not be
ever going about repentance, and faith, and the first principles of the Oracles
of God, and never come to perfection: This is the effect of the Epistles of
Peter, that people should not content themselves with what they have, but that
they may grow and go forward; Desire the sincere milk of the Word, that you
may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. and grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. He is beating
upon this, that no man should content himself with any measure already
attained; if he do, his heart will be deaded, and made dull and blockish to all
goodness; and this is another cause of the deadness of peoples hearts, they
are at a stay, they are at a stand; every man (may be) would be a good
Christian, and a child of God; and if he can get but any hope that he is a
child of God, now he is safe, and now he goes dully and blockishly on, if he
can but hold there; and if he has any fears that he is not right, then may be
he begins to stir himself a little; but as soon as ever he gets any hopes
again that he is right, he goes on in a blockish manner, and passes over holy
things otherwise then he ought to do; and then if any spurs come into his
conscience, and awaken him, may be he stirs again, till he gets up a little
hope that his condition is good, and then he falls off, and grows as secure
again as he was before; and this deads the hearts of people.

I come now to the means how a man may be quickened, and the first Means of
quickening. 1. Means.
is this. If we would be quickened, we must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
we must go to him (I speak now to good people) if you would be quickened, you
must go and fetch it from the Lord Jesus Christ; he is a fountain of life
opened unto all that come unto him; I am come (says Christ) that they might
have life, and that they might have it more abundantly, John 10. 10. Christ is
not only come to quicken the dead, and raise them up that they may be alive
toward God, barely, and nakedly; but he came to make all his people lively,
that they should have more life and quickening, and be more enlarged in grace;
he came not only to work the thing, but to work a growth and increase of it
more and more: Now if you would know how to come by this life in Christ Jesus,
the only way is to believe in Christ, John 7. 38 He that believes in me, out
of his belly shall flow Rivers of living water; there shall be rivers of
spiritual life in that man, that shall never be drawn dry; so then, do any of
us stand sticking at this, how shall we be quickened, and shake off this
deadness that is in us? I say, look up to Christ, and labor truly and
unfainedly to desire him, and hunger and thirst after him; if we did search
after Christ, we should be quickened presently; there is no man is dead, but he
that has no care to look after Christ, and desire him; if we would have
Christ, if our hearts be open to him, if we do but desire him, and long for
him, if we have but these groans, and outgoings in our souls, oh that I had
but Christ shed abroad in my heart! if I had him, I should have life and
quickening; if I had him, I should have right and title to all Gods heavenly
comforts; if our hearts did but go up and down longing after Christ, this is
the way to attain to quickening. Isa. 55. 1. Ho every one that thirsts, come
ye to the waters, etc. Come, and ye shall have waters that shall never be dried
up; the want of faith is the cause of hardness of heart, and of deadness; as
our Savior Christ, when he saw they were dead, Matthew. 16. he did upbraid them
with unbelief: if a man did but once believe, if a man did but truly cast his
soul upon God, if he had but once his eyes opened to see the vanity of all
other things, to see the danger of sin and iniquity, the misery of all
unregenerate people, and to see the worth of Christ, and the infinite goodness
of God in Christ, what an admirable pearl it is to enjoy him; how it is better
then life it self, better then the whole world, yea, then thousands of worlds;
if a man did but see this, and had his heart affected with this, to be drawn to
Christ, and to have his heart and mind run after him, to be possessed of him,
this is faith; you that would know whether you have faith or no, if you had all
the faiths in the world, you are infidels without this faith; but if you have
this faith, you have true faith; if you have a heart running after Christ,
minding him, and longing for him, and casting your souls upon him for all
good, accounting this your principal, and total, and main good, and accordingly
affecting this, these are the works of faith; and if you have these works, you
may be quickened; believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, set your hearts upon him,
and seek after him, and you shall have all manner of good, even life it self.

The second means is, a careful learning of the Word of God preached. Second
means
When the Corin^hians were marvellously blocked u^ in their minds and hearts,
and were straightned in good things, 2 C^r 6 12. mark what the Apostle says v.
11. Our m^uth is ^pen to you etc. as who should say, in our Ministry there is
abundance of grace, abundance of life, and largeness of heart, abundance of
gracious things; all manner of good things we bring with us in our Ministry;
peace, and comfort, and hope, and all the promises of God, and all the rich
treasu^es of Jesus Christ; we come with our arms full; you are not straightned
here, but you are straightned in your (...) bowels; as who should say* you may
be enlarged sweetly by our Ministry; w^ deliver unto you abundance of grace and
mercy, and abundance of supply; all those deadnesses, and lockings up of heart
in you, would be healed by the Ministry of the Word; so may, I say, if your
hearts are locked up, certainly it is for not taking what the Word offers; if
you would come hungerly and greedily to the Word of God, with an heart desirous
to be edified and instructed, and to apply what the Word speaks to your souls,
certainly you shall here meet with abundance of grace and life; for the Word is
the Word of life, and the Ministry of the Word is the Ministry of the Spirit
of God and life, so that the deadness of all people is merely from their own
bowels; you are not straightned in us, says the Apostle; no, in the Ministry
of the Word is abundance of life.

The third means is, A careful shunning of all those causes of deadness which
we named formerly; we must take heed of sin; for if we give way to sin, it
will dead the heart, it will make a make a man shy of God, and put a man to
woeful tasks, and bre^d lo^hness to go about duties; it will make a man to have
a guilty conscience, and dead a man that way; it will grieve the spirit of God,
and quench all the operations, and sweet influences, and gracious motions of
the Spirit, that the sweet liveliness of his workings will be gone away, if a
man give way to sin; if he give way to the world, or slackning in a godly
course; if a man give way to pride or vanity, or any sin; this will dead the
heart, a man's heart will presently be deaded, if he give way to the Devil, and
to his temptations. In particular, you must take heed of niggardliness in
Religion; they that love quickening, must labor for a frank and free spirit,
that will rather overdoe in Gods service then underdoe; as long as a man has a
free heart, he shall have a quickened heart; therefore labor to preserve it;
do as Philemon, I kn^w thou will d^e more than I say. Paul knew he had a free
spirit, that if be commanded him a little, he would do more; he would rather
overdoe then underdoe* our Savior Christ calls for this free spirit; I^ a man
take thy coat, give him thy cloak also; rather overdoe then underdoe in any
good thing; have a free heart; if God bid thee pray, pray thr^e times, five
times a day, rather then not often enough; there be m^n^ duties that God does
not set down how often, and how frequent, and ho^ long; now labor for a free
spirit; rather do twice as much, then underdo.

Again* Take heed of lowness of Religion, of taking up a low, and base, and
mean kind of Religion, that will not reach the Kingdom of God; there is a low
kind of Christianity, that will not be able to attain to salvation; a low
faith, that does not make a man to have his conversation in heaven; a low
repentance, that reaches not to mortification; a low profession of Religion,
that comes not to the power of Godliness, Prove. 15. 24. The way of life is
above; it is an high thing, therefore take heed of low Religion; for people
think that any kind of righteousness will serve turn; if they have but a
little Reformation and Religion, they presently think this is godliness; but
let us take heed of this low Religion, that will never do the deed.

Again, We must take heed of want of Watchfulness; we must set up a gracious
and Christian watch in our hearts from day to day; when the Lord had found
fault with the Church of Sardis for being dead, in the next words he bids them
be watchful; as who should say, the want of this watchfulness, and looking to
your selves, and having a care over your thoughts and a^fections, lest you
should be drawn aside, the neglect of this is the cause of all deadness.

Again, We must take heed of vanity; as David says, Psalm. 119. 37. Turn away
mine e^es from beholding vanity, and quicken me O Lord.

Again* We must take heed of covetousness; for we shall never have any gracious
work upon us, if we give way to it.

Again, We should take heed of slacking and abating private duties; we should
carefully call upon God every day in secret, when there is no body by but God
and our own souls; if we find backwardness to this duty, know it comes from
the Devil, that would drown us in perdition if he could; therefore we must
resist him, and go about it; for certatnly otherwise we cannot be quickened.

Again, We should take heed of slighting inward duties, the holy ordinances of
God in our bosoms, holy meditations, gracious strivings against corruptions
when they arise, setting the Lord before us, seeking Gods presence in all
places; we must have a care we have gracious purposes, and endeavors, and
strivings inwardly in our bosoms.

Lastly, Let us take heed of contenting our selves with any pitch we have
attained; but still labor to grow in grace, lest we fall short, and never
enter into Gods rest.

The next means is to be earnest with God to quicken our hearts; to pray The
fourth means.
to God for his grace, that God would be pleased to put life into us; we should
make Elijahs prayer, that prayed to heaven for fire to come down upon the
sacrifice; so pray earnestly to God to send down his celestial fire into thy
heart, to warm thee, and heat thee, and stir thee up to that which is good; as
the Church does, Psalm. 80. 18. Quicken us, and we will call, etc. Of all
Petitions under heaven, we should pray most of all for life, next unto the
glory of God, and the salvation of our souls (nay indeed, as the very means for
both) we should pray that God would quicken us; into all our prayers let us put
in this Petition, that God would quicken us; evermore to have it as the
standing desire of our souls, and the daily request and suit we have at the
throne of grace that God would quicken us; there is no grace we have more need
of then this; and indeed it is that which sets all other Graces awork; if we
did know how ready God would be to welcome such a suit, we would be more ready
to pray to God for it; there is no man so tenderly welcome to God, as he that
prays for quickening; the more he is weary of deadness and common professing of
God, the more welcome to God; he would fain fear God indeed, and please God
indeed; when a man is possessed with deep studies how to attain to this, this
man is a welcome man to the throne of grace; therefore let us stir up our
selves to this; there is no mercy better then this, that God should quicken us,
Psalm 119. 156. Great are thy tender mercies, quicken me, O Lord! He takes here
quickening for all Gods gracious mercies and tender compassions; he takes the
quickening of his heart as a gracious effect of Gods infinite mercy to his soul;
if we had but this, how welcome would good duties and opportunities of doing
and receiving good be unto us?

The fifth means is to be diligent, and to take earnest and effectual pains 5.
Means.
in this work, and in all Christian duties, in all the worship of God; there is
a secret blessing of God upon those that take pains, even in the meanest
calling; you shall have poor Widows that have four or five small children to
keep; yet being painful, it is a wonderful thing what a blessing of God is upon
them, that they make a shift to live, and never come to trouble the Parish;
such a blessing of God there is upon the diligent, as Solomon says, The hand
of the diligent makes rich, Prove. 10. 4. So it is in regard of spiritual life;
there is a secret blessing of God upon the men and women that labor, and are
diligent about the means of grace, and are careful to take pains to have them
made profitable to their souls; upon those that are diligent in prayer, and
striving against sin, diligent in hearing of the Word, diligent in partaking of
the Sacrament when it comes, and diligent about the Sabbath, that they may not
lose the benefit of it; it is a wonderful blessing that shall accompany such
men; they shall thrive in grace, when as others shall be like Pharaohs lean
kine, that devoured all their fellows, and yet were lean and ill-favored
still; it is not the greatness of a man's comings in that makes a man rich, but
the well-managing of it; there is many a rich Heir comes to poverty, when as
another that was never born to a foot of Land, yet with pains, and labor, and
industry, is well able to live, and give more to any good use, then twenty base
idle fellows; let a man hold but a little ground, twenty acres, he may grow
more rich upon it, being a good husband, then another man that holds twenty
times as much, and is a spendthrift, and lazy, and careless, and never looks
how business goes forward; there is a blessing of God upon labor and industry,
as Solomon says, Prove. 13. 11. He that gathers by labor shall increase. So it
is here; it is not he that lives under the best Ministry, that is most
quickened, but he that lives under a poor Ministry, and is diligent, he is
better then hundreds that live under the powerful Preaching of the Word, and
never are careful to improve it. It is noted of John's hearers, that many of
them had more life, then they that sat under Christ's Ministry: It is noted of
Job, though he dwelt in Midian, where was no means of grace, yet he had more
grace and life in his heart then almost all the Church of God that dwelt in
Zion; there was hardly a man in all Israel like Job; Paul, though he came into
the Vineyard after all the Apostles, yet by his labor and diligence he gat
before most of them all; so a man that sits under the Ministry, and takes
pains with his heart, that the Sermons he hears may do him good, that he may
be the better for them; if a man labors to get good by the Sacrament, to get
good by conference; if he labor to have every Ordinance of God made profitable
to him; this man, with a little grace, shall grow more then thousands that go
on idly, and yet have more helps then he; therefore if we desire to be
quickened, let us be diligent, and take pains, and not go with our hands in our
bosoms, like Solomon's sluggard.

Sixthly, Another means is to exercise that grace we have; there is never 6.
Means.
a man in this Congregation has so little grace, but if he did exercise it, so
far as it would go, who knows how much quickening he might quickly have? which
of you do not know that there is a God? and that there is a Heaven, and an
Hell, and the Principles of Religion? if you would but make conscience to make
use of all the checks of conscience, and the knowledge you have, if you would
but make use of the relentings you have now and then, and the motions you have
now and then, if you would but make use of them, and exercise them, this is the
way to quicken you* let a man have but a little knowledge, and let him exercise
it and improve it, and frame his life an^ conversation accordingly, knowledge
shall be multiplied to this man; and so again, let a man have any relentings,
any meltings now and then at a Sermon and exercise these, strike while the iron
^s hot, and put them to the utmost, this is the way to be quickened; as it is
the saying of one, Every thing is increased with the exercise of its own kind;
as it was with the bread in the D^sciples hands, while they were distributing
of it, it increased; so it is with the graces of Gods spirit, peculiar and
saving graces, and common graces; let a man exercise the graces of Gods spirit,
this is the way to abound in them, and to have them quickened and strengthened,
and made more and more operative in a man; therefore let us exercise all the
graces of Gods spirit, and improve them all; grace is like a snow-ball, the
more it is rouled up and down, the bigger it grows; so let a man but go and
improve all the graces of Gods spirit that he has bestowed upon him, there
will be addition to every one of them; by repenting a man may learn to repent;
and by relenting, a man may learn to relent; and by striving against sin, he
may learn to strive against sin more and more.

The last means is to consider the examples of the worthies in all ages, 7.
Meant.
and such as are even in our days, we should consider these, and these will
quicken us up to be more forward; when St. James would quicken up the James 5.
Christians to whom he writes, to wait with patience the coming of the Lord,
he quickens them by the example of Job and the Prophets; so when he would
quicken them up to prayer, he presses them by the example of Elias, he w(...)
man as well as we, says he, and had the like passions, yet he prayed when the
heavens had been shut three years and six months, etc. Consider this; the zeal
of others may provoke us; specially if we set it before our eyes, we should
think with our selves, What he so believing, and I so full of doubting? he so
lively, and I so dull and blockish? he so affected, and I so untoward? this
should shame us, and provoke us to stir up our selves by looking upon such,
especially upon those that have taken up the profession since we did, and yet
have gone beyond us; it should awaken us; this is an excellent means to quicken
us; as our Savior Christ, when he would exhort his Disciples to suffer
persecution, says he, consider the Prophets that were persecuted before you;
so if we would be quickened up, we should look upon Matthew. 6.
the Saints that have been quickened before us, that we may have their grace and
comfort.

We come now to the last thing, and that is to persuade you by some Motives. 5
Motives to shake off this deadness; Motives are special things to quicken up a
man; the Apostle when he would quicken up the Corinthians to love, he uses
diverse Motives unto them; the first is taken from the collation of love, with
all the extraordinary gifts of Gods spirit; he shows, without love they are all
nothing, though a man had all knowledge, and all faith, so that he could remove
mountains, and had not love, it were nothing; so that you see love is an
excellent grace, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. Another Motive he takes from the effects
and adjuncts of love, love suffers long, etc. from the fourth to the seventh
verse. Thirdly, He uses another Motive to show how love does generally surpass
most graces in the endurance of it; Prophesies they shall cease, knowledge that
shall cease and be done away, but love that shall never be done away; love
never fails. Lastly, He compares it with the cardinal virtues, with the
principal graces, namely, faith and hope, and shows how love is beyond them;
hope edifies a man's self, but love edifies the whole Church of God; faith and
hope must vanish, and will not go into the Kingdom of heaven with us, but love
it does always accompany us; so that you see the Apostle is careful to use
motives to quicken up people to that which he exhorts them unto; the Scripture
as it does bid us do a duty, so it uses motives to quicken us up to the doing
of it.

And again, When it forbids any sin, it uses motives to take off our hearts
from that sin; as when the Apostle would diswade from the unworthy receiving of
the Sacrament, what abundance of motives does he heap one upon another to
terrify us from it? 1 Cor. 11. 23. etc. the first is from the institution of
the Lord Jesus Christ, I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered
unto you, that the Lord Jesus, etc. as who should say, what will you profane
his institution. Secondly, From the time when he instituted it, the same night
he was betrayed; in his agony and in the midst of his sorrows he thought of
your good, and will you profane such a mercy and blessing? Thirdly, From the
nature of the Sacrament, it is the Sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord
Jesus Christ; and will you not reverence that? Another is from the end of the
Sacrament, it is to show forth the Lords death till he comes; therefore how
should we have a care of this? that we may come to the Sacrament in a gracious
and reverent manner, duly meditating what it is, having a lively apprehension
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and to keep a constant memory of what he has done
for us. Another is from the greatness of the sin of unworthy receiving, he
shall he guilty of the body and blood of Christ; again, from the danger of it,
whosoever eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself;
again, from the particular judgments that God had inflicted upon that town,
for this cause many are sick among you, and many sleep; and questionless it is
for this cause, for your unworthy receiving of the Sacrament; you see what
abundance of motives he brings for this; now I say if Motives be good in any
point, look whatsoever we exhort people unto if it be good to use Motives to
stir them up to it, then much more in this point; in the point of deadness to
shake it off, in the point of quickening that they would labor to get it; and
indeed when a man uses Motives to faith and repentance, it is not only to get
that, but to quicken them up to faith and repentance; when a man spurs a horse,
it is not only to make him go, but to quicken him up to go; we are all dull and
careless and blockish; now Motives serve to stir us up, Eccles. 12. the words
of the wise are as go^ds to provoke and stir up people.

Well then, The first motive shall be this, to consider the woeful ingredients
1. Motive.
of this sin of deadness, the horrible sins that are contained in it, what a
compound of spiritual diseases are in this sin.

First, There is a dullness and blockishnesse of mind, dull and heavy to learn
any thing that is good; as it is said of the Jews, Acts 28. 27. when a man has
an unteachable mind, though he be never so long under the word of God, it
cannot strike into his heart, and enter into his understanding, his mind cannot
^eel the weight of divine truths; take outward truths of profit and pleasure, a
man may lead him up and down with these truths, he feels weight in these; but
for the word of God he has no understanding in that; may be he can tell what
the Ministers say, and talk of it; but for the weight of divine reason, the
mind is blockish to this; men are like to a blockish scholar that has gone
seven years to school, and yet is not beyond the primmer; so when a man shall
sit so long under the Ministry of the word, and yet be a stranger to it, as if
he had never heard of it; he hears discourses of faith, and can speak of it,
and talk of it, of the letter of it as well as the best believer, and yet is as
blockish to go about it as can be; what an horrible thing is this? that the
truth should come to a man's mind, and a man should be dull to conceive it.

Secondly, Another evil is awkness and averseness of heart, listleseness to the
ways of Jesus Christ; as Christ says of the Jews, Mat. 15. 8. their hearts
cannot be pulled to that which is good, their hearts are untoward, and have no
list or disposition that way; even as if a man should go about a thing that he
has no heart to, so people go about prayer and the hearing of the word, as if
they had no heart to it; they have no heart to prayer, they have no heart to
think soundly of God, and of their latter end; they come to duties, but their
hearts are a thousand miles off.

Thirdly, There is senselesness of conscience, it is not tender of little sins,
it feels them not at all; and as for great sins, it feels them but a little;
may be peoples consciences find fault with them from day to day for doing what
they do, and tells them they ought not to do it, but yet they will not leave
their sins; it tells them thus and thus they ought to do, but it has no power
to make them do it; may be it accuses them, but they are never the better,
peoples consciences are dull and blunt and have no force at all.

Fourthly, For coldness and lukewarmness of affections; the affections of a man
are not set upon God; they pray without affections, and hear without
affections* the doctrine of eternal life does not affect their hearts; hatred
of evil is cold, and love of God and goodness is cold, as Christ says, the
love of many shall wax cold, and so their desires are cold and Matthew. 24.
languish and come to nothing; we can find tears for other matters, but not for
our sins; we can have our affections soon stirred when our selves and our own
wills are crossed, but God may be dishonored a thousand ways, and we never
grieved or moved at it; so when we hear a fine story, and carnal news, this
delights; but when we hear the word of God, the truth of God that concerns our
eternal well doing, we are not moved, or affected at all with that.

Fifthly, Another ingredient of this sin is the weakness and faintness of
endeavors; if people have any endeavors, any kind of putting themselves
forth to that which is good, it is with faintness, as if they cared not whither
they went about it yea or no; as Solomon says, Prove. 13. 4. people desire
mercy and pardon, and would have hope and salvation, and the Kingdom of God,
but will not be at the cost and charges they ought to be at for these things;
this is nothing but the deadness of our hearts.

Lastly, That same dullness and drowsiness of the whole man; though men be
careful enough of outward things, yet how careless are they of their souls?
were our hearts broken and contrite under these things, we should be soon
quickened; as the Lord says, Isa. 57. 15. I rev^ve the spirit of the contrite
one; so God would revive us if we were sensible of these distempers of ours; if
we would humble our selves before God, and plead to him for help, he would help
us; but when we do not lay these distempers to heart, and seek out to God for
redress, no marvel though we are dead and dull still; well then, is it so? that
there are so many horrible ingredients in this sin of deadness, then how should
we labor to fling it away, and use all means to be quickened? the Apostle being
to dissuade from following the will of the Gentiles, he uses this very
argument, the abundance of the vile ingredients that is in the will of the
Gentiles, 1 Pet. 43. so you may see how the wise man disswades, Prove. 26. 25.
when he speaks fair, believe him not; for there are seven abominations in his
heart: so let us think there is seven abominations, yea seventy times seven
abominations in this sin of deadness; therefore let us look out that God may
help us and quicken us, and revive us in all our ways.

The second motive is to consider that as long as we are dead we cannot 2.
Motive.
pray, Psalm. 80. 18. Lord, quicken us and we will call upon thy name; as who
should say, Lord, we are not fit to pray and call upon thy name except thou
quicken us; therefore quicken us, that we may call upon thee: So Ministers
cannot preach unless they be quickened; as Dr. Ames tells a story of a godly man
of France, there was such cold preaching that he was fain to go out of the Town
to s^t under a powerful Ministry; therefore we cannot preach if we be dead; the
Scribes and Pharisees preached without Authority and life, they were dead, and
therefore had no authority in their preaching, but Christ preached with
Authority; if we were quickened we should be the better able to preach: So
again, you are not able to hear unless you be quickened; a dead heart may hear a
thousand Sermons, but what does it work upon them? even as good as nothing; if
Paul or Apollos, or an Angel from heaven should preach to us, unless God
quicken us, all is nothing; nay, Christ tells us, that his own Ministry, and
John's Ministry, there were not two such in all the world again, yet how dead
and fruitless were they? whereunto shall I liken this generation? etc. Mat. 11.
16. etc. the meaning is this, John the Baptist he came mourning and in a
doleful manner, fasting and afflicting himself, and crying out Repent; he
mourned but none would relent; Christ he came piping, he came in another
manner, he came eating and drinking, and he preached gracious things, the
Kingdom of God and the acceptable year of our Lord; now says he, you have not
daunced, all these things have not affected your hearts a jot, you are as
blockish as if you had no Ministry at all; as Christ says, Mat. 8. 22. let the
dead bury their dead; what does he mean by that? he means those that are dead
in their souls; those that are dead in their spirits and souls, they are fit
for dead employments and nothing else; the coherence was this, there was a man
came to Christ, and was willing it seems to be the Disciple of Christ; but oh
says he, first I pray thee, let me go and bury my father; bury thy father?
says he, any man may serve for that, let the dead bury their dead, those that
are fit for nothing else may do that; but if thy heart be alive, thou art fit
for me, thou art fit for spiritual employments; but when a man has a dead
heart he is sit for nothing; as Christ, he gave the bag to Judas, he was the
fittest man for that; so let a man be in office, if he be dead, he has no
heart to punish sin, no not so much as to use his faithful endeavor to root it
out; nay, he will pull down the guilt of the sins of the parish upon his own
soul, rather then he will stickle a little for God, Judge. 4. 8. how backward
was Barak to go against the enemies of the Lord? if you will go, I will go,
says he to Deborah, otherwise he had no heart to go; so Esther, how dull was
she to stand for the Church of God? she would let the Church be ruinated rather
then she would go and speak to the King in the behalf thereof, but that
Mordecai stirred her up soundly; now is not this a sufficient motive to stir us
up to labor for quickening? how can we do the things God calls for from day
today? we should stand for him, and call upon him, and set up his worship in
our families; we should fear his name, and set him before our eyes, and fight
against sin, and labor to please him in all our ways; now without being
quickened we are sit for none of these things; now what a woeful thing is it when
we shall not be furnished to every good work as we should, and fitted to do
that which God requires of us; therefore let us shake off this dullness and
blockishness of spirit.

Thirdly, Another motive is this, we can have no true sign at all to our 3.
Motive.
souls, that we have any true grace at all as long as we are dead; when Christ
is said to give a man grace, he is said to quicken a man, Joh. 5. 21.
conversion is called the life of the dead; a man's repentance is no better then
the repentance of a reprobate, unless it be repentance from dead works, and
repentance unto life; if a man has faith, it is not the faith of Gods elect if
it does not quicken him, I live by faith, says Paul, Gal. 2. 20. justification
is communicated only to a man that is quickened; God together with justification
does quicken a man, he does revive him and make him alive toward God; nay, we
have no argument that we have our sins forgiven us, unless God has quickened
us, Col. 2. 13. he has quickened them, having forgiven them all trespasses;
when God forgives the trespasses of his people, he does quicken them, h^ takes
away the dullness of their hearts, and the blockishness of the^r minds, and the
senselesness of their consciences, and their awkness and untowardness to that
which is good; he does quicken them up ^ every man has life, for we see how
lively men are in seeking after their profits and pleasures, people have life
enough, but it is upon things here below; and they have affections enough, love
enough, and hope enough, and joy and delight enough in the world, but they are
set upon carnal things; but if grace comes into the heart, it is the vigor of
the heart; now as long as we are dead and dull, what sign of grace can we have?
if we have grace ye^ we cannot have any proof and comfort of it as long as we
are drowzy and dull; it is true, no man can have any grace but he has some
life* but if he does not quicken up himself, he hinders himself of the peace
and comfort that otherwise he might have; hence it is that the conscience is
troubled, and people are unsettled, and are so full of fears to dye; hence i^ is
that people are so like to the sea, the waves whereof cannot rest; their minds
are unquiet and unsettled; it is for want of quickening, if we were quickened we
should have great peace come into our souls.

Fourthly, We cannot grow in grace unless we are quickened; as long as 4. Motive.
we are thus dull and heavy and lumpish to the things that are good, we cannot
grow in grace. Hos. 14. 7. they shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine;
first they shall revive, and then grow; first God quickens a man, and then he
makes him grow; the Philippians love was dead to Paul, afterward it quickened
again; now says he, your love flourish^th, Phil. 4. 10. now their hearts were
quickened, it began to grow; but when a man has a dead heart, how can he grow?
as he said, Joh. 15. 4. can the branch bear fruit without the vine? so may I
say, can a man's heart grow in goodness without life? it is only a living
creature that can grow; if a plant be once dead, it withers away and cannot
grow; if a man have a dead heart, though he should hear lectures and sermons
every day, he would never grow, he would be never the more holy, never the more
godly; if he should have family prayer, closet prayer, yet if he should be
dead, he should have never the more ability against his temptations; though the
ordinances of God be admirable helps to growing, yet if a man be dead and dull,
they will never help him to grow in grace; though grace be of a growing nature,
yet a dead heart starves all the graces that a man has.

Fifthly, Another motive is this as long as we are dead, we shall be so 5.
Motive.
far from growing* that we shall be hardly able to keep our own, Rev. 3. 2.
strengthen the things that remain, that are ready to dye; as who should say,
thou art so far from growing, that the good things that are in thee are even
ready to dye; thou will lose that very good that is in thee if thou do not
sha^^ off this d^^dness and careleseness, and heartleseness to that which is
good; as it is with a man that has a consumption upon his body, he is so far
from growing that he rather pines away, he waxes more and more faint and
grows d^ader, and waxes nearer to his end, he pines away; so when a man is
dead, (though not quite dead) his heart is deaded, he does pine away; as the
Prophet says, Ezekiel. 33. 10. if we pine away, how shall we do o^ yet thus it is
(...) man has a dead heart he does pine away; I, and again* how is it possible
for a man whose heart is dead to prayer, and he has no affections to (...)
which is good? if there be any opportunity to that which is good, he hangs off;
how can this man do otherwise but wax worse and worse? for he wants that which
should work out sin; if it be a springing water, it will work out the mud; but
if it be a standing water, it will grow thicker and thicker, and will be
noisome; so if the body be alive, though it be never so full of ill humors, if
it be lively, nature will work them out; but if the pangs of death be upon a
man, every disease and distemper gets the victory, his nature cannot work it
out now; so it is with a man that has a dead heart, he cannot work out the
corruption that daily bubbles up in his heart; as Eli, though he had never so
many corruptions, he had no heart to root them out; it is true, he reproved his
sons, but it was to no purpose: as good never a whit as never the better; so
when Solomon was grown dead, and had lost his former life of grace, afterward
when corruption grew in his heart, he could not work it out; for when God had
chosen Jeroboam to be put in his room, though Solomon knew that it was of God,
and he set him up to be King, yet he could not work out this corruption, but
his heart to his dying day rose up against Jeroboam, and he sought to kill him;
he wanted the life of grace he had before, and sin got up, and he could not
work it out soundly to his dying day. Now is not this a most grievous thing?
the very consideration of this, how should it provoke us to shake off this
deadness? Can that body do well that has lost his expulsive faculty? when
distempers arise it cannot expel them, it must needs be the destruction of the
body; so when the life of the soul is either in part or wholly taken away, how
can he work out his corruptions and distempers that daily arise in him? we have
need of grace, and life, and quickening; we are tempted every day, and the
corruptions that dwell in us, are ever boiling up. Now if we have not the
expulsive faculty to purge them out, the heart must needs be in a woeful
condition.

Sixthly, This sin of deadness, in some sense, is worse then any other sin, 6.
Motive.
and that in six respects.

First, Other sins, for the most part, are in one part of a man; as drunkenness
is in the appetite, and covetousness is in the concupiscible faculty, and pride
and ostentation is in the heart, and ignorance is in the mind; but deadness is
in all the whole man; as it is with a languishing disease; other diseases, one
may be in the head, another in the neck, another in the back; but a Consumption
runs over all the whole man; So it is with deadness; as it was with the Church
of L^odicea; when they were grown dead and careless, he charge them that they
were dead all over; Thou art poor, and blind, and miserable, and naked; this
heaps all miseries upon a man; Rev. 3.
such a man is like unto Judah, From the crown of the head, to the sole of the
foot, there was no sound part, Isa. 1. 6. It is a general disease; it is like
the deluge that drowned the whole world, it drowns the whole man; I confess
drunkenness, and adultery, and such particular sins, may kill and damn a man;
but I say by accident, deadness is worse then they; it is true, drunkenness,
and adultery, and profaneness are worse; but why are they worse but because
they have this deadness too? but if they could be taken alone* and a man might
have a living heart toward God otherwise, they should not be worse then
deadness.

Secondly* Other sins are against one commandment of God, or two, or so; but
this deadness is against all the commandments of God; it is a sin against
prayer, for we should pray with life; it is a sin against hearing, for we
should hear with life; it is a sin against the Sabbath, for we should keep it
with delight; it is a sin against all the Ordinances of God, for we should come
to them all with life and affection. Suppose a servant, his Master should bid
him do a thing; he bids him go to one place, he goes to another; he goes and
drinks, and swills; another servant he goes about that his Mr. bids him, but
whatsoever his Mr. bids him do, he goes about it slothfully, and by halfs; this
servant is a worse servant then the other; why? because thi^ servant offends in
all the business he has to do; whatsoever his Mr. sets him about, he marrs it,
and does it to halfs: So deadness of heart, it disables a man to every duty, to
whatsoever God requires of a man; and this is one of the reasons why he that
breaks one of the commandments of God, is said to break them all, Iam. 2. 10,
11. Why? because he deads his heart, a man that gives way to sin against any
one commandment, deads his heart to all; and so by reason of that deadness, he
becoms guitlty of all.

Thirdly, Other sins are not so deep in the soul; but this deadness is deeper
then all; a man will be willinger to lay down any sin then deadness, and to
take up any duty then quickening; a man had rather do any thing, if he may do it
without life; if the bare hearing, praying, and profession will serve turn, may
be he will do that; but to do all with life, this the heart is loath to come to;
when it comes to lay out all the strength and vigor of the whole man upon God,
the heart cannot abide this. Judah was content to turn to God; but to do it
with life, this they would not do, Jer. 3. 10. Treacherous Judah has not
turned to me with the whole heart, etc. He does not deny but they turned unto
him; but they would not do it with their whole heart, with life, with all their
power and strength; thus they did not turn unto him. As it was with the Ruler
in the Gospel, he was content to observe the commandments of God, not to
murder, not to commit adultery, not to steal, not to swear; All these have I
observed from Matthew. 19.
my youth, says he; but when Christ came to call for life, that he should sell
all, forsake all, and follow him; that is the life of a man, the soul and
heart of a man must be put forth; he was sad at that saying: So Laodicea was
content to do any thing; the spirit of God lays nothing to her charge, he
charge her with no particular sin, but lukewarmnesse only; she would do any
thing; but to be fervent and zealous in it, to lay out her strength for God,
that she would not do; so that we had need to take heed of deadness of all
other sins; it is a deep sin, and is the harder to be gotten out; and the
harder it is to be gotten out, the more pains is to be taken.

Fourthly, other sins may be but acts; as a man may be drunk, but he may not
have the habit of drunkenness; as Noah was drunk, but he was not a drunkard; we
see David committed adultery, but he had not the habit of adultery; but
deadness is an habit, Ephesians. 2. 1. Now when a man leaves sin in a dead manner, he
leaves it, but his affections are not crucified to it; he does good duties, but
he is dead to them; this man comes near to the estate of sin: now an estate of
sin is worse then any particular act of sin.

Fifthly, Other sins are the first death of the soul; we are all under
trespasses and sins, Romans 5. Death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned. We are all by nature the children of wrath; we were all once dead, but
now, if after we are Christians, we grow dead again, we grow twice dead; of all
sins we should take heed of deadness, for that causes the second death; not
the second death of damnation, but of being dead after a man has been
quickened; as Saint Jude speaks ver. 12. twice dead; so we are twice dead. Now
other sins do make a man but once dead; but after the Gospel has come among
us, and has stirred up our hearts, and quickened us in some measure, if we grow
remiss and dead, and cold again, we are twice dead, or at least grow and tend
that way, and so our estate is more dangerous; therefore how should we take
heed of this!

Lastly, Other sins, though God threatens hell and damnation against them, yet
more specially against deadness; did you ever hear of a more special threatening
then that 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. when men do not receive the truth in the
love of it. He does not say, When they do not receive it, but When they do not
receive it with affection, with all their hearts. You may see there how
terribly God threatens, when we do not receive the truth in the love of it; we
do not love Gods Word; we do not love prayer, and his ordinances; we do not
love the communion of Saints; we do not love obedience to Gods truth; this is a
most woeful thing; though we do receive it, yet if we do not receive it in the
love of it, see there what he says; For this cause God shall send them strong
delus^ns, that they should believe a lie that they might all be damned, etc. So
when Ephesus left her first love, God threatened to remove the candlestick, Rev.
2. 4, 5. When Laodicea was grown cold and careless, and of a middle temper,
Gods threatens to spue her out of his mouth, Rev. 3. 16. When Eli was grown
cold and remiss, and wanted zeal and life to stand for him, see how terribly
God threatens him, I will do a thing that whosoever hears it, both his ears
shall tingle, 1 Samuel 3. 11. Nay, says he, I will judge his house for ever for
this thing, v. 13. What remains then, but that we should with all our might,
and all care and diligence, even set to both our shoulders for the casting off
this sin of deadness, that if it be possible, we may come to be quickened, and
serve God as we ought to do, and follow his heavenly Kingdom with eagerness,
that none of these things we have spoken may befall us.

Consider first, we have life, and why may not God have it? He has breathed
into our souls the breath of life; in him we live, move, and have our being; he
has given unto us all life and breath; and if we have life, why may not God
have it? if he has given us affections, why should they not be given to him
again? if he has given us thoughts, why should we not bestow them upon him? if
he has given us dispositions and inclinations; why should they not be set upon
him? The Rivers that come from the sea, return to the sea again. It is said of
the Macedonians, that they did yield themselves to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8. 5. So we
should yield our selves to the Lord; if God did ask any thing that were not in
us, it were another matter; if we had no thoughts and affections; if we had no
heart and inclinations; then no wonder though we did not give him them; but
when we have them, why should not he have them? all things are of him;
therefore let all things be to him; shall our lusts have our thoughts, and not
God? shall the world carry away our minds, and not God? that is against reason.

Secondly, Consider that all the world is alive in their own courses; let
Christians be alive in theirs; as the Prophet speaks, Micah 4. 5. Every man
walks in the name of his god, let us walk in the name of our God. So I say,
every man follows his god; those that have their belly for their god, all their
mind and affections run that way; those that have their pleasure for their
god, and their profit for their god, how eager are they after these things? as
one says, the world is like the Ant; poor little creatures, they go carrying
of straws after their manner, and are so busy; so it is with the world; what a
deal of drudging up and down, and going this way and that way is there in the
world? one for one thing, another for another; one for his Mammon, another for
the lusts of his flesh, and the pride of life; men are busy and stirring, every
one is setting forward; why should not we be as forward in our way? if we be
Christians, and the servants of God, why should not we bestir our selves for
him? the Devil himself is a spirit, and is working and busy, as himself
says, Job 2. 2. Then let us walk up and down and bestir our selves this way,
and that way, and every way for God, and be as active and agile for him; let us
consider how the poor prisoners in Ludgate beg for a token, what eagerness they
use, that though a man had no mind, yet their importunity will make him give
them something; and shall not we beg earnestly of God to pardon our sins, and
quicken us, and humble us for our deadness, and for the time to come, to make
us earnest for the Kingdom to come; if men be so earnest for bables, how
earnest should we be for these precious jewels?

Thirdly, Consider the worth of these things; the worth of the Kingdom of
Heaven, the worth of eternal life, the worth of the Gospel, the worth of prayer
and all Gods holy Ordinances; are they such poor beggarly trifles, that we
follow them with such a slender pursuit? are they such beggarly commodities
that they are not worth the looking after? Certainly Heaven may justly
challenge our best desires, our best affections, our best pains and endeavors,
and the best and flower of all our parts and learning, as the Church says,
Cant. 7. 9. My beloved is sweet; so our beloved is sweet; sweet things go down
pleasantly; so how should the word be, and prayer be? how sweet should all the
things of our beloved be they should go sweetly down, nothing should delight
us more. When Solomon set up his Throne, it is said that he laid out the best
gold upon it; so if we would have the crown of life, we must lay out our best
parts, and affections, and endeavors upon it; how sweet should the calling
upon God, and the going to Gods house be? what a shame is it, that when such
heavenly things, such precious jewels are to be had, people will not come to
them, whereas these things should be the sweetest things in the world? if we
were careful of the good of our souls, and were affected with Heaven and
heavenly things, as we ought to be, we should be tender of this; how should we
take heed of pride, and covetousness, and any thing that should hinder us of so
great salvation?

Fourthly, Consider, if we be quickened, nothing will be hard; all the
difficulty of Religion is over, if a man be quickened: for nothing is hard to a
willing mind, when a man's heart and soul is set upon it; nothing is hard, as
the Apostle says, to him that loves God, His commandments are 1 John ^.
not grievous; all the difficulty, that we cannot pray, and hold our hearts to
the Word, and overcome our corruptions, all lies in the deadness of our
hearts; if we would have mastery over our corruptions, if our hearts be dead,
we must look for the more toil, as Solomon says, If the iron be blunt* if a
man does not sharpen the edge, he had need put the more strength to it, Eccles.
10. 10. So when a man's heart is dull and dead, there is the more difficulty in
the overcoming of any lust, in the doing of any good duty, every thing comes
hardly off. Now when a man's heart is quickened, it is like oil to the wheel,
it makes it go easy; when a man's heart is quickened up toward God, what is it
but that man can do?

Fifthly, Consider, If we be quickened, we shall hae a great deal of peace, and
joy, and comfort. I may say as the Church in another case, Revive us again, O
Lord, and we shall rejoice in thee, Psalm. 85. 6. So I say, if we were revived,
if God did quicken our hearts, if we were earnest with him to do it, and we
could once attain unto it, we should rejoice in God; those that follow God with
an earnest heart; they have those joys, which no other can intermeddle with;
God gives them unknown comfort, unknown peace, and unknown support; the more a
man follows after God, the more he shall partake of God, a man shall have joy
unspeakable and glorious.

Sixthly, We should make all heaven to rejoice; when the Father had his
prodigal Son come to him, that was before dead, and was now alive, says he, It
is meet we should be glad, Luke 15. 32. So when any poor creature that was dead
before to all goodness, is now made alive, and is quickened up in all the ways
of God, it is even meet that there should be mirth in Heaven, that the Angels
in Heaven should rejoice; whereas if a man go on in Gods service dully and
blockishly, it is as vinegar to the teeth, and smoke to the eyes, and the
heavens are sad over us.

Seventhly, If we were quickened, we should not only do our selves good, but we
should do others good too; we should be earnest to do it; there is an excellent
place for this in the story of David; David being marvellously quickened, just
as he came from Gath, there met him 400 poor destitute and afflicted men, and
presently he made the 34 Psalm, wherein he says, O come and taste and see how
good the Lord is; blessed are they that trust in the Lord: presently he calls
upon them to be quickened also. So Paul, when he was quickened up himself, though
he were before the Judge, and went upon life and death, yet he regarded not
that, but he labored to quicken Agrippa too, insomuch that he made him to cry
out, Thou perswadest me almost to become a Christian; and he would not leave
him there, but says he, I would not that thou only, but that all that do hear
me this day, were not only almost, but altogether Acts 26.
such as I am, excepting these bonds. O, thought he, that all this company were
but acquainted with that I feel and find; a quickened heart will labor and
strive to do good unto others.

REV. 3. 2. Watch therefore and strengthen the things that remain, that are
ready to die, etc.
WE told you this Epistle contained three things. First, a Reproof of the most
of them in that Church for their grievous sins. Secondly, Remedy to cure them
of those sins. Thirdly, A Commendation of certain virtues in those persons that
were not carried away with the iniquities of those times. The Reproof we have
spoken of already; and now we are come to the second part, and that is the
Remedy; for when Christ does reprove them, he does it not for ill will, but for
their good and therefore he gives them good directions. The Remedies he gives
this Church are five.

The first is, Be w(...)full, as who should say, This is the reason you go
Five Remedies given the Church.
down the wind, and want life, and are dead and dull in Religion, because you
are not watchful.

The second Direction is, Strengthen the things that remain: as who should say,
if you would be careful to fortify those good things that are in you, you may
stand out against these temptations; a little grace will go a great way if it
be well managed. Now he does urge this direction three ways. First because
these things they have are but remainders; they had a great deal more once
Strengthen the things that do remain; as who should say, all is even almost
quite gone; you had a great deal more zeal and forwardness; but what you have
now, is but the remainders and the leavings; therefore it is high time to look
about you.

Secondly, Because even those remainders were almost gone too, Stengthen the
things that remain, that are ready to die: as who should say, they will be gone
too, if you bestir not your selves, and look well to your estates and
conditions,

Thirdly, Because thy works are not perfect; they are nothing else almost but
hypocritical and unsound, I have not found thy works perfect before God.

The third Remedy is, Remember how thou have received and heard, etc. Verse 3.
as who should say, consider how thou have been formerly; consider how the Word
has been delivered, and how thou have received it.

The fourth Remedy is, Hold fast; as who should say, labor to get up again,
and hold fast, that the Devil, and the world, and the temptations to sin, may
not get away the good things that are in thee, that they may not spoil thee of
the good things of God, and of the hope of eternal life.

The fifth Remedy is, Repent; that is, bewail thy self, and lament thy
unfruitfulnesse, and unwatchfulnesse, and carelessness this way, and humble thy
self before Almighty God; thou may yet have mercy; when a man does
confess(...)s sins, God is just to forgive them, and is ready to vouchsafe mercy
1 John 1. 9.
and quickening, and comfort; therefore repent, says he.

Well then, the first remedy is to be watchful; to watch, is to be attentive,
to be considerative, to look what may do a man good and what may do a man
hurt, that he may thereafter carry himself; it is for a man to have his eyes
in his head, to have his wits about him for spiritual things: This is the
subject of it, it is properly in the mind and in the heart; it is a Metaphor
taken from the body; for the body when it is asleep, the senses are locked up;
the eye cannot see, the ear cannot hear, they are all wrapped up, they are not
lively and operative; but when the body is awake, the senses are all open, the
eye can see, and the ear hear, and the senses are ready for every Object; from
hence it is derived to the souls of men, they may be said to sleep or watch;
for when the soul is careless and negligent toward a thing, may be dangers are
toward a man, and he does not fear them, nor study to prevent them; may be
there is a great deal of good coming toward the soul, and he goes drowsily
about it the soul now is said to be asleep; but when the soul lo^ks seriously
and consideratively about things, then it is said to watch; so that there is a
sleep of the soul, and a watch of the soul, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Th^s. 5
6. So that this watchfulness is nothing else but the active prudence of the
soul, whereby it stirs up all the faculties to look about, that if any good be
toward it, it may get it; if any danger be toward it, it may abhor it; this
is the watchfulness here spoken of; for this drowsinesse and sleepiness is a
part of the corruption of our natures, whereby we are mavelous careless of
God and eternal life, that though we be in the gall of bitterness, and by
nature the children of wrath, yet this is the corruption of our nature* to look
sleepily upon this, that danger may be upon us, and we never observe it; and
though there be eternal life to be had, yet we are as it were asleep; we do
not study how to attain it; though there be misery insupportable, and
unspeakable, and sure and certain to fall upon us, unless we be delivered; yet
we do not think of these things, we have no fear at all, or else our hearts
are drowsy, and are content to make any thing serve the turn. Now when the
soul is rowzed up, and made to have a due consideration of these things, now
is is awakened, now it is watchful.

The Point we observe from hence it this, That it is an excellent and sovereign
Observation.
thing for a Christian to watch; and therefore Christ commends it to his
disciples, and commends it to all people to the end of the world, Mark 13. 37.
^at which I say unto you, I say unto all, watch. Now it is good to watch in
five respects.

First, In regard of our selves; for our own selves are false unto our selves;
1. Reason.
if we be godly men and women, we are two selves; we have a bad self, whereby
we are apt to be proud, and carnal, and ungodly in all our ways, and to forget
God; and we have a good self, that is better minded. Now it is an excellent
thing, when this good self shall watch over this bad self, and have an eye to
it; as if a man had a pilfering servant in his family, would he not watch him,
and eye him? would he not watch him what money he had in his house, and observe
what is in his house from day to day? So we having such a deceitful self about
us, we had need to watch continually, as the Apostle speaks, 2 John 8. Look to
these, that we lose not those things, etc. As who should say, you will lose the
benefit of all the good things that are in you, if you do not look to them?
there is a thief in thy bosom, a deceiver that will steal and cosen thee of
all, if thou look not to it.

And here first we should watch our own hearts; for our own hearts are
deceitful, as the Prophet speaks, The heart is deceitful above all things,
Jerem. 17. 9. It is very sly; and how easily does it deceive us, and carry us
aside? therefore we had need watch over it, as the wise man says, Prove. 4. 23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence. If a man were to ride upon a wild horse,
would he not have a care to keep the bridle? would he let the bridle go? then
he would run away and he should hardly catch him again: his business will be
hindered and his time spent; so it is here, a man's heart is like a wild Colt,
like an untamed Hei^er, if a man let it go; a man had need always to have the
bridle in his hand; if a man do not watch it and observe it, and hold it in, it
will r^n away and a man cannot catch it again; as a man that is ringing a bell,
if he let the rope go, he cannot readily get hold of it again; so a man's heart
is slippery, therefore a man had need ever to be watching of it.

Secondly, We had need watch our thoughts? what slippery things are our
thoughts if they be upon that which is good? will they be long there? they are
now there, now gone again; therefore how careful should we be to hold our
thoughts to that which is good? the thoughts are so loose and fickle, and
unconstant, and uncertain, that though they be on good things for a minute of
an hour, they will be ten times as long upon vain things; there is no trusting
of our thoughts, we need not say as David of the men of Keilah, will they
deliver me to Saul? will the lusts of my heart 1 Samuel 23. 11:
deliver me to Satan? nay, they will deliver us, if we watch not over our
selves.

Thirdly, We should watch over our affections; they are admirable things, if we
set them upon the things that are above, and be watchful to keep them there;
what admirable advantages are they? they are the wings of the soul to help us
in prayer and any good duty we go about; they will wipe away the difficulties
of the ways of God; but they are marvelous uncertain things, that if we be not
always looking to our selves, though our joys and delights, etc. be upon
heaven and heavenly things, they will run upon the world again and lose
themselves there, so that our affections had need to be looked unto.

Fourthly, The Conscience had need to be looked unto; for though the Conscience
be the best part of a man, yet it will ^latter us and speak peace to us if we
look not to it, where is no peace, and will check us very carelessy, and will
not hold forth our du^ies nakedly, if we do not watch over it.

Fifthly, So again, We should set a watch over our tongues, over our very words
that we speak; as David says, I will set a watch before the door of my lips,
Psa. 41. 3. when a man speaks his words, it is as if he should bend his bow to
shoot; now when ^ man bends his bow to shoot, he had need level well, or else
he will not hit the mark; so if we be not watchful over the words we speak, we
shall speak vainly, and to Gods dishonor; therefore says Solomon, he that
keeps his mouth, keeps his own soul* he that watches Prove. 13. 3.
over his lips that he may not offend, watches over his own soul.

Secondly, It is good to watch in regard of the world, for the world will 2
Reason.
get in and undo u^ if we take not heed, when we are about our callings, when
as we let our eyes look upon our wares and commodities, upon our barns or our
Cattle, or the like; whatsoever comes into our eye is apt to po^son us, and
whatsoever we see or touch, or handle is apt to do us mischief; how many
thousands are carried away by their eyes, by what comes into their senses? as
Am^ziah cried out, 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. What shall do for the hundred talents? he
could not lose an hundred talents, but his eyes were mavelous eager after
them, they were a stumbling block to him, he could not go so freely about the
commandments of God for fear he should lose them: Demetrius having commings in
by his calling, when the word of God showed what an unwarrantable calling he
had, he had rather put off the word of God then his calling; O says he, by
this calling we have our Acts 19. 25.
gain: So powerful is the world over men, that it can keep men in unwarrantable
courses; the world winds into men and makes their affections earthly; how many
thousands are there that can hardly find any competent time to serve God? they
are so taken up with the world when they come to the Ordinances of God; their
hearts are so spent upon the world, that the Ordinances cannot work upon them;
therefore had not a man n^e^ to watch over himself? as a man that eats fish may
choke himself if he take not heed; so our Savior tells us, that the cares of
this world are ch^aking things; a man Mark 4. 19.
had need be careful how he speaks of the world, and thinks of the world, for
fear he be made listless and hear^less to the things of God; this is the reason
why people have no more heart for heaven, because they do not watch against the
world, the world poisons and choaks them; let a man have never so sweet
dispositions, and be never so awakened and star^ed* yet if he give way to the
world, and the things of the world, his heart will be taken off again from
these things.

Thirdly, It is good to watch in regard of the Devil, in regard of Satan; Pet.
5. 8 be vigilant and sober; for your adversary the Devil goes up and down like
a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

Consider first what a subtle enemy he is; if a man were to deal with a subtle
enemy, he would watch and have a care of himself, lest he should have advantage
against him; he would think with himself, There is some mischief intended
toward me; he would look to all his ways, lest a snare should be laid for
him; when David knew that Saul dealt subtly with him, you see how he looked
to himself, he scouted everywhere, that Saul could come nowhere but David
looked to himself; he was very careful of himself, so that Saul says, I hear
he deals subtly: So it were good that the Devil heard 1 Samuel 23. 22.
that we dealt subtly; for he deals subtly with us, and collogues, and
colors, and varnisheth; in matters of evil, he sets the best side outward; and
in matters of good, the worst side outward; if any good be to be done, he
labors to make a man dead in the doing of it; if any thing be sinful he hides
the danger of it, and shows a man nothing but the pleasure and delight and
profit of it, and a man shall see nothing else almost; the Devil is so subtle
that he knows what we delight in* and where he may have us; he knows what sins
we are prone to, and where he may get us; he knows what will hit our humor
best, he knows what will like us best; there was but one passage wherein Peter
was naked, and the Devil caught him there; if he had taken any other course, a
hundred to one but he had withstood him; he sees where the water is low, and
there he leaps over; therefore how careful should we be when he is so subtle?

Secondly, Consider how diligent he is; he is ever trudging up and down from
place to place; as Saul hunted David up and down Town and Coun^^, so the Devil
hunts up and down; all places are full of him, the streets, the market, the
house, the fields, our beds and clos^ts, our Pulpits; wheresoever we are, he
will be sure to be there too; he is diligent to follow us everywhere; now if we
do not watch we shall be caught by him; we may say o^ Satan in some sense, as
David of the spirit of God, whether shall I go from thy spirit, and whether
shall I flee from thy presence? etc. so, whether shall we go from Satan? we can
go nowhere but he will follow us; he is as busy as a fly about a bald head;
though they be beaten off again and again, yet they will come again; though our
Savior Christ beat him off, yet he comes again and again, and has more and
more flings at him; nay, he set Peter to tempt Christ: He rangeth over all the
earth, therefore we had need watch.

Thirdly, Consider his strength; he is a strong enemy, he is the strong man,
Mat. 12. 29. it is true, notwithstanding all his strength, he cannot force us to
sin, he can but say as he did to Christ, cast thy self down; he can but say
lie, and covet, etc. he cannot force a man; nay, whatsoever he puts into us, it
is not a sin if we give not way to it; a man may put it out again if he will;
he did but provoke David to number the people, he might have resisted it; he
cannot force a man; but yet he is a strong enemy, and comes with fiery darts;
and he is strong in regard of our lusts and corruptions that Ephesians. 6.
are so strong; there lies the Devils strength; he has that in our own bosoms
that is so mightily on his side; therefore we had need to watch.

Fourthly, Again, Consider the malice of this enemy; he is the enemy that does
it, as the Apostle Peter says, your adversary the Devil; he is an adversary
(...), his temptations may be overthrown, but his malice can never be
overthrown; a man can never make his peace with him, so long as he lives in
this world; he is like a frenzy man, as it is said, he is full of Rev. 12. 12.
wrath, knowing his time is short.

Fifthly, Again, Consider the Devil has nothing else to do; if the enemy had
something else to do, a man might be the less careful; as it was a comfort to
David that Saul had something else to do; when Saul was on one side of the
mountain, David on the other, because he had something else to do, the
Phil^^mes invaded his land, this took him away; but the Devil has nothing to
employ his time about but only to watch to do mischief; therefore we had need
be wondrous watchful over our selves.

Fourthly, It is good to watch in regard of the wicked, the Devils instruments;
Galathians, if they had watched, they had never been drawn from the truth; so
for practical errors, how many cursed principles get into men's heart^ and
appear in their lives? that such kind of Religion is good Religion; that such
kind of faith is good faith; they have abundandance of cursed principles: Now
if we look not to our selves, how shall we be carried away, as the Apostle
says, 2 Pet. 3. 17. ^o may be thou art in a wicked family, as Lot in Sodom;
now I say it is impossible for thee to stand in such a place^ but thou shall be
hooked in, in an horrible manner; the Apostle pure a chiefly upon the Saints in
Caesar's house, Phil. 4 12 chiefly those that are of C^sars household; it is a
wonder of wonders there should be Saints in Caesar's house; it is impossible for
a man to be among the wicked, to have wicked neighbors and companions, but he
shall be drawn away by them, if he be not watchful over his own soul.

Fifthly, It is good to watch in regard of good things. I speak to the

First, It is good to watch in regard of our graces; look what grace a man
has, it is as a precious jewel, and thou may lose it if thou be not
watchful; thou may los^ a great deal of faith, and quickening, and heavenly
mindedness, or anygood that is in thee, thou may lose a great deal of it, if
thou look not well to it: As a sheep that has a great deal of wool, if she go
among briars and thorns, how soon may a great deal of it be torn off? so a poor
creature that walks in the world among so many briars and thorns, among so many
temptations, he may have all good things rent away if he look not to it; if a
man had a great deal of money in his purse, and were among cut ^urses and
cheaters, would not a man have an eye about him? it is said of a godly one, 1
John 5 18. he keeps himself, etc. he looks what he has and carries about him,
that he may not lose it.

Again, We should watch our graces, to increase our graces, and strengthen
them; watchfulness is an excellent thing to strengthen grace; as it is in the
Text, watch, and strengthen the things that remain; whereas if a man do not
watch, his graces will dye and decay, every temptation will overcome him; now
we have need of more grace, though we be mortified, and lively, and fear God,
and regard his name, and are humble, etc. yet we had need be more humble, and
more vile in our own eyes; now, how can we have this unless we be watchful? the
Apostle therefore when he had called upon Christians to be watchful, in the
next words says he, grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. for if a man be watchful, it
is the way to grow.

Thirdly, We should watch our graces that we may work with them, and exercise
them, and improve them upon all occasions, we should watch all opportunities to
occupy with our talents; it is said that God will have his people to seek
good, Amos 5. 14. to seek how to do good from day to day; so we should watch
all opportunities to do good, and to stand for God, and glorify his name, and
adorn the Gospel that we profess; opportunities do not come so often, we had
need take them when they come, they are precious things; now if we do not
watch, God will many times tender us these things, and we shall have no heart
to them.

Secondly, It is good to watch all good duties; What is the reason that people
pray no better, hear no better, draw near to Gods table and partake of the
Sacrament no better, they get no power against sin, no power against
corruption? it is because they do these things without watchfulness, Mat. 26.
41. Christ says, watch unto prayer; we must be watchful if we will get good by
the Ordinances of God.

First, We should watch before the duty; when we are going to prayer, and going
to Gods courts, we should be watchful; a prudent man looks well to his going,
Prove. 14. 15. wheresoever he goes he looks well about him, that he may observe
all circumstances; how many thousand lets and impediments are there? which if a
man take not off aforehand he cannot perform the duty aright; if we had been
watchful we might have done the duty better a great deal.

Secondly, We should be watchful in the duty; when we call upon God, we should
take heed how we come into his presence; when we hear the Word, we should be
careful that we be not carried away with vile thoughts, nor suffer any thing to
attempt us when we are about any good duty; the Devil will be about us to
interrupt us, therefore we had need be watchful against him.

Again, We should watch after the duty, that we may not lose the fruit and
benefit of it; most people when they have been at the Ordinances of God; are as
if they had not been there; when they have been at prayer, as far from power
against sin, and drawing mercy down from heaven, as if See more of this in the
Sermons upon 2 Timothy 4. 5.
they had never been down upon their knees.

Thirdly, It is good to watch in regard of God.

First, Sometimes God comes with motions, and draws nearer to us then he does
at other times; therefore now we had need take hold of them, Isa. 55. 6. call
ye upon him while he is near; as who should say, sometimes God is nearer then
at other times; O now have your eyes in your heads, and let not God go, but
make use of this; if ever God speaks to our souls, or open our eyes, let us
make use of these things, and be up and a doing, lest they slip away from us.

Secondly, Sometimes God does extraordinarily help us, and give us
extraordinary favors; let us watch those favors, for then the Devil is most
busy; when God does any notable thing for us, when he gives us peace, or joy,
or comforts or power against sin, or whatsoever it be, then Satan is most
busy; so soon as Christ had that extraordinary favor from his Father, to be
owned from heaven before all the standers by, This is my beloved son etc.
Matthew. 3. 17.
The next news we hear of, he had a terrible assault by Satan; when God had
showed great favor to Saint Paul, in wraping him up into the third Heaven, the
next thing he met with, was Satan to buffet him.

Thirdly, Sometime God does punish us and afflict us: now how should we watch
to get good by our afflictions? This is the reason that afflictions, and
crosses, and distresses are so often among us, and do no good; it is for ^ant
of watchfulness.

Is it so, that it is good to watch? Then how may we lament the horrible

The second Use is to exhort us all to take up this duty of watchfulness, to
watch in all things, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 4 5. to watch in our eating
and drinking, that we may not eat and drink our bane; to watch in company, that
if they be good, we may get good by them; if evil, we may get no hurt from
them; we should watch in good duties, for we shall meet with the Devil there
too; every one that has the fear of God before his eyes, whatsoever grace he
has, he should watch over it; whatsoever good work he has to do, he should
watch, that he may go on in it; for watchfulness is an helpful duty; watch
and pray; it is helpful to prayer, and so for all other duties; it is a duty
destinated to another duty, so that we can do no other duty without
watchfulness; therefore we had need to watch.

First, Consid^r the misery of them that do not watch, they must needs
decline, and wax worse and worse; you see the Church of Sardis here for want of
watchfulness grew dead, nay the very good things in her were ready to die.

Secondly, Consider the good of watchfulness; if we watch we shall be
satisfied with grace; if we have grace, we shall increase it, Prove. 20. 13.
Slothfulness keeps a man in poverty, but he that opens his eye shall be
satisfied with bread. It is true, as in outward things, so in spiritual things;
let a man be drowsy and slothful, he shall be a poor man and a beggar, and
shall have nothing to show for eternal life; but if thou will open thine e^es
and look about thee, thou shall be satisfied with bread, with the bread of
life, with the image of God, with righteousness and holiness; the more thou
watchest, the more abundantly will God bless thee.

Thirdly, Consider that men in their outward callings are watchful; the
shepherds watch their flocks, and the husbandman his seasons, when to sow, and
when to reap his corn; when to sell it, and when to buy it, how much more
should we for the good of our souls?

Fourthly, We should consider the examples of Gods Saints; David he Psalm. 119.
92.
watched, at midnight I will arise and praise thee; he would rise out of his
bed in the night, and pour out his heart before God, and bless God for his
goodness; he would not do it in his bed, but he would go out of his bed and
do it by his bedside upon his knees; how should this stir us up to
watchfulness?

Now I come to the second Remedy, and that is to strengthen the things that 2.
Remedy.
remain, and the rather, because they are but remainders, and ready to die, and
their deeds are not perfect before God. These words are diversely interpreted by
Divines; some understand them personally, Strengthen those persons that remain;
as if he should say to the Angel of the Church, Thy people are generally cold
and dead, and drowsy, there is hardly any life in them; now those that do
remain, strengthen them, that they may be awakened, they are ready to die;
there are hardly any of thy hearers that are upright and sincere before God,
therefore strengthen them; thus Pareus, and many others interpret it; and this
is a very good sense; for a Minister is bound to strengthen all his people, if
any be drowsy, to awaken them; if any be dead, to quicken them; and the Lord
complains against Ministers when they do not do thus, Ezekiel. 3. 4. The
diseased have they not strengthened, etc.

But then there is another Exposition of these words given by Divines, that
understand it of things, and not of persons; and so it is in the Original,
Strengthen the things that remain; that both Minister and people would
strengthen the good things that were in them; for the Minister was grown weak
and remiss, and the people, weak in all good things: Now the Spirit calls upon
the Angel of this Church, and in him upon all the Congregation, to strengthen
the good things that were in them.

So that the point of Doctrine is this, that it is every Christians duty to
Observation.
labor that he might be strengthened, specially if he has had more grace
formerly then now he has; it is every Christians duty to strengthen the good
things that are in him.

For the opening of this word strengthen, it has an opposition to weakness.
Now there is a double weakness.

First, Of those people that are unconverted, that are weak to the resisting of
sin, and doing any that is good; they have some principles in them to resist
sin, and do good, but they are weak, as common illuminations, and natural
conscience, and fear of wrath, and hope of Heaven, and shame of others, and the
good example of others, and living under the means, and restraining grace, and
the like; these things may do a great deal of good, but they are weak, and
cannot make them resist sin, and do good soundly; thus unconverted people
are weak. This is not properly the weakness that is opposed to strength, that
he would have them get out of the weakness of unconverted people.

Therefore secondly, There is another weakness, and that is of the children of
God themselves; they have weakness to resist sin, and do good; and this is
twofold.

First, There is a weakness of Beginning. Secondly, of Declining.

First, In beginning; when a child of God is a beginner in grace, and is but a
babe, Heb. 5. 12. When for the time ye ought to be, etc. Such as are babes have
need of milk, they cannot digest strong meat, they are too weak for that; as
may be a new beginner has gotten faith, but it is weak, he is not able to
apprehend the promises of salvation, and the assurance of Gods goodness and
mercy toward him; he has much ado to apprehend Christ himself, and uphold his
heart; so a man may have some knowledge, but it is weak; and some resolutions
and endeavors, but they are weak; corruptions bear him down, and his
mortification is weak; he cannot master many of his heady and mighty lusts. Now
such people as these are to be exhorted to strengthen these good things that
God has begun in them: Has God begun any good things in thee? any lively fear
of his name, any hatred of evil, any love to goodness, any longing and
thirsting after righteousness, any endeavor after eternal life, any faith?
thou should labor to strengthen these things, that they may abound in thee,
and that they may be confirmed and established in thee, that thou may be made
unblameable against the coming of the Lord Jesus; but (...)s is not the meaning
neither.

Secondly therefore, There is a weakness of declining, when a man has been
stronger, and now has abated of his strength, and is grown weaker; a strong
man may grow into a consumption, which may spend him away till he comes to be
an Anatomy, and so is grown weak; so many Christians that have been stronger,
they are now grown weak, they are grown into a consumption o^ graces, they are
grown to be an Anatomy, to be nothing but even skin and bone; they were wont to
have more faith to apprehend a promise, but now they have more doubting; they
could pray strongly, but now they are faint and weak; they were powerful in
every good duty, but now they are down the wind; they are like a Jack that
wants wanding up, they had need be wound up again; they are grown more
choleric, and peevish, and pettish, and have less strength over their
corruptions, and are made more ready to be drawn away. Now such persons are
exhorted to strengthen these things; and the rather, because they are but
remainders; you have had more grace, and have let it die and decay; therefore
strengthen that which remains, and is ready to die; so that there are two parts
of this Doctrine.

First, That every man should be earnest, and use all manner of holy Part 1.
means to strengthen himself. It Is true, First it is every Ministers duty to
labor to get strength into his people, to strengthen their understanding, and
knowledge, and judgment, to strengthen them in the promises, to hold forth
Jesus Christ nakedly unto them, to expound the free grace of God, that they may
be strong in faith: So if a Minister sees they are weak to bear afflictions, he
should labor to support and bear them up, and pour some spirit into them, and
enable them to bear: So if he find they are unable to bear temptations, he
should use all arguments to piece them up that they may stand against the wiles
of the Devil; a Minister has his own strength given him of purpose to
strengthen his brethren, Isa. 35. 3. the Lord says, Strengthen the weak hands,
etc. He would have Ministers call upon people to get strength, and to use all
means by preaching, and teaching, and exhortations, to get some strength into
his people; it is a Ministers duty, not only to gather Saints, but to perfect
the Saints; whither should the people come but to the Minister to get strength
in grace?

Secondly, It is every neighbors duty to strengthen his neighbor; Christians
should strengthen one another in all manner of good duties* as coals of fire
do warm and heat one another when they are together; but if they are severed,
they will be dead; so Christians, when they meet together, should labor to
warm, and heat, and quicken one another. Saint Paul writes to the Thessalonians
to mark all the weak and feeble people among them, and to strengthen the
feeble-minded, 1 These. 5. 14.

But then thirdly, Every man should do this duty to himself, to strengthen the
good things that are in him; we see all the world labors to be strong in
outward things, some to be strong in riches and wealth, some to be strong at
the Court, and others to strengthen themselves in their friends and alliance;
as Abner labored to be strong for the house of Saul, for he knew he should be
no body if that went down; if a man have a case to defend, he will make
himself as strong as he can to desend himself; if a man be to fight a battle,
he will make himself as strong as he can; nay, people will strengthen
themselves in their wickedness. Now if it be so, then how much more should we
labor to be strong in the grace of God? If we have any good things given us of
God, we should strengthen them; as Paul says to the Corinthians, when he saw
they were babes still and were weak, and never came to strength, he calls upon
them at last to strengthen themselves, 1 Cor. 16* 5.

Because we can have no comfortable argument to our souls that we are true 1.
Reas.
Christians except we get strength; every true Christian is a very able man as
Paul says, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens
me. He was a strong man, and able to do great things; what man of a thousand
can be rich, and not be proud and vain, and let his heart follow after
pleasures and the things of the world? yet a true Christian can be rich, and
yet not be thus; so what man almost can be poor, and not be discontented, and
repine against God, and take unlawful courses? yet a true Christian is able to
be poor, and yet not deny God, nor distrust God nor fall a carking and caring;
so likewise a true Christian can have a peevish nature, and yet not be peevish;
he can have as crabbed a disposition as any body else, and yet not be crabbed;
he can have as vile a cursed nature as any man under heaven, and yet have a
good disposition; he is able to do all things, as Job says, Job 9. 19. If you
talk of strength, God is strong. So it is with a child of God that has the
image of God in him; if you talk of strength, he is strong; a man cannot have
any true argument to his soul that he is a true Christian, unless he be
strengthened to do the things of God, unless he be lifted up of God to do
supernatural things; a true Christian is no weakling; a man says, I cannot
do thus and thus, it is my weakness; then thou can not say thou art a true
Christian; for a true Christian is an able man, a mighty man; nay all the
graces of Gods spirit are strong, that if a man has any degree of them, he may
do wonders with them, 1 John 5. 4. This is our victory that overcomes the
world, even our faith. He does not say great faith, but our faith; a little
faith, though but as a grain of mustardseed, is able to overcome the world; a
true Christian can overcome sin, and the world, and the Devil, and whatsoever
is contray to him; a natural man may believe in some sense, but he can nothing
with his faith, it is not of the right stamp; but a true Christian he can do
wonders with his faith; he can draw near to God, and cry Abba Father; he is
able to purify his own heart; all things are possible to him that believes,
it is a powerful thing; Jacob had power with God, says the Text; he is able to
fit Genesis 32. 28.
himself against every lust, and go about every duty, and please God in all
his ways in some measure; a little faith is strong; so love is a strong grace,
it is as strong as death, Cant. 8. If a man has but a little true love to God,
it will enable him to do strange things, it will make him suffer any thing,
do any thing, leave any thing for God. Now natural people they say they love
God, but it is a weak love, it cannot make them leave a lust for God, it cannot
make them do any thing for God, it cannot carry a man beyond nature; but all
the graces of Gods spirit are mavelous strong things; therefore as ever we
desire to have a sign and token that we are true Christians, and have the grace
of God in truth in any measure in us, we should labor to strengthen all the
good things that are in us; for if we do not strengthen them, they are not of
the right stamp.

Secondly, We can never do any act of new obedience unless we be strengthened,
2. Reas.
as the Lord says to Joshua, Josh. 17. Only be then strong, and do my
commandments, etc. He would have him strong, that he might observe all the Law
of God; as who should say, Joshua, thou can never be able to observe my Law,
there be mighty performances, things that flesh and blood can never reach unto;
therefore unless thou have strength, and divine strength, thou can never be
able to do this; therefore be strong, strengthen thy self, labor to have all
the courage and might that may be. God bids us do nothing but he requires all
the strength of the whole man; Thou shall love the Mar. 12. 30.
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all thy strength; it must be thus; if the
water-man be to row with the tide and the wind he puts forth no strength, the
stream will carry the vessel; but if he be to row against wind and ^yde, now
he must put forth all his strength; else the bo^t cannot ^o; nay, it will go
the contrary way; so if we would please God, and work the works of God, and
attain to his heavenly Kingdom, we must row against wind and tide, and without
tugging and hailing, and putting forth a great deal of strength, we shall never
do it; as suppose a man be wronged and offered an injury, he cannot be quiet an
hour together, but he is abused and misused, and mocked, and opposed; now he
cannot be patient unless; he be strong, and have great strength to deny
himself; as Col. 1. 11. Be strengthened with all might according to h(...)
^lorious power, to all patience and long suffering with joyfulness: As who
should say, if you would have patience, you must be strengthened with all might,
specially if you would be patient with joy; may be a man may be patient, but
then he is surly and lumpish, and all amort^ may be he bears, but he is like a
block or stock, he cannot joy in trib^lation, he had need have a great deal of
strength to do this; so if a man would pray, can he pray without a great deal
of strength? it is not a little heave will lift up a man's heart to God; I lift
my heart to thee; he gave a Psa. 25. 1.
great lift to his heart; and Heb. 5. 7. it is said that Christ prayed with
strong cries; we cannot pray aright unless we come with strong cries and
strong desires; so if a man hear the word, if it awaken him and quicken him, he
will lose all again, and be as blockish as he was before, unless he be strong;
1 John 2. 14.
we can do no good duty without strength, and therefore we had need to labor
for strength.

Thirdly, We can never overcome temptations, nor make our part good 3. Reas.
against temptations without strength; nay, we cannot resist them, or combat
with them, or stand in the field against them, but we shall be beaten out, and
be overwhelmed if we have not strength; if we would go to heaven we shall be
sure to meet with abundance of temptations; and if temptations will put us out
of the way, we shall have enough of them; if they can sway us, and make us do
this and that, we shall not want temptations; if a bowl has bias, the strength
of the arm will take away that, though the bias be never so strong; as long as
the strength of the arm lasts, the bias goes according to the strength of the
arm; when the strength of the arm is gone, then the bias begins to sway it: So
if a man have strength, it will swallow up the bias of temptations; but when a
man has no strength, then the bias of temptations carries him away, then the
world bows him, then pleasure and his natural inclination sways him this way
and that way, whereas if a man had strength he might resist temptations. 1 Cor.
15. 58. be steadfast, and unmovable, abounding in the work of the Lord; that
is, if you were strong, you would be unmovable, and abound in the work of the
Lord; all the world could not withdraw you from the work of the Lord; for all
temptations, you would abound in good things; what in^inite need have we to
resist temptations? none of us can arrive at heaven, unless we be able to go
through thick and thin, and a world of temptations; blessed is the man that
endures temptations, he shall have enough of them; and happy is the man that
can endure them, and overcome them; if we be not strong, if we have not this
spiritual might, what shall become of us? if we have not strong love to the
truth, we shall be hooked away from it; if we have not strong love to
obedience, we shall be disobedient; if we have not strong love to the ways of
God, we shall be pulled away from them by force of temptations.

Fourthly, Without strength, if we should chance to fall, we cannot get 4.
Reas. James 3. 2.
up again; what man is there that falls not? in many things we offend all; how
often does the godly man fall into sin, through weakness and infirmity, and
ignorance, and sometimes in a worse manner? now if he have spiritual strength
in him, then he may rise up again; if he has a strong relation to God in Jesus
Christ that cannot be broken, then he may get up again; as the body, if it has
abundance of sores, and blains, and diverse diseases and distempers upon it, yet
as long as the strength of nature lasts it may work them out again; if you give
this man Physic, as long as the strength of nature lasts, Physic may do him
good, but if the strength of nature be gone, the disease will overcome him, it
will be his death; so it is with a Christian, as long as there is any spiritual
strength in him, it will work out corruption; if a man have strong relation to
God, strong interest in Christ, strong apprehension of the evil of sin, and of
the goodness of Gods ways, strong fear of God, and a strong judgment, these
will work out any sin and corruption; but if he has not these, he can never
get up again, as the Apostle says, Heb. 12. 12, 13. lift up the hands that
hang down, and the feeble knees; and make strait paths for your feet, etc. as
who should say, if you will strengthen your feeble knees, then though they be
lame, they will rather be healed then turned out of the way; but if you let
your feeble knees be weak still, then if you have any lameness or any
distemper, you will be turned out of the way; but if you strengthen your feeble
knees, when you have been lame, and have any distemper, you will rather be
healed then turned out of the way: You shall see when Israel were without the
true God, and were distempered, they were Idolators, and all manner of
wickedness was grown upon them; now when God would have Asa purge out these
abuses, see how he calls upon him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 7. be strong, etc. now in the
words following we may see Asa did strengthen himself, and reformed all the
abuses, and set up the worship of God, and went on admirably in that work, now
he had gotten strength.

Lastly, If we have not strength, we can never do any thing God bids us 5. Reas.
with ease; but if we have strength, we may not only do what God bids us, but
do it with ease; as when a man has a strong memory, he can get two or three
leafes by heart with ease, he has it presently; another that has a weak
memory, will be conning and conning it I know not how long, and as fast as he
remembers one thing, he forgets another; he has much ado to get it; so if a
man have a strong judgment and understanding, though he meet with an hard word
or passage, he will understand it, and pick out the meaning; whereas one of a
weak understanding may be studying all the days of his life, and yet never
apprehend it; so when a man has got spiritual strength, he can do what God
bids him do; and leave what God bids him leave with ease; he may pray, and
humble and deny himself with ease, and lay those lusts aside, which before he
had as live have parted with his blood as parted with them; when a man is
strong in his love to God, and strong in the consideration of Gods goodness and
mercy, he can do these things with ease; my yoke is easy (says Christ) and my
burden is Matthew. 11. 30.
light; whereas to a natural man it is the heaviest yoke and burden in the
world for a man to be tied to abstain from all vanity, from all vile passions,
and inordinate affections, from all sinful pleasures, and covetous desires; it
is a burden intolerable for a natural man, it is because of his weakness; but
now a gracious heart that has gotten spiritual strength, can do it, and do it
with ease.

The first Use is to condemn those that have no strength at all, that are
nothing of saving grace and of the covenant of life wrought in them they have
nothing but the common graces, that may be in a reprobate; as Paul says, Romans
8. 7. of the carnal mind, it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed
can be; it cannot be subject; there is no strength of grace; there is strength
enough, but it is let out upon the world; may be they have strong parts and
gifts, but there is no strength to this duty; to be subject to the Law of God,
he is not able to do it; as Christ says of the corrupt Matthew. 7. 18.
tree it cannot bring forth good fruit; it has as much strength to suck from
the earth, and to bud and blossom, and bring forth fruit, and as much fruit as
a good tree* but it cannot bring forth good fruit; so a natural man thinks as
much, and speaks as much, and eats and drinks, and sleeps as much as a godly
man does, and goes about the business of his calling, and hearts the word of
God may be, and prays as often as a godly man does, but he is not able to
bring them to a good end, to do them well, he has no strength at all: as
Christ says to the Scribes and Pharisees, how can ye escape the wrath to come?
they had great parts and strength in other matters, but to escape hell, and
shun the wrath to come, they had no strength to do that, they were as weak as
water there; what a woeful thing is this, when a man has no strength to
overcome his sins, and deny himself? when men have eyes full of Adultery, and
cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. this is a miserable condition for a man to
be in.

Secondly, This may condemn those, that though they have some good things in
them, yet they do not strengthen them that are of the strain of the Church of
Sardis, that let their graces dye and decay, and go down the wind, and perish
and consume; they suffer a consumption in their graces, rather then watch and
strengthen the things that are in them; what a lamentable thing is this? though
our faith be never so weak, we are hardly able to lay hold upon one promise;
and when we study to find sign of conversion in us, we can hardly find any; and
yet notwithstanding people will not strengthen their faith, and other graces.
Let us not deceive our selves if we be Christians let us show it by the
strength that is in us; for if we be true Christians, we must be able
Christians to do all the works of God, able to fight against our corruptions,
able to do good duties, able to obey the Gospel; he has the least strength of
true saving grace is able to be upright in all his ways, he is able to observe
all the commandments of God in some measure, he is able to carry himself
uprightly against every evil way; in one word, he is able to keep all the word
of God in some measure; he that has but the least strength of grace is able to
do this as the Lord says, Rev. 3. 8. of the Church of Philadelphia, though she
had but a little strength, yet she kept the very word of God; a little strength
of saving grace; will make a man do more then the whole world can do; it is
able to make a man reach above all the reach of nature, and all na^^ral parts,
and morality and civility, and all the fair carriages that ever were; it is
able to go beyond all; there is more wisdom in the least degree of saving
grace, then in all the Politicians in the world; and more knowledge in the
least fool in Christ's school, then in all the wise men under heaven; I mean
true saving knowledge; therefore let us not deceive our selves, but as we
desire to be able to say that we are true Christians, let us labor to
strengthen all the good things that are in us, that our faith we think we have
to show for heaven may be a strong faith, and that our hope may be a strong
hope, that we may purify our selves by it, and that the fear of God may be a
strong fear, to make us depart from hell beneath, and so that our desires may
be strong to the throne of grace, and our endeavors strong against our
corruptions, and our care and conscience strong from day to day to do the works
of God.

The second Use is an Use of direction, what we are to do to strengthen the
good things that are in us. A^^ fi^s^* Let ^s labor to have all the powers of
our ^ouls strengthened by the strengthening the powers of the soul; I mean
this; you know that divine operations are above nature, above the reach of the
powers of our souls naturally. Now if we would be strong to do the works of
God, and divine things, we must get our hearts to be raised and lif^ed up to an
higher strain, to a subli^er pitch; as it is said of Jehosap^at, 2 Chr^n. 17^
His heart was lif^ed up in the ways of God. That is, his heart was strengthened
to walk in the ways of God; and now his heart was lifted up; the Text shows
^e did great matters; he could restore the worship of God, and make the Priests
and Levites do their duties; he could do admirable things for the glory of
God. Now his heart was lifted up above the reach of nature; so we should labor
to have all the powers of our souls lifted up to God; we are not converted to
God; unless God has raised up our minds, and wills, and affections; as it is
said, God raised up Judges to deliver Israel from their enemies: The Judge. 2.
16.
meaning is, they were no more able to deliver them then other people; but God
raised up their spirits, and li^ted them up, that they were able to go about
the function God had set them in: So Jer. 51. 11. before God had raised up the
spirits of the Medes, they were a weak people, they durst not meddle with
Babylon^; but when God had raised up their spirits and lifted them up to an
higher pitch of courage and strength, they were not only able to go against
them, but to overcome them; so before God raise up our minds to an higher
pitch, we are not able to know God aright; we are not able to do good, and
mortify sin, and be crucified to the world, we are not not able to go about
these things; but when God has raised up our hearts, and the powers of our
souls, we can then go about them; as the water is not able to boil the meat of
it self; but let the fire come and raise the water to an higher pitch, to a
seething quality, now it is able to ^oil the meat; so it is with a man's heart;
therefore we should labor earnestly with God in the use of all good means,
that we may get the powers of our souls raised and lifted up on high, that they
may be able to reach the works of God, and attain unto them.

And first labor to have strong minds and understandings; I do not mean strong
literal knowledge; for with a little of that a man may have strong love to God;
and zeal to his glory, as we may see in the book of Martyrs. Elizabeth
Sackwell, and Katharine H^rst, and others, they were mavelous ignorant; when
they were asked what a Sacrament was, and how many there were, they could not
tell, and yet were admirable Martyrs, and sealed to Gods truth according to
that knowledge they had, and laid down their lives for the Gospel, though they
had not this knowledge* therefore I mean not that, though that be very good;
and without some literal knowledge the mind cannot be good; a man may have
literal knowledge without spiritual, but not spiritual without literal;
therefore it is good, but that is not it; therefore we must labor to have
str^ng spiritual understandings, that we may understand spiritually the things
of God, as David: says, Psalm. 119. 34. Give me understanding, and I shall keep
thy Law; as who should say, if ever any man does s^n against thy Law, it is
because he does not understand himself, therefore (...) see how eager he is
that God would give him understanding, that he mi^ht understand his ways, and
understand what his will is, that so ^e (...)ht do it, that he might understand
it savingly, powerfully, and deliver his Law into his heart; God delivers his
Law into every man^ heart; but says he, grant me thy Law graciously; he prays
that Psalm. 119. 29.
God would not only deliver his Law to his understanding, but in a gracious
manner ^a man nev^^ sins against God, but his understanding is deceived; when
we are proud, we are deceived; for we think too well of of our selves; when we
are worldly, we are deceived; for we think the world is better then it is; so
when we are dead to good duties, we are deceived; for we look upon Gods ways
and ordinances, as if they were not such admirable things; it is through the
deceitfulness of our understandings that we give way to sin. Now if our
understandings were strengthened, we should be fenced against the
deceivableness of sin, that when the Devil comes with his delusions, and the
temptations of the flesh with false colors to put us upon sin, the
understanding would be strong, and see the weakness of all such reasons; every
man follows reason; reason is a strong thing, and leads all the world; no man
does any thing, but he has some reason for it; the worldly man has some,
though not true reason why he is so carnal, he is afraid he shall not know how
to live; therefore we should be earnest with God to strengthen our
understandings, that we may see the baseness, and beggary, and folly of all
such vile reasons as these; if the understanding were sound, it were a
mavelous strong thing; A wise man is strong, yea a man of knowledge
increases strongly, Prove. 24. 5. Therefore I say we should labor to have
sound understandings, that God would give us to know his Word as it is, and to
look upon things as they are, that the world may not seem to be otherwise then
it is, and our names, and credit, or any thing in the world may not seem to be
more beautiful then they are, that we may look upon things in their own
colors, that we may have light; if we had the light that comes from above, we
should be mavelous strong; as Paul says, Let us put on the Armor of light.
So Heb. 10. 32. says he, After Romans 13. 12.
you were enlightened, you endured a great fight of affliction. When they had
true light come into their hearts, that they durst not be impatient, then,
though they had mighty afflictions upon them, they endured them, they had light
come in, they could not rise up against God; if our knowledge were strong, our
corruptions would be weak, our carnal hearts would be weak, we should not be so
able to go against God and his commandments; I can do nothnig against the
truth, says Paul; why? he had a strong light, he saw so clearly that it was
the truth of God, and it 2 Cor. 13. 8.
was the way to be damned for ever to go against it, and he saw so clearly
what an admirable thing the truth was, that he could do nothing against it; as
Joseph says, How can I commit this great wickedness, etc? He had such a light,
and so saw the nature of the evil, that he durst not do it for a Genesis 39. 9.
world; the understanding is a very strong thing, see it in that which is in
wicked wretches; what a deal of strength has that little knowledge of God that
is in their hearts? when a wicked man knows that his courses are of the Devil,
and he is informed and reads it in the Word of God, he knows his ways are
condemned of God. I tell you this knowledge keeps a great deal of stir in his
heart, and makes his conscience afraid, and sometimes qualms come over his
heart, and sometimes makes him resolve I will be a drunkard and adulterer no
more; it makes him that he cannot go so freely about his wicked courses, Mark
6. 20. When Herod knew John Baptist was a godly man, this made him fear him. So
when Saul knew assuredly that David should be King, though he went out to
destroy him, he let him go; nay, a very persecutor, if he knows they be the
people of God he persecutes, it will make his very heart ache, and will make him
give over his persecution, except he be mavelous strong, Isa. 11. 9. Why? how
will God bridle persecutors? The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord. There shall be such a deal of knowledge, that they shall not be able to
hurt in my holy mountain; nay this knowledge may make wicked men mightily to
deny themselves. Balaam, though he was greedy after riches and preferment, yet
when he knew that it was Gods mind that he he should not curse Israel, he
should provoke God; says he, If Balak would give me his house full of silver
and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord, etc. Nay, knowledge may
work Reformation, After they escaped the pollutions of the world through the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 20. Now if knowledge be such a thing where
it is not rooted soundly in the mind, then how strong would it be if we did get
our understandings soundly informed? if we would get knowledge rooted in us,
the very knowledge that God has commanded us, to serve him, and fear him,
that, he has revealed his wrath from Heaven upon all disobedience; that Christ
is the Savior of the world, it would strengthen us against sin, and to do
good; therefore let us labor to have strong minds.

Secondly, Let us labor to have a strong will, as David had, Psalm 119. 15,
16. I will meditate in thy precepts, I will delight my self in thy statutes, I
will not forget thy word. You see how absolutely he is set upon it, I will do
thus and thus, and I will not do the contrary; this is a strong Will; and
therefore you see what admirable things he could do, because his Will was
strong; what is the reason people are so weak? they cannot resist sin, they
cannot give over such a lust, they cannot get life and quickening in prayer and
other duties; if an Enemy come, they cannot put it up; if affliction come, they
cannot bear it patiently; if they are called to stand for God, they cannot put
off carnal fears; this is the weakness of our Wills; if our Wills were
absolutely set that way, we should be mavelous strong, and break through all
oppositions; all the strength of a man lies in the Will of a man; if a man's
Will be set upon a thing, he will go through fire and water, he will do it;
therefore we should labor that our Wills may be strong in the works of God, to
the pleasing of God, and hatred of evil, and opposing of all the ways of the
flesh; as David says, Psalm 119. 10. I have sought thee with my whole heart.
We should do thus; you may see this in wicked men, when their hearts are
absolutely set to do evil, how do they go through difficulties? nothing shall
hinder them; how wonderfully did Saul persecute David, over hills and dales,
and caves of the earth, over rocks and craggy places? if he had not been
furious and mad, he could not have followed him in such places; nay, he spurned
against conscience; God met with him oftentimes, and infatuated his counsels,
which could not but be as hedges in his way; but he broke over all: Whence was
this? his Will was absolutely set, 1 Samuel 23. 23. he was resolved, if David
were to be found under the copes of heaven, he would have him; so if our
hearts, our wills were absolutely set to find God and his grace; if we would
say, if Christ be to be found, we will have him; if he be in Heaven or Earth we
will have him; we will run over all ordinances and duties; what sin will we not
leave? what course will we not take? if he be to be found, we will have him. A
man might go through any difficulty, if his Will were absolute; the Will is a
strong faculty, it has the command over the whole man; the mind thinks, and
the heart intends, and the affections stir, and the tongue speaks, and the foot
walks, and the hand works, but the Will sways all; nay if a man's appetite be to
a thing, yet if he will not do it, he may refrain it; the Will is the
strongest faculty in a man; as soon as we hear the Prodigal had a Will to go
to his Father, the next news we hear, he did go; I will arise and go to my
Father, and now nothing could stay him; if our Wills were set earnestly toward
God, that we would serve him, and obey him, and would not be carried away with
our lusts, what a deal of strength would this help us with? we should be strong
to trample Satan under our feet, and mortify our lusts; and this is the reason
God accepts the Will above all, if there be a willing mind, God accepts it, nay
not only accepts it, but rewards it also, 1 Cor. 9. 19. If I do it willingly,
I have my reward. The Will is the strongest faculty God knows; if he has a
man's will, he has all that ever a man can do, he has all his power, nay, he
has more then his power; the will is able to go beyond a man's power; as it is
said of the Macedonians, 2 Cor. 8. 3. they did to their power, and beyond their
power; the will is a mighty strong thing; therefore if we will be strong in the
Lord, let us labor for strong wills.

Thirdly, Let us labor for sound affections, that our affections may be
conversant about God and all his holy laws and commandments; which way a man's
affections run, so they run mightily; that way a man's strength runs, as the
Prophet says, Isa. 63. 15. look down from heaven; where is thy zeal and thy
^^rength? that is, when God is zealous for his peoples good, he puts forth his
strength for their defense; therefore the Prophet cries, Lord, where is thy
zeal and thy strength? so we may say, where is our zeal to God, and against
sin, where is our zeal for good duties, for heavenly-mindedness, and the
spreading of the Gospel, and doing good in our places? if we were but zealous
and earnest in our affections, we should not go so dully and faintly in the
ways of God as we do: it would make us strong; we see how strongly men follow
after the world, when they are zealous for the world; so if we were earnest
after God, we should be strongly carried after him.

Secondly, If we would get strength, let us labor to believe; for when a man
has once gotten faith, now, though he be never so weak, he may say, God is my
strength, Psalm. 73. 26. A man that has gotten this faith, may say as David,
Psalm. 71. 16, I will go in the strength of the Lord; I will go to prayer, to
the word, to the Sacrament, I will go about my calling, when I am put upon my
business, I will go in the strength of the Lord to do it; if this man wants
strength, he goes and even borrows strength from heaven, Heb. 11. 34. by faith,
of weak they became strong; as the rivers that watered Paradise, their heads
and springs were out of Paradise; so though there be streams of mercy and
grace, and power, and love communicated to us, yet the heads of these are out
of us; Christ is the head from which we must fetch all; I can do all things
(says Paul) through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all
things; you will say, this is to brag and boast; alas no, I can do nothing, it
is Christ that strengthens me; like the Ivy that creeps up by the wall, so a
Christian creeps up by Christ; there lies all our strength; therefore all our
care should be to believe, to get off from our own bottoms; a true Christian is
never so weak as when he will be himself, when he goes about actions himself;
if he would let Christ do all, and he only take that course Christ bids him,
and never go his own way to work, he were a strong man, Isa. 30. 7. It is your
strength to sit s^ill; the children of Israel were so busy to help themselves,
they would to Egypt, and they should help them; says God, you shall never have
help this way; your strength is to sit still and wait upon God, and trust in
him; so I say, then is a true Christian weak, when he departs from Christ, and
does not keep close to him; suppose a man should be in misery, there be but two
ways to help him, the one is by himself, the other is by Christ; now, suppose
a man were in such a straight, that he must be delivered in a quarter of an
hour, or else he is undone; shall a man go to prayer now, or to his own
strength? to prayer if it were for a man's life; now when a man goes to his own
strength and parts, this weakens him; we should do every thing better if we
would go to Christ, and set our hearts upon him, if we would use the means, but
hang upon God, this were our strength.

Thirdly, We should fly all occasions of evil; may be a child can contain it
self from the dug (when it is newly weaned) so long as it comes not near it;
but when the child sees the dug, now the fancy runs upon the dug again, and
now it cries for the dug again; it is because it is not perfectly weaned; if it
were perfectly weaned, though it saw the dug, it would not look after it; so we
are not perfectly weaned from sin; therefore though when we resist occasions
and temptations of sin, we are able to abstain and contain our selves, yet
because we are not perfectly weaned, if we give way to occasions we lose all;
when we will rashly venture upon the occasions of evil, we lose our strength;
therefore says David, Psalm. 101. 3. I will set no evil thing before mine eyes;
as he would not do it, so he would not have it in his sight; every man is privy
to himself, and may know what thoughts, what desires, what appearances, what
customs, what speeches are occasions of evil to him; he might know what does
occasion him to sin; may be he had not committed sin but for this or that; now
when a man shall give way to these occasions, and not stand upon his guard,
this loses all a man's strength; as Saul he was privy to himself how testy and
furious he was, and if he had any instrument of fury in his hand, he had no
power over himself; yet he would ever be with his javelin in his hand, when he
was in the field, or in the house, still he had his javelin in his hand; now
you may see what mischief he exposed himself unto, he flung it twice at David,
and a third time at his own son Jonathan; if he had been careful not to have
given way to the occasions of sin, knowing how weak he was, and that he had not
command over himself, he might have escaped this; a man that is furious had not
need always to have a sword about him; a man had need shun all the occasions
of evil; Joseph was a strong man, how can I do this wickedness? etc. all the
temptations of his Mistress could not allure him; what was the cause of this?
he would not hearken to his Mistress, nor be with her, Genesis 39. What made Achan
to be so weak? he must needs take the Babylonish garment, and the wedge of
gold; he gave way to the occasion, I looked upon it, says he; he being privy
to his own covetous heart, should have been shy of giving any occasion to the
flesh; but he giving way to the Josh. 7. 21.
occasion was weak and not able to stand.

Fourthly, We should never go up and down without a constant continual purpose
to please God; when we first rise in the morning, we should think with our
selves, well, I purpose to take heed of sin this day; so when I am at dinner, I
will take heed that I let not the remembrance of God go out of my mind; I will
have fresh thoughts of him while I am at board; as it is said of Daniel, he
purposed not to defile himself with the Kings meat: So when we go into the
fields, we should think with our selves, I purpose God Dan. 1. 8.
willing, to beware that I may not come home with a guilty conscience, and do
things that may be to my shame and wounding another day; when we are to come
among wicked people, we should resolve before we come, I will let fall nothing
to dishonor God; thus if we would go armed up and down, we should go strongly;
if we would make serious resolutions to cleave to God, and not to do evil, this
would strengthen us; now when temptations meet us unresolved, we are not able
to put them off.

Fifthly, We should frequent the Ordinances of God. First, We should be careful
of hearing the word of God in a godly manner. Strength and beauty are in his
Sanctuary, Psalm. 96. 6. there is strength to be had in Gods house, in Gods
courts; his Word and Ordinances are the food of the soul, that as bread
strengthens a man's body, so this spiritual bread of life strengthens a man's
soul. So again, For prayer, to go to God in prayer, that would strengthen us,
Prove. 18. 10. So the Sacraments, they are a means to strengthen us; to go to
the Lords Table with hunger and thirst, and serious consideration of our own
unworthiness, and of our need, and with true faith unto it; the Lords Supper is
a means to strengthen, as it is noted in the primitive Church, Acts 2. 42. so
again for meditations, if we would meditate of the things we hear, of Gods
word, and his blessings, and judgment, and warning we have from day to day; if
we would digest these things, and chew them from day to day, they would yield a
great deal of nourishment unto us; as David says, Blessed is the man whose
meditations are in Gods Law, he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers
side; and his leaf shall not wither, Psalm. 1. 2, 3. that man shall flourish
like a green bay tree: So for holy conference, that is a great means to
strengthen all good things; as those good people, when the times were bad, mark
how they strengthened themselves, that they might not be infected with evil;
they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, Mal. 3. 16.

Sixthly, We should put forth our selves to the utmost in good duties; it is
our laziness and idleness that we are not more able to do good, and that we
are so frail and infirm to do any thing that is of God; if we would take pains
and put forth our selves, we should be strong; and indeed what is strength but
taking of pains when a man puts forth himself? as Eccles. 10. 10. that is, a
man must take the more pains; the more pains a man takes, the more strength he
puts forth; there is no creature that God has made besides man, but does act
to its utmost strength; the fire burns as much as ever it can; and the light
shines as much as ever it can; and the stone goes down as low as ever it can;
every creature works as far as it can; but now man he can limit his strength,
because he has reason and will, and according as he sees a thing more or less
necessary, according as he sees it easier or harder to be attained, accordingly
he lessens or puts forth his strength; and it is great reason that God should
give man power to limit his strength, for he is to deal with the creature as
well as with the Creator; and if he should love and seek the creature as much
as ever he can, this were Idolatry; therefore the Lord has given a man power
to limit his strength, not to let out all his love or fear upon any thing here
below; but yet God does not give a man that power to limit his strength, and
the exercise of it toward his Maker, but he should let out all toward God; as
David says, let all that is within we praise the Lord; he opens his
floodgates wide, and lets out all toward Psalm. 103.
God.

Seventhly, Consider that all received strength is worth nothing unless God
give us new supply; wherefore are true Christians weak at any time, but because
they think thus? I had true grace in the morning, and an hour ago I had the
fear of God and the hatred of sin; and the consideration of this makes him that
he is not so careful to keep close to Christ, and to take heed of falling; he
thinks, I had power the other day, and I was able to resist temptations then;
this makes a man weak; he thinks he had grace a while a go, and so trusts to
that; for if a man do not still look up to Christ, and cleave unto him, as if
he had no strength, the man is presently a weak man, as weak as another man,
and cannot stand; a man cannot be strong in the grace that is in himself, but
in the grace that is in God, Ephesians. 6. 10. Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and
in the power of his might: And as Paul speaks to Timothy, though Timothy were a
man that was as strong as any man upon the face of the earth almost, yet he
bids him not count himself strong in the grace that was in him, but in the
grace that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2. 1. As it is with the air, which is not
strong with the light that is in it self, but with the light that is in the
Sun; therefore we are careful not to shut the windows; for if we shut the light
of the Sun out, the air though it be light now, will be dark again in a moment;
therefore though the room be light, yet we keep the windows open, for the light
of the air is strong in the light of the Sun; so a Christian should keep his
windows ever open toward Christ; if a man ever turn his back again upon
Christ, and neglect Christ, if he do not cleave to Christ, and take heed he do
not provoke Christ against him, he is gone, he is as weak as can be; as Ezra
speaks, Ezr. 7. 28. I was strengthened as the hand of the Lord was upon me; no
otherwise, if the Lord should take away his hand, he were gone though he had
never so much strength, wisdom and parts; he were no body without God.

Eighthly, Lastly, Take heed of striving against knowledge, or willingly; that
weakens us horribly; and in particular take heed of pride; no man so weak as a
proud man, nor so strong as an humble man, as a Divine speaks; a man that is
sensible of his own weakness, of his own being no body, of his own folly, and
that he is able to do nothing of himself, he that is sensible of this is
strong; as Paul says, 2 Cor. 12. 10. when we are weak then are we strong; that
is, when we are humble and weak in our own apprehension and consideration, when
we lay this to heart, that we are weak, then are we strong; for this makes a
man lay about him, to cleave unto God.

I have laid down diverse directions for the strengthening of those good things
that are in us, and I will now add one more, because it is seasonable for the
time. Direct.


Make conscience of using and improving the Sacraments, for they are excellent
Ordinances to strengthen a man.

First, The Sacrament of Baptism; I do not mean the mere receiving outward
baptism, that is a weak thing; but when a man has a care to improve his
baptism. It is noted of Abraham, that he had faith before his circumcision; but
he received circumcision, the seal of the righteousness of faith, for this,
that he might be the father of the faithful, Romans 4. 19. Now he could believe
incredible wonderful strange things, that would have staggered him before: So
when David was to fight against Goliath, he was a great warrier, and a mighty
soldier, and David a weak stripling; now see how he strengthened himself
against Goliath; he uses three argument, and one is taken from the Sacrament of
Gods covenant; he was an uncircumcised man, but David was circumcised, and
within the covenant; What is this 1 Samuel 17.
uncircumcised Philistin, to one that is circumcised and in covenant with God?
and he has given me the Sacrament of it, that he will help me and be with me,
and stand by me in all estates and conditions. So it was with the Jailer;
before when the Magistrates bid him put Paul and his fellows in the worst
prison, he durst do no other; and when he saw the prison doors Acts 16.
open, he would have killed himself, he was not able to have any power over
himself; but when he had faith and was baptized, now he was able to take them
out of the prison, and carry them to his own house, and give them the best
entertainment; though the Magistrates counted them Roagues and vagabonds, he
had gotten strength now.

Secondly, The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is of great force, being used with
faith and due preparation according to Gods Ordinance; it is a Sacrament for
the very nonce to help a man's faith, and strengthen him in every good thing.

First, Because this is the very nature of the Sacrament; it is the Sacrament
of growth and increasing in grace; the other Sacrament puts a man into the
estate of grace, and this strengthens a man in the estate of grace; therefore
when Christ administered the Sacrament, he tells us, we may receive Matthew 26.
it as our very bread; now Psalm. 104. 15. bread strengthens a man's heart: He
tells us if we come to the Sacrament aright, as our bodies receive bread and it
strengthens them, so we may receive that which will nourish our souls; take,
eat, this is my body; will not this bread nourish you? directly my body is such
a thing, that do but take it by faith, it shall strengthen you, just as this
bread strengthens the body; as Eliah went in the strength of that 1 Kings 19.
meat he eat forty days and forty nights; so if we come to this Sacrament
understandingly and preparedly, it is most certain we shall have strength; may
be not that we would have our selves; may be we would have more grace, and more
assistance, but we shall have that strength whereby we shall be able to go on
in the service of God, doing good, and shunning evil from day to day; My flesh
is meat indeed, etc. And indeed it will nourish a man; as it is said of
Jonathan, he was weak and faint, and his eyes grew John 6. 55. 1 Samuel 14.
dim; but when he tasted a little honey, his strength came to him again: So the
Sacrament received by a true Communicant, that sets himself to prepare his
soul to partake of it, he shall have his eyes enlightened, and his heart
quickened, he shall have some succor and relief from it to go about every
good word and work.

Secondly, It is a seal of Gods Covenant, and therefore must needs strengthen a
man that is in Covenant with God, if he come to it as it ought to become unto;
for what is the Covenant a true believer is in? I will make an everlasting
Covenant, never to turn away from them to do them good; and I will put my fear
into their hearts, etc. Jer. 32. 40. It is an everlasting Covenant, I will
never let them go, I will put a strong fear into their hearts, that they shall
not do as the wicked do, they shall stand in awe of God; it is a strong
light; others shall be deluded; they shall not be deluded; it is a strong
apprehension of the Word and Will of God; this is the Covenant of God. Now when
a man shall come to have this sealed, when God shall give this Sacrament to
make this good, and he takes the Sacrament upon it, that he will walk according
to this Covenant, according to the grace that God has given him; this man has
all the witnesses in heaven and earth; why should he be weak in faith then?
There be but three witnesses in 1 John 5.
heaven; he has these that has faith; there be but three on earth, the
spirit, water, and blood; by spirit, is meant the same spirit that works true
faith and obedience in the hearts of his people; then water, that is the water
of Baptism; and blood, that is the blood of the Lords Supper; the Lord does
witness eternal life to this man's heart; therefore what can this man want?

Thirdly, This Sacrament is Communion with Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16. The cup
of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ?
etc. So that when a man comes to the Sacrament aright, he has communion with
Jesus Christ; therefore he must needs be strengthened, though he were never so
weak before; as Solomon says of the Contes, they are a feeble folk, and yet
they make their houses in the Rocks, Prove. 30. 26. So true Christians are a
feeble folk, yet they make their houses in the Rock, where they eat this
spiritual meat, and drink this spiritual drink; they drink of that Rock Jesus
Christ; when they draw near to this Table, they draw near to Christ, and
therefore must needs gather strength; they come to this Rock to be rooted and
established in this Rock; and therefore must needs get strength.

Fourthly, Because this Sacrament is a Sacrament of communion with the members
of Christ; a man that rightly receives it, does increase the Communion of
Saints over all the world; though he never saw them, yet he is loved more and
more of all the Saints; therefore he must needs grow stronger: Take a man that
is woven into every man, there is hardly any man of any power but loves him, he
has friends everywhere; this man is a strong man, as it is said of Absalom, he
grew strong, for the people increased continually with him, 2 Samuel 21. 15. So a
Christian must needs grow strong, that truly hears the Word, and receives the
Sacrament; for people still come flocking more and more unto him; for still as
the Church comes to grow, or any soul comes to believe in Christ, he
strengthens himself; as Paul was strong in every Town where he went, in regard
of the Communion of Saints; such a man is strong in regard of his infirmities,
he has many to help him to bear them; he is strong also in regard of advice
and counsel, he shall have the counsel of the Saints, Job 4. 3. If a man be
doubtful what course to take when instruction comes, it strengthens a man much:
Now when a man has communion with all the Saints, what abundance of counsel
has he? you may see how weak David was, he was not able to 1 Samuel 25.
beat down his wrath and impatience: Now when Abigail came with her good
counsel, he blessed God for it.

Let us have a care to come so to the Sacrament, that we may be strengthened in
all good things, that we may be more quickened up to every good word Moses, and
all Israel received the Passover, God smote the first borne of all Egypt,
Psalm. 105. 30. This was a seal that God smote all the strength of the
Egyptians, but there was not one weak person among the Israelites: So if we did
receive the Sacrament aright, there should not be a weak Christian among us,
God would smite the Egyptians, and weaken the strength of all their lusts and
corruptions; is therefore any among us weak, and he cannot do this and that?
his lusts are like the sons of Zerviah to David, too hard for him; Though I be
anointed King, I am weak, etc. 2 Samuel 3. 39. So do thou say, I am very weak
this day, and though God has anointed me King over my lusts, and I am a
Christian that should have power over my lusts, yet these base lusts and cursed
corruptions are too hard for me; I say, if we did but wisely and carefully, as
we ought to do, go to the Word and Sacrament, and the rest of Gods Ordinances,
we should have mavelous supply and help to carry us on in our Christian
Combat: It is a very remarkable thing, that when God would have Joshua and all
Israel go about that same hard work, to go and encounter with 31 Kings of
Canaan at one clap, and they were now newly come into the Land of Canaan, and
were hemmed in, the waters of Jordan came back, and they could not go back
again, it is to be noted that before God would have them strike a blow, he
would have them take the Sacrament of Circumcision; you know the Canaanites
might have come and cut their throats when they were sore; nay when they were
circumcised, God would not Josh. 5.
have them go fight yet, but they must take the Sacrament of the Passover,
which would cost them seven days; one would think this was not the way to be
strong; but this was indeed the way to be strong, to go in the strength of
heaven; this made the spirits of their enemies melt, for they were now within
the Covenant of God; therefore how should we help our own souls, if we would
but go in the strength of Gods Covenant to prayer and every business we have to
do, and if we would but rightly partake of this Sacrament as a seal of the
Covenant? nothing would make it so strong as this.

This may seem to condemn the most of us all generally. How do Christians miss
of the partaking of the Sacrament? what a deal of weakness is Cor. 11. 30. For
this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. He speaks there
of their unworthy receiving the Sacrament; this is the cause that your bodies
are weak: So this is as true of the weakness of the soul; for this cause many
are weak among you, and many have such sick souls; nay, many are even dead to
all manner of good, even for this cause, the not receiving the Lords Supper in
a right manner; for if the Sacrament were duly come unto as it does require,
it is to strengthen us in grace, and against Satan; but when people come hand
over head, when they pr^pare themselves slightly, pray slightly before they
come, and come carelesle and negligently, and take not pains to come in due
fashion, they rather strengthen themselves in sin and Satan against them; as
it is said of Judas, after he had received the sop, the Devil entered into him,
John 13. 27. you see he went away with more hardness of heart from the Lords
Supper, then he came to it; he went away with more wrath and discontent against
Christ and his blessed company then before; the Devil had more strength then he
had before: A true Christian that comes to the Sacrament as he ought, gets more
strength to his faith, more strength to his lively hope, more patience and
meekness; he strengthens all the graces of Gods spirit, and strengthens
himself against Satan and his own flesh, and against his l^sts and
corruptions; but when a man comes otherwise, he does not only not get strength
against corruption, but corruption gets strength rather; he goes away with more
corruption of heart, and more guiltiness of sin then before, and is more
heartless to prayer and good duties: The Devil deals with men, as the Monk did
with Henry the 7th. Emperor* it is reported that he was poisoned by coming to
the Sacrament; for he had poisoned it; so the Devil poisons the Sacrament to
most men, they eat and drink their own damnation, when they go away from the
Lords Supper they are worse then when they came, more weak and unable to put
off Satan, and more exposed to his fiery darts; whereas if the Sacrament were
approached unto according to the due order that God has set down in his Word,
we should gather, strength from it.

This may serve to show the reason why people get no more good by the Solomon
says, When a man is not ready to hear, he offers the sacrifice of f^ls,
Eccles. 5. 1. So when a man receives the Sacrament, and is not ready to
receive, he receives the Sacrament of fools; he does not consider what a sacred
thing it is, and what great matters are required of him, and what care and
conscience is requisite thereunto; we should examine our selves, as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 11. 28. We must not only eat of that bread, and drink of that
cup, for so even wretches and carnal people do, and never partake of any
strength; but we must partake of it after a right manner, as Christ says,
Luke. 12. 47. He that knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself to do it,
shall be beaten with many stripes; so when we know it is Gods will we should
come preparedly, and we will not prepare our selves; God will not strengthen us
and help us against our lusts, but our lusts shall get head against us. This is
in general. Now I come to speak of some particular reasons that hinder men from
partaking aright of the Sacrament.

First, Because people come not to the Sacrament with a sense and feeling of
their own wants; if we would partake of strength by the Sacrament, before we
come we must feel our wants, how we want hope, and patience, and faith, and
strength, we want spiritual understanding in the ways of God; we should not
only see this* but feel it; people, may be, see this, that they want this or
that; but there is no sound feeling of their wants; they are without faith, and
do not feel it; without hope and patience, and do not feel it; they do not
find the want of these things. Now Prove. 9. 4, 5. Wisdom says to him that
wants understanding, Come eat of my bread, etc. When a man does want
understanding, is not only without it, but feels the want of it; he is not
only without strength and faith, but feels the want of it; he sees the want of
wisdom and discretion, and Gods helping of him more and more; if it be so, eat
of my bread, etc.

Secondly, Because people come without true repentance to the Lords Table, they
do not repent of their sins, they do not break the league between them and
their own ways, they come to the Sacrament, and mean to think as they have
done, and speak as they have done, and keep company as they have done, and
behave themselves in their places and callings as they have done, and no
otherwise then they have done; and though they cry God mercy, and make some
prayers, yet the covenant between them and their wicked courses was never
broken; and therefore it can do them no good: People come to the Sacrament as
Judas did, he came fresh from the Pharisees conspiring the betraying his
Master, and as soon as he had done, he meant to go to them again, and so got no
good by it; whereas if we would get good by the Sacrament, that it may build us
up in knowledge and believing, in having a care to please God, and making
conscience of all our ways, we ought to root out our sins and corruptions, and
fling away our lusts and vile affections; we should throw sin out of doors, as
the Israelites were to throw leaven out of doors, and not to have any in their
houses; nay we should deal with sin, as Ammon did with Thamar; he hated her now
more then he loved her before; nay he put her out, and bolted the door after
her; so though we loved vanity, and worldliness, and passion before, yet now we
should hate them, and put them out of doors, yea bolt the door after them, that
they may come in no more. This is the way to come to the Sacrament, so as to
get strength thereby; and the want of this is the cause that people go away so
weak.

Thirdly, Because they come without faith; they come doubting to the Sacrament,
Romans 14. 23. He that doubts, is damned if he eat. I may apply it to this; he
that doubts is damned if he receive the Sacrament, his own conscience will
reprove him, his own soul will say, I have not done well, I have not pleased
God in coming; his own conscience will condemn him, and damn him; when he
looks upon the Covenant of grace, he cannot apply it, conscience puts him off:
This is for want of true faith; if people would come to the Lords Table with
faith, they would receive strength, as it is said of Moses, Heb. 11. 28. By
faith he received the Passover; so if by faith we would receive the Lords
Supper, and beat down all doubts and fears of flesh and blood, and resolve to
cast our selves upon Christ and his promises, and let him have the disposing of
us; if we would truly cast our selves upon Christ, and believe in his name, and
so come to the Sacrament, we should have strength; how can we get strength
without this? Ephesians. 3. 17. When we come to the Sacrament, we come to partake of
Christ, and receive Christ, that we may dwell in Christ, and he in us. Now he
will not do thus without faith; faith is the wedding garment; if we come
without it, we shall be bound hand and foot and cast into utter darkness; may
be thou were fettered before, but now thou shall be more bound, even bound hand
and foot, that thou can not stir, as the Apostle says, Above all things take
the shield of faith; so I may say, if you will come to the Sacrament to your
Ephesians. 6.
own peace and comfort, above all things take the shield of faith. When men
come to the Sacrament only with bodily eyes, and bodily hands, what do they
get? nothing but a piece of bread, and a drop of wine; but if they had faith,
they should have the evidence of things not seen; Christ, and heaven, and the
covenant of grace, are not seen with bodily eyes; faith would help them to the
evidence of these things not seen; as St. Austin speaks of a worthy Martyr,
when he was to suffer Martyrdom, he took the Sacrament to strengthen him to
suffer Martyrdom; and the Martyrs in the Primitive Church, every day expecting
Martyrdom, they every day received the Sacrament to help them with strength;
but when we come to the Sacrament without faith, we deprive our selves of this
benefit. Now as long as we give way to our sins, doubting will reign, and faith
cannot be in our souls.

Fourthly, Because they do not seek earnestly to God to bless the Sacrament to
them they do not make themselves strong in heaven before they come; they do not
go with strong cries and groans to the Throne of grace, that God would quicken
them that they may get the good they ought to do at it. If we would come to the
Sacrament of Lords Supper as we ought to do, we should be earnest with God and
wrestle with him, that he would make us sensible of our wants, and that he
would pluck up our hearts to come with faith, that he would strengthen us, that
we may behave our selves well when we are there, and when we come away; every
Ordinance of God is sanctified by the word and prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5. Now because
either people do not pray at all, or if they do, they are not earnest with God,
therefore it is that they return home little the better.

Fifthly, Because they do not behave themselves ^ell when they are at it, they
are not well occupied when they sit at the Lords Table, they know not how to
employ themselves as the duty requires; this is that would help us to true
strength by the Sacrament, if we were well employed when we were at it. Cant.
1. 12. While the King sits at his table, etc. says the Church, that is,
while the King was enjoying communion with me and I with him, I was just at the
same time very well employed; I labored in some measure to stir up all the
graces that were in me, that my Spikenard might send up a sweet perfume into
his nostrils, that my faith might work, and my love might work; so while we are
sitting at the Lords Table, and the King sits down to bid us welcome; we
should labor to be well employed, to keep vanities out of our minds, and
employ them well, that we may have a good meal before we go.

Sixthly, Because people when they have been at the Sacrament, they do not
examine themselves diligently, whither they have got any good by the Sacrament;
I have received the Sacrament, have I got any good by it? is my faith
strengthened? am I yet backward to Gods will, untoward in his worship, dead in
his service, am I still hovering and doubting in my conscience, have I no care
of God, have I got no good by the Sacrament? if people would but call
themselves to account, whither they have got any good by the Sacrament, this
would do them a great deal of good; it would make them bewail and lament, and
cry out if they got no good; people let things r^n on at six and sevens; if
they get good, so it is; if they get none, so it is, but lay it not to heart;
whereas a godly heart when he has been at an Ordinance, calls himself to
account, and takes it mavelous heavily if he see he has got no good; as the
Church when she prayed, and saw her prayers did not prevail, it was a bitter
thing to her; Thou have covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayer should
not pass through, Lam. 3. 44. when she saw she prayed, and strived, and tugged
with God, and there was no comfort, O how she took it to heart, she made it the
burden of her complaint; so if Christians would do thus, The Sacrament does
not take, the Lord covers himself with clouds, and hides himself from me, he
will not own me; we should go crying and yelling up and down to see that we do
not get good by the Sacrament; if we would do thus, we might get good by it.

Seventhly, If people do get good by the Sacrament afterward, yet they do not
interpret this to be by the goodness of God in the Sacrament; may be they meet
with some comfort and assistance now and then which might do them a world of
good, and strengthen their hearts wonderfully if they did look to it; when they
have gotten many good blessings, now they do not construe this to be by reason
of Gods Sacrament and Covenant; if they did look upon it, O this came by virtue
of Gods Covenant, and the seal of his Covenant to my soul, this would make them
strong in Gods Covenant, and help them exceedingly; thus David did, if he got
any mercy at any time, still he laid it upon going to Gods Ordinances; this I
had because I kept thy precepts; This I had because I prayed unto thee, and
sought thee Psalm. 119.
earnestly; I followed God earnestly, and now I see his infinite goodness and
mercy toward me, how he has rewarded me; I confess it was a poor thing I did,
God might even have slung it as dung in my face, but see how he has rewarded
me: So if Christians would say, this I had because I was careful, though I had
formerly neglected Gods Ordinances; yet at last I came to seek him earnestly
with my whole heart, and to come more preparedly and diligently to the Lords
Supper, and now this I find I had by it; how has God blessed me since? how
has he assisted me, and lifted me over many rubs and temptations? I will have
a care of this therefore afterward; this would strengthen a man wonderfully,
but for want of this people get little good.

Eighthly, Because Christians do not rowse and stir up the Sacraments that they
have partaked of formerly, they do not provoke their souls to extort the
efficacy and fruit of former Sacraments; when Moses had perceived that all
Israel had entered into Covenant with God, he rowseth up their hearts to look
upon this Covenant, Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18, 19. Then have avouched the Lord this day
to be thy God, etc. As who should say, you have entered into covenant with God
this very day; now rowse up your selves and and consider what God has done;
this very God has promised you to set you up above all Nations; then stir up
your selves and believe God, and say, Why should I distrust God? certainly he
will bless me, and do good to me; and this day thou have vowed thy self to
God, therefore rowse up thy self and think there is no going back; I have made
a covenant, and taken the Sacrament upon it, and now there is no going back; as
Luther speaks of a good Virgin, she was marvellously tempted by her lusts and
corruptions; she helped herself by the covenant; I am a Christian, and am
baptized, I have taken the Sacrament upon it, and will not yield; and this did
marvellously help her; but when Christians neglect this, no marvel though they
continue weak still; nay, most people though they have been at the Sacrament
make no conscience of their vows to God, they break covenant with God,
therefore no marvel they get no good by the Sacrament.

REV. 3. 2. Be watchful therefore and strengthen the things which remain, etc.
STrengthen the things which remain; As who should say, thou have some grace in
thee, but what grace? nothing but the remainder of a great deal; more thou have
had formerly; thou have been more earnest, and more fruitful, and have abounded
in the work of the Lord, thou have had more a great deal, thou art horribly
grown down the wind, thou have nothing but the remainders of what thou had,
therefore it is high time for thee to go and strengthen the things that remain.

Now here by the way, before we come to the main point, we may observe A child
of God cannot fall from grace.
That a child of God cannot fall totally away; there will be ever something
that remains; though he may lose much of his good graces, he cannot lose all;
though Sardis was brought to a low ebb, yet there was something remaining; I
say, a child of God can never come to such a low pass, but he shall have
something remaining; he may have horrible declinings, and woeful decayings of
grace, but he can never come to this pass, to have no grace, no faith, no love
to God, no ca^e of his name, to be a wicked man again, there will be something
remaining in him that is good; as we may see, 1 J^hn 3. 9. Whosoever is born of
God sins not, for the seed of God rem^ineth in him; a child of God that is
born of God cannot sin, that is, he cannot absolutely and totally fall away,
there will be good things in him as long as he lives, there will be a seed
remaining in him for ever; he can never be a bankrupt, and come to nothing; he
shall be a godly man, and a child of God, and one that fears Gods name for
ever; he cannot lose all, though he lose much; as it is said of J^hoshaphat,
though he yielded much to sin, and gave way to the lusts of his own heart in an
horrible manner, yet there was something remaining in him; though he had
greatly dishonored God, and distempered his own soul, so far forth as to love
the ungodly, and to help those that were the enemies of God; yet says the
Text, there are good things sound in thee; he was not quite deprived of all the
graces of Gods 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. 3. Mat. 25.
blessed spirit, but there were good things in him still; so the five wise
Virgins, though they slumbred and slept, and were exceeding secure, yet their
lamps were not gone out; I may compare a Christian to a cup of right Canarie
Wine, that no frost in the world can quite freeze; it may freeze it very much,
but yet there will be some spirits of the Wine remaining unfroz^n; so godly men
are an everlasting foundation, all cannot possibly be spent and consumed in
them, they shall have something remaining in them. Now I will tell you, First,
What is not the reason of this. Secondly, What is the reason of it.

First, Not any thing in himself; it is not any grace received in it self, it
1. What not the Reason.
is nothing in thee; no not the image of God in thee, nor any holiness, nor
mortification; there is nothing in him keeps him from falling away; for let a
man have all the grace that ever any man had, he may fall totally for all that;
nay, if he were as holy inherently as Adam in his innocence, he may fall away
totally; nay, if he were as holy as the Angels in Heaven, and were in the same
estate that the Angels in Heaven are; they are not immutable in their own
nature, therefore that they are confirmed in grace, it is Gods goodness and
mercy to them, it is nothing in themselves; those Angels that do stand, may
fall notwithstanding any thing that is in them; no grace received will keep a
man from falling totally away, if he have not the fountain and the favor of
God to keep him, if he have not a better bottom then himself; intrinsecal
unchangableness is only a property of the Lord, Mal. 3. 6. All creatures may
change, if they had a thousand times more of the image of God, yet they may
change and fall, and lose all notwithstanding any thing they have received; it
is nothing in a man's self; Now I will make this appear that it is not any thing
in a man's self.

First, Because the godliest man in the world is bid to look upon himself Evid.
as one that may fall absolutely into any sin in the world in himself; for all
the love he has of God, he may yet hate him; for all the fear he has of God,
he may yet slight him; a child of God is commanded to look upon himself, as
left to himself, to be in a woeful case; that he may fall finally and totally
away, to be nothing and worse then nothing; as the Apostle says, Gal. 6. 1. if
a man be overtaken in a fault, ye that are spiritual restore such a man,
knowing that ye your selves also may be tempted that is, consider, it may be
thy case, thou may be tempted to fall as well as he, and worse too; you that
are spiritual, though you be never so spiritual, though your minds be never so
wrapped up with God, and taken up with spiritual things, yet you are not so
spiritual, but if you will hearken to the counsel of your own hearts, you may
be carnal and brutish; look upon thy self as a poor miserable creature; though
thou have never so much grace, thou can not keep it, unless thou have a
better keeper then thy self.

Secondly, Because the people of God are bound to fear themselves (I bring the
very arguments that they bring that hold a child of God may fall away totally;
therefore I grant them that the arguments are good, that in themselves they may
fall away) and I say a child of God is commanded to fear; be not high-minded
but fear; that is, though thou have an excellent faith, and stand by faith,
yet be not high-minded, do not think thou art higher then thou art, and remoter
from the power of the flesh then thou art; be not proud and conceited; for all
the faith thou have, thou may distrust God; and if God leave thee to thy self
thou may be an unbeliever, and as vile an infidel as ever breathed upon the
face of the earth; in thy self thou have as vile a wretched heart as any man,
which if thou were left to thy self would quickly show what it is, Phil. 2. 12.
13. work out your salvation with fear and trembling; for God works both the
will and the deed: As who should say, I do not deny but a child of God does
depend upon the good pleasure of God, and is built upon his eternal counsel; he
is not built upon his own pleasure, he does not stand upon the hap hazard of
his own will, but upon the good pleasure of Gods will; but says he, it is our
part to fear; for we for our part may fall, we can do nothing, no more then we
are helped; no more then God does stand by us, and keep us from falling; it is
our part to fear and tremble from day to day; as the Apostle says, Heb. 4. 1.
let us fear, lest having the promises of entering into his rest, any of us
should fall short: Let us fear; as who should say, we are in danger of coming
short, we are in danger to fall, and not to reach the Kingdom of Heaven; how
many temptations are there? what a vile flesh do we carry about with us?
therefore let us fear.

Thirdly, The children of God are commanded to take heed, lest they fall
totally away; where note they may for all that is in themselves, for any grace
that is received; therefore God calls upon them to cling to him, and ^o cleave
to him, that he may not be provoked to withhold himself from them; as we may
see, Heb. 12. 15. take heed lest any man fail of the grace of God, etc. Take
heed, look diligently to your selves, lest any man fail of the grace of God; if
you mean to go to heaven, I can tell you you must have care and diligence, and
look to your selves; take heed you be not proud and worldly; take heed you
suffer not security nor any other corruption to steal upon you, and hinder you
from going on in a godly course; take heed lest any of you fail of the grace of
God; what do these words import* but that a man in himself is in greiveous
danger, in regard of falling totally away? so 1 Cor. 10. 12. he that stands,
let him take heed lest he falls, though he stand never so firm for the present,
though he be never so stout and courageous; no man ever went so far in the
ways of God but he might turn back if he looked not to himself; no man was ever
so zealous, but he might be lukewarm if he looked not to it; no man was ever so
quickened, but he may be deaded, if he look not to it; therefore he that stands
let him take heed lest he fall.

Fourthly, Because the children of God are commanded still to grow in grace,
because there is no grace yet received, or that can be received in this world,
is enough to keep them from falling totally away; if a man think with himself,
this grace I have is enough, I need no more, if* he do stand at a stay, and
limit himself, and think this will suffice, he is mistaken; there is no grace,
if it were a thousand times greater then that which the best Saint in the world
has, that can secure a man from falling away; therefore when the Apostle would
persuade Christians to take heed that they did not fall away, 2 Pet. 3. 17. he
bids them grow in grace; would you not fall, but stand steadfast? would you not
be led away with the errors of the wicked? know assuredly that all the graces
you have received are not sufficient; but grow in grace, labor to be more
humble, and meek, and patient, and zealous; labor to make more conscience of
your ways, to have a more tender heart, to be more taken up with God, and more
careful to please him; to be more earnest and frequent in prayer, to mark his
word, and look to your steps every day; labor to stand firmer and stronger
yet; for all that you have attained to it is not so much, but it may be weakened
and born down; Therefore grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, Because the examples of Apostates and backsliders are propounded to
the very Saints, for them to take warning by; as the Apostle propounds the
example of the Jewish Apostates to the Romans; if God spared not the natural
branches, etc. Look upon them, see how they are fallen away, Romans 11. 21*
how that Church is Apostatized; therefore look thou to thy self, lest that
which befell them befall thee; lest thou sin against God, as they did, and so
that light upon thee, which did light upon them; so the Apostle does propound
t^^ example of Alexander and Hymeneus and Philetus even to Timothy; though
Timothy was elect of God, yet he knew Timothy was of a flexible nature, and
might change and fall, and fall totally in himself, if he did not look to it; O
says he, hold faith and a good conscience, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. He propounds
it even to Timothy, that the falls of Apostates might make him wary and careful
to stand upon his guard.

Seventhly, Be use the children of God are fain to pray that God would keep
them from falling away finally and totally; which is a sign that they may fall
away totally in themselves, notwithstanding whatsoever acquaintance they have
with God, or whatsoever virtue they have gotten from Christ's death, yet they
are to go to God to keep them from falling away; as Psalm. 119. 43. 44. take not
away the word of thy truth, etc. As who should say, Lord, for ever keep me, do
thou never forsake me utterly, though I may provoke thee to forsake me very
much, yet never take away the word of thy truth utterly out of my mouth, then I
shall never be able to hold out to the end; if thou will keep me and uphold me,
then I shall keep thy Law for ever; but otherwise I shall never do it: Nay,
Christ plainly tells us, that he is fain to put in, and pour out his prayers
before his heavenly father, that his dearest Saints and elect may not fall
away; as who should say, Father, they may fall totally away, if thou do not
preserve them; as he says to Peter, Luke 22. 32. I have prayed that thy faith
fail not; faith is the best grace that any child of God has, and love
proceeding from faith is a good grace; but they are all failing things, and may
be worn out by corruptions; therefore Christ prays his heavenly Father that
it may be fed and cherished, and kept by his heavenly Father, that it may never
fail; implying it would fail otherwise: Nay, the children of God are fain to
confess in their prayers it were just with God to let them fall totally away,
by reason of their sins, by reason of their unthankfulness and unfruitfulness
under the means, and want of knowledge of his son Jesus Christ; they confess it
were just with God to be weary of them, and give them for gone; nay, the
children of God, the best of them all do find that it is a very hard thing to
keep themselves from decays of grace, and declinings, and weaknings; they find
that they have much ado to hold their own, much more to grow in grace, and
increase more and more; to grow more and more heavenly, and more and more
virtuous, and more and more selfdenying; they see how many thousand corruptions
and temptations they have, and how backward their own hearts are, and how soon
they are surprised, that they have much ado to keep that which is begun in
them, much more to increase it, and grow in it: Nay, the children of God may so
far fall away, that in their own sense and feeling they may think that they
have not a jot of grace, so that they are sometimes ready to conclude against
themselves, that they have no grace, they were never wrought upon, never
subdued; many times it is thus, and though they do not conclude thus, yet how
often are they put to this desperate lift? to look every moment when they shall
fall, and fall totally and lose all, they shall not have a relic of grace in
them; it is thus with the Saints of God.

Lastly, Because there is no grace received is able to hold without continual
influences from Heaven; this is the nature of the grace of the second Covenant,
that it is by continual influence; it is not like the first Covenant; when God
gave Adam all his portion in his hand, not only for the present, but for ever;
if he would he might stand for ever, he need not pray to God to keep him, but
if he would obey God, he might stand of himself, by the Covenant that God had
made with him; but under the Covenant of grace, grace runs thus, that grace is
but for the present; if a man stand now, if he would stand the next hour, he
must have a new supply of grace; though he be never so patient now, he may be
impatient in a quarter of an hour; though he be never so humble now, he may be
as proud as Luciser in a quarter of an hour; I say, God under the Covenant of
grace gives a man only for the present, so that now he may know it is in Gods
hand; he is kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation; so that
grace is in a child of God, as light is in an house; light is never so in an
house, but in a moment it will be dark if you shut the windows; so it is with a
true Christian, he had need keep his windows open toward Christ, he has need
of continual shinings of grace from heaven; as Christ teaches us concerning
our daily bread, give us this day our daily bread; so it is much more in regard
of grace for our souls; good Lord give me wisdom and faith, and patience this
hour, and so the next hour, and the next day; give me the comfort of this day,
and the assistance of this day, give me the concurrence of thy grace this day,
and so the next; and we must never leave praying to God to accompany us with
his grace from day to day; for a man stands not by the grace that is in him,
but by the grace that is in God; as the Apostle says, Heb. 6. 10. be strong in
the Lord, by the power of his might; he does not say, be strong by the grace ye
have received, but be strong in the Lord; be sure you call upon him, and keep
close to him; there is all you stand by. So 2 Timothy 2. 1. be strong in the grace
in Christ Jesus; if any man in the Church might be strong by the grace in
himself, Timothy might* he was as virtuous a young man as any in the Church; no
man that Paul loved so as Timothy; I know no man like minded, says he; he was
so endued with Gods spirit, and the graces and virtues thereof, that there was
none like him; yet Paul does not bid him be strong in the grace that was in
him, but be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus; grace is in a child of
God, as heat is in the water; though it be never so seething hot, yet take it
from the fire, and it will f^ing out all the heat, and be as cold as ever it
was; so it is here, notwithstanding all the graces that are in a child of God,
if he do not hang over Jesus Christ, and keep close to him, the daily
incursions of sin will consume his graces; the temptations of the flesh* and
the Devil within, and the world without, will consume them all, unless a man be
a good husband, and receive new supply from Heaven; so that we say that no
grace received can keep a man from falling, but that he may fall totally away
in himself: Now to come to the true reasons why a child of God cannot fall
totally away, but something of the Image of God shall remain in him; though he
may lose much, yet he shall not lose all, but something shall be remaining in
him; the reason of this is nothing else but the mere goodness of God to him,
that God will not let him so fall, and God has covenanted so with him, that
man that truly believes in his name, he shall be kept for ever through faith
unto salvation; he shall not be quite broken off, but he shall have some grace,
he shall have something of God in him, something that shall distinguish him
from all wicked men in the world; as the Lord says of David, Psalm 89 33.
though they did sin against him, and carry themselves unworthy that God should
keep them; yet notwithstanding the Lord would whip them and chastize them, but
his loving kindness he would never take from them; why? because he had sworn by
his holiness that he would never fail David; so that here we see it was merely
through the goodness of God to David and his elect people, that they were kept
from falling away; so Psalm. 37. 24. says he, the righteous shall not be
utterly cast down; a child of God may fall, and fall souly and fearfully, he
may stain his own conscience in a lamentable manner, and wound his own soul,
and disable himself to good duties in a fearful manner; but yet though he fall,
he shall not be utterly cast down, there shall be some standing still, it shall
not be an utter fall; so he that does these things, shall never be removed,
Psalm. 15. 5. he speaks there of a man that shall dwell in Gods holy mount, and
be names who it is, one that has clean hands, and a pure heart, etc. so that
you see it is the promise of God, that this man shall stand for ever; he shall
never be totally unsettled; he does not mean he shall not be moved at all, but
not absolutely, so as to be quite and clean thrown down; but yet no thanks to
himself, but thanks to the promise; otherwise he might be moved, and unsettled,
and break his neck, and fall and never rise more; but the promise is, that he
shall never ^e moved, Psalm. 112. 6. the righteous shall never be moved, he
shall be had in everlasting remembrance; the Lord will remember a righteous man
in the midst of all temptations; let all the Devils in hell set upon him, the
Lord will for ever remember that man, and never let him go from him; so that
you see it is merely the goodness of God, not from any thing in himself, not
from any grace received, but merely from Gods goodness; he may thank the rock
he is built upon; as Christ says, Mat. 7 25. He that hears these sayings,
and does them, I will liken him to a man that built his house upon a rock, etc.
The house fell not, but he may thank the rock; it was built upon a rock; so a
child of God is built upon a rock* as we have a Proverb, how can he but swim
that is held up by the chin? so a child of God, the Lord holds him up by the
chin, he shall never sink so as to be drowned; he may fall, and fall fearfully,
but not totally; but there shall be something of God remaining in him for ever,
the Lord will ever keep some truth of grace in that man's soul that he has
given the truth of grace to* 2 John 2. For the truths sake (says he) which
dwells in us, and shall be in us for ever. When God has put in the truth of
saving grace into any of his peoples hearts, it shall dwell in them for ever,
the Lord will take an order for the keeping of it; therefore though a child of
God may be grievously overcome* yet God does ever let something or other remain
he does ever exempt something; God deals with his children in regard of their
souls, as he dealt with Job in regard of his body; though he let the Devil have
a great deal of power over him, yet he did limit him; he is in thy hand, but
save his life; though he would not let him have power over his life to kill
him, he let him have Jobs children in his hands, and he let him have his goods
in his hands, his cattle and his substance in his hands, nay he let him have
his health in his hands, so that he did strike him with boyles, and blains, and
woeful sickness, but yet save his life, you shall not take away his life; so
God deals with the life of his Saints; though he may let the Devil horribly
tempt them, and the World horribly carry them away, and the lusts of the flesh
horribly vanquish them; yet says God, he is my child, and the Devil, and the
Flesh, and the Temptations of the World shall never kill him; save his life,
let him never be dead in trespasses and sins as a wretch.

But you will say, What is it that does remain, and what shall for ever remain
in the children of God? You know David fell into adultery to lie with another
man's wife; he fell to that pass, that he labored to defend his sin, and
maintain it, that it might not come abroad; he added murder to it; what grace,
what fear of God, what love to his Majesty, what regard of Gods commandments,
what goodness or holiness at all was in David's heart now at this time? So
Solomon, when he gave way to Idolatry over all Israel, to the Idols of Moab,
and Ammon, and Edom, and the Philistines round about, that the true God was not
truly worshipped; what grace had he? was there any goodness or piety in Solomon
at that time? So when Peter denied his Master, and forswore him, and confirmed
it with an oath, and cursed himself if he knew the man; what grace was in
Peter's heart at that time? So when Asa threw the Prophet into prison when he
came to reprove him; what grace remained in him at that time? Thus the enemies
of this Doctrine argue against it; therefore they say a child of God may fall
totally. Was there any grace at all in David's heart when he was committing
adultery and murder? was there any grace at all in Lots heart when he was
committing drunkenness and incest one night after another?

I answer, There are four things which shall ever remain in Gods children, and
shall never be taken away quite and clean after they are once converted, and
brought home to God.

First, They have an Unction, an anointing from the holy one, and that is in
them, and shall abide in them for ever, 1 John 2. 27. The anointing which ye
have received of him dwells in you, etc. This same anointing, it abides in
the people of God for ever: By this same anointing, I mean the opening of their
eyes, whereby they look upon God and Christ, and his goodness, and holiness,
and righteousness, and the commandments of God, and sin, and hell, and the
world, and profits, and pleasures; they look upon the things of the world, and
upon the things of heaven, in another manner then any other people do; God
opens their eyes, that they look upon things in a different manner from other
men^; and this unction shall abide in them for ever: It Is true, sin may
h^rribly dazzle their eyes, by reason of the corruptions of the f^esh, and the
deceivablenesse of sin; they may be marvellously weakened in this unction, and
darkness and deadness of soul may blind their eyes, and dim their looks;
but it can never be quite taken away; they will have a better sight of God, and
Heaven, and Christ, and heavenly things, and of the Ordinances of God, and of
the world, and their callings, and the business of the world, they shall see
these things after a different manner from the world; as for example: A child
of God shall see more of the word then any other; others may see the word, and
yet continue in sin still; but a godly man shall see that in the word, that he
^ares not live in any sin for a thousand worlds. So for the Sacrament, he sees
more then a natural man; a natural man sees nothing in the Sacrament, but he
may come to it as he does come to it, he may live in his sins still, he sees
nothing in the Sacrament, he does not see that he eats and drinks his own
damnation if he come unworthily; but a child of God sees that in the
Sacrament, that he dares not come unpreparedly and unworthily by any means; he
sees that in the Sacrament that requires preparation and worthiness; so for
sin, he sees that in sin, that he dares not go on in it; he will rather die
at stake, rather then do as the world does; though through weakness and want
of cautelousnesse, sin may get great advantage against him, yet it shall never
bear him down, and the unction keeps him that he dares not lay the reins upon
his neck. This is one thing shall ever remain in a child of God; and this
appears by two things.

First by this, That if ever the Devil get a child of God to commit sin, he
cannot carry it away as others do, but it makes the heart bleed, and wounds
the conscience; he sees such things in yielding to sin, and giving way to the
Devil (I speak of known s^ns) the unction does so wound him, that he cannot
carry it as others do; if he tell a lie, he cannot bear it as the wicked can
do, they can be merry, and jovi^l and carry it away, it never troubles them;
but where this unction is* it lies heavy upon the soul; as the Prophet David
had this unction in the midst of all his falling into adultery; for you may
see, for all he lived ten months in the sin before he came to thorough
repentance; it is true, he did so, yet all this while he had this unction; for
so himself confesses, Psalm 51. M^ sin ^ever before me. Though he never
sought to God soundly and thoroughly for ten months together, yet still good
things were in him, his ^^ns were ever before him, it did haunt him as a ghost,
and wound his conscience; his unction did show him, what a beast am I, what a
wretch, what have I done?

Secondly, It appears too by this, That a child of God, though he has sinned
never so much, yet he cannot stand it out; but let him be soundly dealt with,
he is not able to hold out, but he must submit to the Lord; it is a sign this
unction is in him; for he sees Gods Word, his displeasure, his grace and
goodness; a child of God may be horribly peevish, and horribly transported in
this fashion, to the dishonor of God, and opening of the mouths of the
ungodly; but come and deal with him, show him his sins, he is not able to
maintain bucklers against it; he sees that in your reproof which will burst
all his bones, and make him stoop, and fling away his sins, and cast away his
disguisements; as it was with David when N^than came to him, O says he, I have
sinned; he resented presently; the unction made him see that in Nathans Sermon,
that he was not able to hold out any longer, but now his soul bleeds, and
melts within him; so when a child of God comes to the word, and hears his
sins reproved, he cannot carry himself as the wicked do; they can hear the
word, and keep their sins still; but a child of God has an unction, and when
the word does discover his sins to him, he cannot hold up his hand against God,
but he must fall down and bow before him.

Secondly, There shall ever remain in a child of God lusting against every
known sin; there will be ever in a child of God, both before and after the
committing of known sins, lusting against the flesh; the sanctified part will
lust against the unsanctified; he shall never sin with an whole will, and full
consent, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, etc. There is a spiritual will in a
child of God, that will ever lust against the carnal will, so that a man cannot
commit sin with his whole will, as a wicked man does; as Paul says, Romans 7.
25. He did not sin with all his soul, with all his heart; his mind was for
God, the spiritual part of his will was against his sin; I find another law in
my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, etc. He did not sin with all
his will; for he had another law in his heart, rebelling against the law of sin
and death; therefore the Apostle says, 1 John 5. 18. Whatsoever is borne of
God sins not; that is, he cannot sin with his free will, with his whole
consent. I will make this appear by five things, that a child of God can never
sin with his whole will.

First, Because he never sins, but it is against his standing purpose and
resolution, A child of God cannot sin with his whole will.
and determination in himself; a child of God has a purpose never to sin
against God, by using all manner of ways, by striving, praying, laboring,
endeavoring, coming to all Gods Ordinances, and taking all courses to resist
sin; he has this purpose; a wicked man now has no purpose not to sin, but he
has a secret purpose to sin; a Drunkard has a purpose when he meets with his
companions to go to the Alehouse and drink with them; and a covetous man has
a secret purpose to be worldly; so let a man be a vain and an evil companion,
he will not give over his company-keeping, they are his friends, and he will
converse with them; tell him he must converse with the Saints of God, he will
not, he has a secret purpose to the contrary; but if a child of God sin, it
is against his purpose, he has a standing purpose not to sin, Psalm 119. 27.
Psalm. 39. 1. Psalm. 101. 3. So, I will never forget thy precepts, I will
consider thy testimonies, and I will turn my feet unto thy ways. There are
abundance of places of Scripture that show that a child of God ever takes up
an absolute purpose concerning holiness and godliness of life and
conversation. Now if a child of God be born down at any time, it is against the
purpose of his heart, which is a sign that he does not sin with his whole
will; for if a man's will were absolutely set upon wicked courses, then he would
have a purpose and resolution to live in them; but a child of God has always
a purpose to do the contrary, and to walk in Gods ways.

Secondly, Because a child of God never sins, but it is against the study and
composure of his heart* it is against his course, against the frame he
composeth to himself, which is, that he may not sin against God, but that he
is borne down with sin, Psalm. 119. 112. I have inclined my heart to keep thy
statutes always, even to the end. He had a study and composure in his soul to
keep Gods statutes and to keep them always, even to the end; therefore
whenever David sinned, it was not with his whole will; for he sinned against
the study and composure of his heart.

Thirdly, A child of God never sins, but there is something or other that
breaks the fullness of the voluntariness of it; as for example; if a child of
God sins, sometimes it is out of ignorance, he does not know that he offends
God; if he did, he would not do it for a world. Now ignorance does lessen the
voluntarinesse of a thing; a man in ignorance may do a thing which he would
not have done if he had known it; therefore when a child of God sins in
ignorance, his will is not with it.

Again, If he sin against knowldge at any time, then it is through
inconsiderateness, it is in his haste; you know inconsiderateness does lessen
the will mightily; a man may in haste do a thing, which when he comes to think
of, he would rather have cut off his right arm then have done it; therefore
this is an argument that all his will was not in the committing of the sin,
because he did not consider of it, he did not do it deliberately. Psalm. 116.
11. In my haste I said all men are liars; in my haste I said I am cut off from
thy presence.

Again, If he he do it with more deliberation, yet there is something still
that does lessen the will; there be grievous and violent passions. Now violent
passions do exceedingly take away the will; a man in passion will do things
that his will is absolutely against; a man will stab his dearest friend in f^r^
and ^a^lion; as when David murdered Vriah, it was merely out of passion* the
p^^ion of shame, lest his sin should come out, to the dishonor of God, and the
shame of his Kingdom and Crown; he was overwhelmed with shame and fear of the
disgrace of his sins, and in fear he did do it. So Peter was in fear when he
denied his Master, in fear that he should be put to death, when at the same
time I dare say many qualms came over his heart* O that I were not here! O that
I were not put to this! So when Jon^^ ran away from God, it was in a passion.

Again, Suppose that passion be down, yet something or other there will be
still, that will lessen the will, as violent temptations and impulsions to sin;
when a man himself at the same time has a great act of his will to resist
these temptations and impulsions to sin; when a man at the same time has a
great act of his will to resist these temptations, but the temptations are
greater, and so he is born down; but here is not all the will; for he would not
do it; a wicked man may have reluctance, and resistance against sin in his
conscience, but a godly man his will is against it.

Fourthly, A child of God can never be brought so low as to make a trade of
sin; He that commits sin, is of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. that is, he that
commits sin by way of trade; now this cannot be in a child of God; he is of
the Devil that makes a trade of sin; a child of God his course is to the
contrary, it is his trade to cleanse himself, and purify his heart by faith
from day to day; if he be impatient, he cannot make a practice of it; a child
of God cannot sin, for he is sanctified. Psalm. 119. 1. 2. they do no wicked
thing, etc. This is by way of trade and occupation; a child of God does never
sin in that fashion; therefore it is certain his full will is not to sin, for
if his whole will were after sin, he would go on in it, and live in it, and
make a practice of it; but he dares not, nor will not make a practice of it.

Fifthly, A child of God does never so sin but he has an aptness in him to
rise again; a child of God has a greater aptness to rise again and repent, and
love God again; he has a gracious heavenly aptness above all other men in the
world; let him sin never so much, let his fall be never so great, there will be
this aptness left, and it shall remain in him continually; and this is an
evident sign he never sinned with his whole will; for if he did sin with his
whole will, he would be as unapt to repent as if he had never been converted;
as Solomon says, Prove. 9. 8. As who should say, a wise man is apt to take a
rebuke, he is apt to take it in good part; he will take it humbly and
obediently, if he be a wise man; and this is a sign his will is not absolutely
set upon folly; but if you tell him you have played the fool, and dealt
unadvisedly, why would you be overtaken with such a corruption? you have
provoked God, etc. he will love you for it, he has an aptness so to do, and
this aptness shall ever remain; and this is another good thing remaining in the
children of God, that is, a lusting against sin.

Thirdly, Another thing is for ever to have a tender disposition to look after
God, and to have an eye to God; this shall never be taken away quit^ and clean;
as you may see in Jonah, though he had run away from God in that lamentable
manner, yet says he, I will look toward thy Temple; his thoughts were there,
his mind was to have Gods love, his goodness, and countenance to shine upon
him; he must have an eye to that above all things in the world; but you will
say, affliction made him do that, he was now in the Whales belly; but you may
see, he looked upon God before he was in the Whales belly; for when the
Mariners asked him what he was, says he, I am an Hebrew that fears God; and as
a proof of this fear, you may see how he submitted to God; I have run away from
God, says he; he confessed his sin, and took shame to himself, and submitted
himself to be flung into the Sea, that God might have glory by his drowning if
he would.

So that all was not drowned in him; now that this disposition remains appears
by five things.

First, Though a child of God should grow to never so sluggish a pace in
Religion, that all his vigor in prayer is gone, he has not the affection and
heart in good duties that once he had, he is lumpish and untoward; yet in the
midst of all these distempers, he cannot lie down to this, but he has
abundance of heaves to God to quicken him again; as David says, Psalm 119. 25.
My soul cleaves unto the dust, O quicken thou me according to thy word. His
wings were off, and his chariot-wheels were knocked aside, he could not go on
in good duties with any pace, he was lumpish and untoward, his soul cleaved to
the dust; and yet you see what heaves he gives, he would be quickened, he would
not be at this pass; Oh that God would quicken him? this was his disease, and
the burden of his soul, O quicken me! O the lamentable throws and secret
yernings that are in a poor soul that is dead and dull! he cannot pray, nor
find the Word work upon his soul, he can receive no fruit and benefit by the
Word of God; O the moanes, and yernings, and lookings up to God, that God would
quicken him! though he has no heart almost, but is marvellously borne down,
yet he is not able to lie down under this, it is a disease to him; O quicken me!

Again, Let him be never so much hardened, as a child of God may be fearfully
hardened; yet in the midst of all he has a feeling of this hardening, whereupon
he makes out after God, and will never give him over, till he has freed him
from it, Isa. 63. 17.

Again, Though a child of God be never so secure, as he may be secure and grow
careless of God, yet in the midst of all, he can never be quite overcome by
security, so as quite and clean to forget God; no, he must listen after God,
and will hearken after God, and hear the voice of God in some measure, when the
word reproves him, and finds fault with his courses, he does hearken to it, he
is not quite asleep; as the Church says, I sleep, but my heart waketh, Cant.
5. 2. She did take notice of God in the midst of all her security; it is the
voice of my Beloved, says she.

Fourthly, A child of God can never so far go down the wind, but he shall for
ever love the Image of God, and love mercy, and love holiness and goodness,
and love the Ordinances of God, and the Image of God, wheresoever he sees it;
nay, he does love the children of God, and this is a sign unto him that he is
passed from death to life, when he hardly has any other sign; it is true, when
sin a^^ corruption has exceedingly defiled Gods child, it may make him shy of
Gods children, and make him wind out of their company; but yet grace makes him
love them, they are the amiab lest persons in the world in that man's eye, he
blesses the very ground they go upon, he has this ever left in him; and by
this a child of God may know that he is passed from death to life, because he
loves the Brethren, 1 John 3. 14.

Fifthly, A child of God shall never be brought so low, but in the midst of
all he shall chide, and check, and find fault with his own soul, not as
wicked men do, by reason of the terrors of conscience, but in a gracious
manner; why have I done thus? is this the thanks for the redemption of the
world by Jesus Christ? is this the thanks for the Gospel? are these the fruits
I bring forth under Gods Ordinances? why am I thus dull to good duties? why am
I thus dastardly and cowardly for God? there will be these gracious chidings;
though sin and corruption makes him full of legal terrors, yet there be some
gracious checkings and expostulations, as David says, Why art thou so heavy O
my soul? O be quickened, O be awakened, hear better, and pray better! He does
check and condemn himself in a gracious manner, and he can never like of these
courses; this will be for ever.

Lastly, Another thing that shall be in Gods children for ever, is the habits
of grace; they shall ever have these; though the acts of grace may be asleep,
and cease working, yet the habits of grace shall ever remain; as a man, though
through violent sickness he may run mad and frantic, and lose the act of
reason, and be like a mad man; yet the habit of reason is in him still, because
he has a reasonable soul; and let the distemper be gone, and he will put
forth the acts of reason: So a child of God, though for the present he be
horribly distempered, and all the acts of grace are asleep; yet he has the
spirit of God in him, and therefore has the habits of grace; although no grace
were shining in David's heart in the act of them, when he fell in to the sins of
murder and adultery; yet he had all graces in the habit of them, in the root of
them; as a tree, though it seem to be quite dead, yet life is in the root; so a
child of God will have the habit and life of grace ever remaining in him; and
this appears by two things.

First, A child of God in the midst of all his carelessness and negligence,
there is a miraculous preserving of that man, that though that man has been
very ^areless, and wonderful unwatchful, and exposing himself to the
temptations of Satan; yet he shall be strangely kept, that he shall not fall,
in a wonderful manner, though it be no thank to himself, 1 Samuel 2. 9. This is
an evident sign of Gods spirit in him, that though he let him get abundance of
knocks, yet he will not let him get that fatal knock, but he carries him along
from day to day.

Secondly, It appears by this, that this man shall never be to be converted
again, but he shall for ever be a new creature; though the spirit of God hide
himself, and withhold his former operations, yet he will not go quite away,
because a child of God shall never need to be converted again: It Is true, the
rising up of a child of God out of sin, into which he is fallen, is called
conversion sometimes; as our Savior Christ says to Peter, When thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren. Nay a child of God may think he has need
of new conversion, and that he must begin all anew again; as David said, Create
in me O Lord a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51. 10.
as though he were to begin anew again: But a child of God is never to begin
anew; no, regeneration is an incorruptible thing, 1 Pet. 2. 23. Psalm 112. 5.
His righteousness remains for ever, he shall never have quite lost it, so as
that he shall be to seek again, as if he had never had it; for if regeneration
were to be renewed, a man should be reprobated again; but there is but one
Faith, one Baptism, one Lord, Ephesians. 4. Therefore if there be but one Baptism,
there is but one Regeneration; The faith is but once delivered to the Saints,
Jude 3. God delivers his virtues and graces but once to the soul, and is never
to deliver them again; indeed they may be smothered and choked sometimes, and
lie under the ashes, as coals under the embers, but they shall never be quite
extinguished; there needs nothing but a stirring up and provoking of the gift
of God that is in them; and this is a sign that they never fell totally away;
for if they fell totally away, they must have new repentance, as if they had
never had it, and they must be converted again, and regenerated again with a
second regeneration, which was never heard of.

The first Use may serve for the confutation of those that hold that a child
of God may fall totally away; here you see he cannot; though he may fall never
so grievously into foul sins and grievous distempers, yet he shall never fall
totally, but some good things shall remain in him, Psalm. 37. 28. The Lord
preserves his Saints. And Jude 1. they are called a people sanctified by God
the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ. And as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 2.
10. He that does these things shall never fall. A child of God shall never
fall totally; it is everlasting life that he has; that faith which he has is
an eternal grace; he that believes has everlasting life; so the fear of God
is an everlasting grace; The fear of God endures for ever, Psalm. 19. 9. And
therefore those that totally fall away, show plainly that they were never the
children of God; as the Apostle faith, If after they have been enlightened, etc.
they fall away, it is impossible they should be renewed by repentance, Heb. 6.
Because they were never right, there was never any true grace in that man's
heart; but says he, I hope better things of you, and things that accompany
salvation, Heb. 6. 19. As who should say, they that have things accompanying
salvation, can never fall totally away.

The second Use is for comfort to Gods children. Have thou true faith, or any
good things wrought in thy soul? thou shall never lose it; though thou may
suffer a great deal of sickness, and fall into many decays of grace and
goodness, yet thou shall never lose all; there shall be some good things
remaining in thee; the Lord will not suffer thy righteousness to fall for
ever, he will have thee in everlasting remembrance; therefore what a comfort
ought this to be to every true believing soul?

Again, This is a great comfort against all fears. Art thou afraid thou have no
grace? I beseech thee believe the Word of God rather then thine own sense and
feeling; thou have heard the Word of God say a child of God can never be
without grace, he can never fall totally away; therefore though sense and
feeling tell thee thou have none, yet believe the Word that says thou have, 2
Cor. 5. 10. We walk by faith, and not by feeling, says the Apostle. The best
of Gods children sometimes are put to this, to live by faith, and not by sense
at all; though God help thee not in prayer, nor quicken thee in good duties,
and though thy sense and feeling tell thee thou have no grace, believe it not,
but believe the Word of God that tells thee a child of God shall never be
without grace to the worlds end, but something shall remain in him for
evermore; therefore be of good comfort, though thou see nothing, and thy
neighbors see nothing, yet believe neither thy self nor thy neighbors, but
rather believe the Word of God then a thousand witnesses; for it is certain, a
child of God shall never fall totally away.

Again, It may be a comfort against all manner of temptations; God knows how
thou may be tempted and assaulted; the Devil may be let loose upon thee; but
still remember and think with thy self, I was told, a child of God can never
fall totally away one whose heart God has once inclined, one whose soul God
has once sanctified, one whom God has once turned, and brought home to him in
some measure, I have been told he shall never fall away; therefore hold this
principle even to death, against all the Devils in Hell; God is my God, and I
have grace, and shall have grace, and shall never be totally off the hooks as
long as I live; as David, though he said God had forsaken him in regard of
sense and feeling, yet he holds this principle still, My God, my God, Psalm. 22.
1.

Again, This is a great comfort against all persecutions; we know not what
persecutions and what troubles we may come to, and what may become of us before
we go hence: Now it is a great comfort to hear this, that come prosperity,
come adver^ity, come what can come, come temptations on the right hand, and on
the left hand, come fire and faggot, come prison, come banishment, I tell you a
child of God shall never be a bankrupt, he shall never be void of all the
spirit of God, and all the graces of God, he shall have something in him still
remaining. It Is true, a child of God may be brought to that pass, that
persecutions may be heavy to him, and may be a grievous cut, and he may be
ready to put off this, and ready to consult with flesh and blood to put it off;
and unless a child of God provide for persecution, it shall be harder for him
to bear it; but yet if thou be a child of God, the Lord will never leave thee
nor forsake thee, as the Apostle says, Heb. 13. 5. though the cross and
affliction be never so bitter and irksome to thee, yet thou shall have
something or other that shall make thee able to bear it, and to go on in it;
though thou do but hang by the fingers ends, yet something shall bear thee
up, so that thou shall not fall.

Lastly, Labor to make it sure to our souls that we are godly; for we see what
an happy estate it is to be godly; once godly, and ever godly; once a believer,
and ever a believer; a man that is a godly man shall never fall totally away;
therefore labor to make it sure that thou art a child of God, and have the
grace of life in thy heart; and then be of good cheer, and take that comfort
the Prophet takes to himself; the Lord is my hope, I shall never be greatly
moved, Psalm. 62. 2. As who should say, I do not indeed deny but I may be moved;
but though I be moved, I shall never be greatly moved; I shall never be so
moved as to break my neck, and be utterly undone; to be quite and clean
forsaken, and given over for gone, so as to be removed from all hope of the
Gospel, and fear of Gods name; a man may be horribly assaulted, yet a child of
God shall never be at such a pass as that the Lord shall leave him utterly.

We come now to the second Motive, and that is that these remainders were ready
to dye; we may take these words to concern the whole Church, or every
particular soul that was guilty of it; but we will speak of them only as they
have reference to the Church:

From whence we observe that a particular Church may be ready to dye; A
particular Church may perish.
this must not be understood of the Catholic Church, or any part of it; as if
the Catholic Church or any members thereof could dye; for there is no true
believer, that believes in Christ by a true and a lively faith, can possibly
perish or be destroyed for evermore, John 3. 16. this Church is a Church that
Christ has undertaken for, to defend unto the end, Mat. 16. 18. lo, I am with
you to the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20. So that this Catholic Church of
Christ, in all the members of it, it is a safe Church; and though all
particular Churches should fail, yet shall not one member of this Catholic
Church; the Church is the first born, whose names are written in Heaven, Heb.
12. 2^, 23. and if this Church cannot be in one Town, it will be in another; if
it cannot be in one Kingdom, it will be among another people; the woman in the
Revelation, has the Wilderness to fly unto; in the most desperate times; God
prepares a place for her in one corner or other; it is impossible that the
Catholic Church should dye in any members or branches of it; God will have
some to know his name; and if it cannot have particular meetings and
congregations, God will have it subsist in some particulars; but a particular
Church, a local Church, as it is taken for a company of people in such a place;
any such Church may fail and dye and come to nothing; you see it here in the
Church of Sardis; at this time it had only a name to live, but was dead; and
what did remain, they were but the last throws as it were; they did go out at
last, they were ready to dye.

Now that any particular Church in the whole world may dye, and cease to be a
Church, may be proved out of many places of Scripture: Christ speaking of the
Jews (that had as great privileges as any people upon the earth) he tells
them, that they might not only cease to be a Church, but should cease to be a
Church; as you may see, Mat. 21. 43. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, etc. here he tells them, that he will quite and clean depart from them,
and take away all signs and marks of a true Church of God from among them; so
the Apostle speaks of the Church of Corinth, he tells them they may come to be
no Church, and that he does greatly fear that such an evil shall come upon
them, 2 Cor. 11. 3. he does not speak to the particular persons that were truly
converted, for they were members of the Catholic Church, but he speaks to the
particular Church of Corinth; they did warp and decline; though many particular
members should be preserved, yet he supposes that particular Church might
fail; so he tells the Galatians, that he did much fear them; you observe days
and years, I am afraid lest I have bestowed my labor in vain; so likewise he
gives the Church of Rome to understand, though it were an excellent Church at
that time; for he says, their faith was spoken of abroad, and they were
beloved of God; yet he tells them they have need to take heed, that they do not
lose their Crown; that they do not suffer Satan, or the world, or any other
means to draw them away from their profession; as goodly a Church as themselves
had come to warpe and decline and come to nothing, Romans 11. 20, 21, 22. As who
should say, Thou have no privilege of immortality, of being an immortal
Church, that thou should ever be a Church, that Gods Gospel and Ordinances,
and his name should ever be within thy dwellings; you have no such prerogative;
take heed therefore you walk worthy the Gospel, take heed you grow not
high-minded and secure; it may be your case as well as any other; so the Church
of Israel, the Ten Tribes, they were a Church, but in the end they came to be
no Church, they provoked God to give them over, Hos. 1. 9. it is a parabolical
kind of speech, that the Prophet should marry an whore, and have a son, and
call his name, etc. and that was one degree of removing; and the second should
be called, etc. which was the utter renouncing of his people.

Now there are four several marks and notes infallible of a true Church; 4.
Notes of a true Church.
and there is no particular Church but had them once, and may lose them every
one.

The first is, the sincere preaching of the Gospel is an infallible and
inseparable mark of a true Church of God; wheresoever there is the true 1.
Sincere preaching the Gospel.
Church in any Parish or Kingdom, there must be a sincere Preaching of the Word
of God; therefore a Church is described by the Preaching of the Word and
Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. that is, they were a Church of God, the Oracles of
God were among them, and were to be heard; opened and declared among them; so
Psalm. 147. 19. He shows his word unto Jacob, and his statutes unto Israel;
that is, he makes it a Church, he explains his word, and makes it known there;
so Acts 14. 23. it is said that Paul and Barnabas went up and down and ordained
Elders in every Church; if there were a Church, there must be Elders in it;
there must be Elders, Pastors and Ministers, that may not only preach the Word,
but open it aright; for the Scripture may be in an Antichristian Church, but if
they in their preaching make the Scriptures doctrines of Devils, and expound
them in that fashion, they are no Church; but the Elders must speak the word of
God as the word of God, at least in the fundamentals; now there is no Parish or
Kingdom can be said to be a Church of God, that have not true Ministers able to
preach the word of God soundly, to teach the Doctrine of faith and repentance,
so as people may believe and turn from their sins to God* and this is a grand
mark of all other; where the voice of Christ sounds, it is a sign he has a
Church there; now I say this sincere preaching of the word of God, it is not
tied to any place; there is no place but may be deprived of it, if they do not
walk worthy of it; it is free, and has all the whole wide world before it; the
Lord has not limited his Gospel to any Town or Kingdom; he may send it where
he please, and continue it as long as he list, and may remove it when he thinks
fit; therefore when the Corinths were something saucy and impudent, and bore
themselves upon this, that they had the word and Gospel of Christ, 1 Cor. 14.
36. says the Apostle, What? came the word of God out from you? etc. As who
should say, be humble, down with your pride, receive instruction; as the word
of God is come to you, so you are not the only men in the world that the word
can come to; the word may be taken from you if you take not heed; therefore
receive instruction by the word, and give way to it; for the word of God may go
any whether else, and you may be deprived of it if you take not heed. Rev. 6.
2. Christ had his word on horseback; now if any Kingdom or Parish, or
Congregation do not give him good entertainment, he is ready to go away; and
the sincere preaching of the word is the spiritual rain; now if any people grow
unfruitful, and bring not forth the blessed fruit of the doctrine of life, God
threatens to take away this rain; as it was with the Church of Judah, Isa. 5.
6. he speaks here of his vineyard, the Church he had in Judah and Jerusalem,
and he finds fault with their barrenness and unfruitfulness; when he looked
they should bring forth grapes, they brought forth wild grapes; nothing but
covetousness and security, and all manner of uncleanness, and they did not
bring forth fruit answerable to the means of grace vouchsafed; therefore the
Lord threatens to command the clouds that they shall rain no more upon his
vineyard; thus you see the sincere preaching of the Gospel, any particular
Church may lose and be deprived of; there is no place or Congregation that has
a lease of the Gospel, but it may lose it again, and be left in blindness, and
sit in the region and shadow of death; now when a Parish or Kingdom is come to
this, to be deprived of the sincere preaching of the word, it cease wholly to
be a Church of God. I do not deny but God may have some members of his
Catholic Church there, for they may subsist without Congregations, though
very poorly, and under a great deal of affliction; but there is no National
Church, no particular Church, no Parish Church; that Parish is not a Church of
God; there may be some particular members of the Catholic Church there, but
there cannot be any particular Church of God there: that Congregation is a
Congregation without God; and that Kingdom is a Kingdom without God; as you may
see, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. when as a Kingdom is without a preaching Priest, etc. He
does not here mean by a preaching Priest, one that barely did preach; but he
means by a preaching Priest, true sincere preaching, at least in fundamentals;
now when Israel were without this teaching Priest, they were without God at
that time, and therefore was no true Church; for Christ is ever among the
candlesticks, as you may see in the Revelation; there is no Church but Christ
dwells there in his Ordinances more or less; now when people are deprived of
the sincere preaching of the word, God goes away together with his Gospel from
that Nation; and they are a people without God, unless God be pleased to look
upon them again; they are a Congregation of undone people, and not a
Congregation of blessed people as the Church of God is, so far forth as the
judgment of man can judge; where the Gospel is gone in the sincere preaching
of it, they are an undone people Prove. 29. 18. Where there is no vision, the
people perish: Now there is no Nation or Parish, but may be deprived of the
preaching of the word, if they walk not worthy of it; therefore may cease to be
a Church.

Secondly, Another inseparable mark of the true Church is this, a true 2. True
and sincere use of the Sacraments.
and sincere use of the Sacraments, at least in the substance of them; you
shall find a particular Church is described by this, to have the right
administration of the Sacraments; as the Church of Judah is called
circumcision, Romans 3. 1. the meaning is, what profit has the Church of Judah
above other people? and he calls them by that name, because that was a
Sacrament of the Covenant of grace which God established among them; and so it
is under the Gospel; the Churches under the Gospel are defined by the
Sacraments; as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 3. 3. we are the circumcision, which
worship God in the spirit; As who should say, they brag that they are the
people of God, and have the seals of the covenant, as circumcision, and the
like; but we are the people of God, for we worship God in the spirit: Now any
Church may lose the right use of the Sacraments; the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper was almost left out of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11. 20. says he,
this is not to eat the Lords Supper: They met together, and had a Table spread,
and bread and wine, and had a form of consecration; yet they were come to this
pass, that they did not receive the Sacrament. So the Church of Rome has lost
this inseparable mark of a Church of God, they have lost the Sacrament; for the
ordination of God is quite changed in the main essentials of it, and they are
made the badges of an Harlot, rather then of a true Wife; They withhold the cup
from the people, and administer the Sacrament in one kind only, whereas Christ
commanded it to be in both kinds; again, they deliver it in an unknown tongue,
whereas Christ commanded it to be delivered in a known tongue; again, they turn
it into Idolatry, to adore the host, to adore the elements; so how many
Churches are there up and down, that yield to the Church of Rome* that have
quite and clean lost the right use of the Sacrament, nay, lost the Doctrine of
the Sacraments? for this is seen, as long as the word of God continues so^^d in
the fundamentals, the Sacraments continue in the doctrine of them; but the
Church may lose the Doctrine of the Sacraments, and the right use of them.

Thirdly, Another inseparable mark of a true Church, is a sincere profession 3.
Sincere profession of the word of God, etc.
of the word of God, and true Christian Religion, either in truth and
uprightness of heart, or else so far as man can judge; for though the preaching
of the Word come to a place, yet it does not follow presently that there is a
Church of God; for suppose a Minister come to a place where they are all
Pagans, this does not make a Church; as when Paul came among the Athenians and
begun his Sermon, they were all Pagans and Infidels, they were not a Church
presently, as soon as ever he begun his Sermon, but when diverse of them
embraced the word, either sincerely, or else to see to, as far as Paul and
others could judge, then they were a Church; there must be a congregation of
people that do profess the pure Religion, and make it appear (at least to the
judgment of man) that they are godly in Christ Jesus; this is an inseparable
mark of a true Church, as we may see 1 Cor. 14. 33. you shall see there that
the Church is called a cong^egation of Saints, a Church of Saints; for says
he, as in all Churches of the Saints; that is, all particular Churches, they
are Churches of Saints; not as if every one of them were Saints before God, but
they were either Saints before God or men; so Gal. 1. 22. I was unknown to the
Churches of Judea, which were in Christ; mark it, all particular Churches, are
Churches that are in Christ; the members of those Churches are in Christ,
either truly, or before men; now I say, this mark may perish from any
particular Church; there is no Church that is a Church of Saints, but may
become a Church of Devils, and ^ Synagogue of Satan, all wicked, and dissolute,
and ungodly. Jer. 29. 2. Jeremiah was weary of his life, he would count it a
great blessing of God, if he would open a place to him to be apart, that he
might not be among them, he was even tired, and his life was uncomfortable;
they were so wicked and abominable, and so far off from being a Church of God,
he did ^ather with himself in a wilderness then there; so it may be with any
particular Church, if they look not to the word of God, and the Ordinances of
God, and good order and Government, they may come to lose this essential and
inseparable mark of a true Church of God.

Fourthly, Another mark (though I cannot call it inseparable, because 4. True
Discipline.
it may be severed) is true discipline, and the right use of the censures of
the Church; when there is true discipline according to the Institution of
Christ in his Church, this is a mark of the Church of God. Now a Church of God
may lose this, and be stripped stark naked of true discipline, to have no
public reproof, no excommunication of those that are profane; nay, these
censures may be perverted and corrupted, so as to use them against Christ, and
not for Christ; to excommunicate, not drunkards, and adulterets, and profane
people, but those that are sincere and godly, and lead an honest and pure life;
it was so with Judaea, John 9. 22. These words spoke his parents, etc. Here you
see discipline was out of this Church, and so far out that it was quite
perverted; and such as should be counted the only members of the Congregation,
they threw them out; if any confessed Christ to be the Redeemer of the world,
which was a necessary truth, they threw them out of the Church; so that we see
the censures may be quite gone. Now it is true, this is not an inseparable mark
of the Church of God, it is not a sign of the esse of the Church, but it is a
sign of the been esse, the well being of a Church: A Church of God, it is true,
may be without discipline; as the Church of P^rgamus, the Spirit says, it was
a true Church, and commends this Church; yet (says he) I have a few things
against thee; what were those? namely, that they wanted discipline, that they
did not throw out wicked and rotten members, and such as were erroneous in
doctrine and manners; this Church was guilty of suffering this; if they had
thrown them out, God would never have charged them with it; the Church cannot
hinder but there will be wicked and ungodly men, but as long as they throw them
out of the congregation, not to have communion with them, the Church has
washed her hands; but it seems this Church had not washed her hands of this. So
the Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2. 18. the Spirit of God calls it a true Church,
yet verse. 20. he tells them plainly, it was a grievous offense to God that they
had not discipline in the Church; Notwithstanding I have a few things against
thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel, etc. Thou have suffered this,
and let her alone, and do even countenance her, and art guilty of all her
errors; for thou did not throw her out, and discard her from being an
outward member of the Church; so that we see the Church may be without
discipline in the being of it; yet I make this a mark of the Church of God,
because though a Church may be without this, yet it is mightily defaced, and
wants its beauty: And again, it is a Church that cannot continue; for when they
do not reprove and rebuke offenders, and deal severely with them directly,
they will infect the whole body, and it must needs weaken and decline, till at
last it comes to nothing; therefore I make this a sign of a true Church. Thus
we see there be four notes of a true Church, which it may have, and afterward
come to be no Church.

Now in the next place I will show you there be several notes of a false Marks
of a false Church.
Church; and the Church that once had those true notes, may have none but false
notes.

As first Antiquity. You shall have some Churches, as the Church of Rome, they
1. Antiquity.
brag of Antiquity, they have Antiquity for their prayers for the dead, and
Purgatory, and the like, and they show 5, 6, or 700. years for these things;
and none but a company of upstart fellows, as Luther, and Calvin, and Perkins,
did ever condemn these things. This is a false mark; and a Church that has
this mark, may be a Synagogue of Satan, and not a Church of God: For, as a
Divine says, no Church can be sound because of Antiquity, unless it has been
from the beginning; as Christ, when the Jews pleaded Antiquity, he says, It
was not so from the beginning. All Antiquity is nothing, unless it be from the
first beginning, when Gods Institution and first ordering was; a lie will be a
lie, notwithstanding its Antiquity; and so an whore, the elder she is, the
impudenter she is; and Errors and Heresies in process of time grow to be more
infectious, they take deeper root. Now if they were once new, what if there
were a thousand years upon such a Doctrine, and such a manner of
Administration of the Sacrament, what is this to the purpose, if there were a
time when this was a novelty and a new device? as the Apostle says, 2 These. 2.
7. The Mystery of iniquity works. Therefore no marvel it is grown ancient, no
wonder it is come to be gray headed; this is nothing, we are not to pick our
Religion by years, but by Scripture; let a thing be never so old, if we cannot
prove it by Scripture, this is nothing; if the Church have no other mark to
plead that they are the Church of God, but Antiquity, that is a poor plea; as
Paul thought before his conversion, I am of the Church; He was exceeding
zealous for the traditions of his Fathers, Gal. 1. 14. This is a poor thing;
Religion may be a vain Religion for all this. 1 Pet. 1. 18. If any people come
to be redeemed by Christ, Christ comes to redeem them from such Religion as
this; the drunkard may show Antiquity for his drunkenness, and the adulterer
may show Antiquity for his uncleanness, etc. But he is a true Christian that
can show the Scripture for his title; and that is a true Church that maintains
for matters of Faith, and walks for matters of manners, according to the
Scriptures. Now if a Church has no better mark then Antiquity, it is a false
Church.

Another mark of a false Church is universality; when they have no other 2.
Universality
mark to show, but that the most are of their side, they can show the greatest
bulk; if you go and count, there is most of their number a great deal; this is
a sure mark of a false Church; yet the Church of Rome makes use of this mark;
for they consute our marks of a true Church, and will have multitudes to be
their mark; and by this we may see they are Antichrist, Rev. 13. 12. so Rev.
13. 8. All that dwell upon the earth, whose names were not written in the book
of the Lamb, worshipped the beast; the reprobate are the greatest part of the
world; now here he says, all that dwell upon the earth almost shall worship
the Beast; if this were the mark of a true Church, Christ had miscounted
himself when he counted his flock a little flock. Luke 12. 32. Fear not little
flock, etc. And again, he says, Strive to enter in at the straight gate, etc.
He describes a true Church by the fewness, and not by the universality of it;
therefore what a madness is this to make universality a note of a true Church?

Thirdly, Another is succession of Pastors from the Apostles times to this 3.
Succession of Pastors.
very day; this they make a mark of a true Church; O say they we can show
succession down from Peter here at Rome, even to this day: The Protestants are
not able to show this; this is a poor mark; Cai^phas that condemned Christ,
could show succession from Aaron; so a Church may be a Church that renounceth
Christ, and is an Antichristian Church, and yet may show succession; and other
Churches, as Alexandria and others can show succession as well as Rome; so that
succession of Pastors is nothing, unless they can show succession of Doctrine.

Fourthly, Unity, They make that to be a mark of the true Church; and 4. Unity.
this is a false mark too; others say they, have not unity among them, but we
have unity; thus you may as well prove the Devils in Hell to be a Church, for
there is unity; as our Savior says, If Satan be divided against Satan, how
can his Kingdom stand? so Acts 4. 27. you may see what an unity was there, they
were all of one knot and one mind; there was a mavelous great unity among
them all to condemn Christ; the Church must be proved to be a true Church,
before unity can be brought to be any sign of it; for the more unity is in a
wicked way, the more hellish is the conspiracy.

Fifthly, Miracles is a note of a false Church; now the Papists say, We 5.
Miracles.
can show miracles for our Religion; where can you show miracles? Christ says,
we may know Antichrist and his adherents by this, Mat. 24. 24. there shall
arise false Christ's, etc. False Christ's and such as make as though they were
Christians, and the people of God, and come to you in the name of the Lord, and
they may show you signs and wonders to make you believe them; but they are the
Devils signs, and they shall be very strong to delude the world; so 2 These. 2.
9. the Apostle shows us that the coming of Antichrist shall be after this
manner; therefore no marvel that they plead signs and wonders, and apparitions
of the dead, from their doctrine of the Mass and Purgatory, and prayers for the
dead, etc. this is an argument that their Church is Antichristian; that which
is a true Church according to the Scripture, needs no new miracles; therefore
Calvin and Luther that propounded nothing but the truth of the Scripture, they
need bring no miracles to confirm it if indeed they had brought any new
doctrines of their own heads, they had need to have brought miracles to confirm
them; but when they brought nothing but what they could prove out of the
Scripture, Scripture-miracles were enough to prove this.

Sixthly* Another mark is pomp and stateliness; a Church may come to 6. Pomp
and stateliness.
have no other mark but this, that it is a goodly and stately Church, a pompous
kind of serving God; things are set ou^ pompously, this is rather an argument
of an Antichristian Church; for the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, and
that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abonimable in the sight of God.

Lastly, They make outward prosperity and happiness to be a mark of 7. Outward
happiness and prosperity.
the true Church of God; but this is rather a mark of a Synagogue of Satan, For
all that live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. And
if any man will be my Disciple (says Christ) let him take up his cross and
follow me. I say the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world; therefore
prosperity and felicity is not a sign of a Church of God; thus we see that a
Church that was once a true Church of God, may come to be no true Church; they
may lose all the true notes of a Church of God, and have no, other notes, but
such as prove it to be no true Church, but rather a Church of Infidels and
unbelievers.

The first reason is, because the Church of God is Catholic, that is, Reas.
1. Because the Church is Catholic.
it is not tied and pent up in any place, God may carry it where he will, he
may set up his Church in what Country, and Town, and Family he will, and choose
what particular person in the whole world he will; God is not tied to any;
therefore when the Jews bore themselves upon this, that they were the Church,
and Gods Ordinances and Oracles were approp^iated to them, they came at the
first hour of the day, at the first hand; but if the Gentiles were a Church, it
was but at the second hand, they came but at the eleventh hour; he takes up a
parable, Mat. 20. and says, they that are last, shall be first, etc. and he
gives a reason, shall I not do what I will with mine own? so God may do with
his Ordinances, and gifts and graces of his spirit; he may bestow them where he
will, he may give his Gospel to a Kingdom, and take it away at his pleasure;
and he may stay as long as he will, and be gone when he will.

Secondly, God does not need any place, any people; though a place be 2. God
needs no place or persons.
never so glorious and stately, and though it be never so admirable a Church,
God does not need that Nation, but if it grow male^ert, and stiff and stubborn
against him, the Lord will make them know he has no need of them, and cares
not for them; as the Jews, when they bore themselves upon this that they were
the people of God, and had Abraham for their father, and were barren and
fruitless and dissolute in their lives, you may see how John Baptist answers
their foolish conceit, think not with your selves, we have Abraham to our
father, etc. Mat. 3. 9. he has no need of you; you are the children of
Abraham, but know God can cast you into Hell for all you are the children of
Abraham, and can make Heathens and Infidels children of Abraham; so when the
Jews boasted, Mal. 1. that God had chosen them, he hated Esau, and loved Jacob,
and they grew to be insolent and disobedient to God, and polluted his holy
Temple, and despised his name; see what God says, I will accept none of these
things at your hands, I will gather me a people among the Heathens, Mal. 1. 13.
As who should say, I want not people, I can go among the Heathen, and there
have my worship regarded which you have slighted and neglected.

Thirdly, There is no particular Church in the world has a promise 3 No
particular Church has a promise of continuance.
always to be a Church, but it they grow careless and secure and unprofitable
under the means, the Lord will be gone; he has made no such promise to
continue with them for ever* it is true, there is never a godly soul, never a
member of the Church but God has promised he will never leave him, 2 Timothy 2.
19. and Mat. 28. 20. he says so of his own people, he will never leave them,
but the good things he has begun in them, he will perfect them in the day of
Christ; nay, though all particular Churches should be destroyed, God will have
a care of these particular Saints of his Catholic Church, that not any limb
of it shall cease; but for particular Churches God has made no such promises,
but upon condition, Romans 11. 22. if a Parish or Kingdom continue in the fear of
Gods name, and regard his commandments, and be fruitful under his Ordinances,
and thankful for his goodness, then he will stay; but otherwise says he, thou
shall be broken off, though thou be the famousest Church in the world.

This may con^ound the Church of Rome, who promise to themselves they ^se 1. ^o
con^ound the Church of Rome.
shall never be unchurched; though they have been unchurched many years, yet
they brag they are the only Church in the world; Bellarmine brags that St.
Peter's chair shall never go from Rome; and no wonder, for the spirit of God
foretold it, Rev. 17. I sit as Queen and shall never be a Widow, I shall be a
Wife, a Spouse for ever, I shall see no sorrow; you see how secure she is, just
the child of her proud mother Babylon, Isa. 47. 8. So it is with the Church of
Rome, I am, and none else; I am; she calls her self the Roman Catholic
Church, as if there were no Church but Rome; all the Nations of the world, if
they will be a church, must be members of that Church; as it was said of Rome
in Augusius time, If Jupiter should come down from Heaven, there is no Country
for him to come into but Rome; look into this or that country, Rome has to do
there; so Rome, notwithstanding her Apostasy, is grown to that height of pride
and security, as if she were, and none but she. O poor deluded company, there
is scarce any true note of a Church of Christ among them, and yet they make
themselves to be the only Church.

This may be an Item for all the particular Churches in the whole world, Use 2.
To all particular Churches.
for England, Denmark, France, wheresoever is any. Here you see the Church of
Sardis had but a name to live, and was dead; there was nothing but remainders
in her, and they were ready to die and come to nothing. But what speak I of the
Church of Sarar^? Where are all the famous Churches of Asta, of Pergamus and
Th^at^ra? etc. what is become of these famous Churches? are they not turned
into a wilderness, and to worship Meb^met and Idols, and are even grown as bad
as Heathens? But what need I speak of these? Look upon the Church of the Jews,
that were the pri^cipal people of God; no Church like that; Israel is my first
borne; there was never any Church under the Gospel that was his only Church;
but Judaea was his only o^e, his pleasant Plant; nay they were the Fathers of
Jesus Christ according to the flesh, Romans 9. yet notwithstanding that Church
was cut off. When the holy City proved a Harlot; when these people grew to be
weary of God and his Ordinances, and grew to be loose, and would not be ruled
by God and his Word, the Lord gave them a Bill of Divorcement, and sent them
away; therefore let us be warned by them; it is a fearful thing when God for
Idolatry shall cast off Churches, and yet we not tremble but live under
security and hardness of heart, and take not warning by it. Jer. 3. 8. God
says, Yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but played the harlot. When
God cast off the ten Tribes, Judah saw this, and heard of this, and could not
choose but understand this, and yet she did not fear for all this: So when this
Parish, or any other Parish shall hear of any Parish that is unchurched and
unministred, and God has taken away his presence from among them, and there
shall be no sign of his gracious presence any more, the Gospel is gone from
such a place, and we hear of it, and yet do not fear, but are as secure as
ever, as unfruitful under the means as ever, and do not stir up our selves to
be more obedient to God and his Ordinances, but go on to play the harlot, and
go a whoring from God from day to day; nay we are even ready to promise our
selves peace for all this; this is a fearful thing. Mark what the Lord says,
Jer. 7. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. He speaks there of Jerusalem: So when God has
poured out his plagues and punishments upon other Parishes, and other places,
and has taken away his Ark and the glory is departed from them, and they are
left in the shadow of death, and we see it, and yet tremble not at it, God
calls upon us from day to day to amend our lives, that we mi^ht find mercy
with him; God tells us, as he has done to other Parishes in the Kingdom, so
he will do to us; the Lord will lay us desolate and waste as other parts of
the land are; and certainly the Lords wrath and vengeance is hard at our heels
if we do not speedily repent, who knows how soon God may deprive us of his
Word and Ordinances? For (...) not found thy works perfect before God.

If we take these words in sunder, they contain these five Propositions.

First, That the covenant of grace requires works.

Secondly, That these works should be perfect.

Thirdly, That they should not only be perect in the sight of men, for that is
nothing; but perfect in the sight of God, before God.

Fourthly, That the Lord Jesus searches whither they be so or no.

Fifthly, Upon due search he finds it out many times, not only in particular
persons, but in particular Churches, as we see here in the Church of Sardis,
that their works are not so.

For the first of these, That the second Covenant requires works, we see
Observat. 1. The second Covenant requires works.
here that the Lord Jesus looks for works in the Church of Sardis that were in
covenant with him; it is true, there is this difference between the two
Covenants; the first covenant requires works as the condition of it; He that
does them, shall live in them, Gal. 3. 12. The doers of the Law shall be
blessed, Romans 2. 13. Therefore it is called the covenant of works, and that in
two senses.

First, In that works are the condition of it.

Secondly, In that it is left unto man; God gives only a power not to sin, if
so be that man will; but he does not give the will. Now the second covenant is
not a covenant of works; the condition of it is not works, but the condition of
it is faith; The just shall live by faith, Romans 1. 17. Therefore it is called a
covenant of grace, and that in two respects opposite to the former; not only
in regard that these works are done by another, and so nothing is required of
the party justified, but only faith for his justification; but also because
though the covenant of grace require works, yet God does not expect a man
should do any thing of himself, but it is by grace; we are saved by grace
through faith, and not of our selves, it is the gift of God. I say the second
covenant is a covenant of grace, and yet it requires works.

And works are here necessary. First by necessity of presence; for though faith
be the condition, yet it is such a faith as has necessarily good works
together present with it; as the Apostle speaks, Faith if it have not works is
dead, Jam. 2. 17. Good works they are inseparably joined together with true
faith; for as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is
dead also; not as though works were the essential form of true faith; but the
nature of faith, if it be true, is such as does necessarily cause good works to
accompany with it.

They are necessary by necessity of inseparable effects; good works are not
only present together with faith, but they are so present, as that they do
flow from faith. God has required such a faith in the covenant of grace, as
does produce good works; they are not only inseparable from faith, but thus
inseparable, that true faith must needs produce them; He that has this hope,
purifies himself as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. That is, He that has this faith,
he sets down faith by the effect hope, and sets it down by another effect, it
must needs purify, it makes that man purify himself as Christ is pure. So
Christ having exhorted them to believe, having raised up their minds to believe
the things that are above, Lay up your treasure in Heaven, Mat. 6. 20. in the
next verse he shows this will have the effect of all manner of good works; For
where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also; it will draw up your
hearts, and make you heavenly-minded, and make you seek the things that are
above; where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also. So likewise we
may see Heb. 11. through the whole chapter, what abundance of effects are set
down of true saving faith: By faith Abel offered sacrifice to God. By faith
Noah being warned of God, obeyed God, and did the things that God commanded,
verse 7. And so by faith Abraham when he was called, yielded to God. So by
faith believers wrought righteousness, and did wonderful things, subdued
Kingdoms, etc. They were able to work wonderful effects; so that when a man
has not works, when he does not obey God through the power of faith, he has
not faith it self

Thirdly, Good works are necessary by necessity of signs; they are not only to
be in a Believer as effects, but as proofs of his faith; ^or a man must
justify his faith by his works; they are signs and proofs whereby he may know
whether his faith be true, and of the right stamp o^ no; for if a man's faith be
a lively faith, a faith that does justify, though in the act of justi^ication
it be alone, yet in existency it is not alone, but it has good ^orks together
with it, as signs and marks of the same; as 1 John 1. 6. If we say we have
fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and (...) not the truth.
Hereby we may know that we are deceived; we may think we have says, and so
fellowship together with him; yet if we walk in darkness, we may know we lie;
for this could not be if we had fellowship with God. So 1 John 2. 4. He that
sa^ I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar. If a man should
once think that he knows God with the knowledge of faith and yet keeps not the
commandments of God* by this very thing he may know that he is a liar. Hereby
shall all men know ye are my disc^ples, if ye love me (...) or says Christ;
and as it is a sign to others, so it is a sign to a man's own self; Her^by we
know that we are passed from death to life, it we loves Brethren. He sets down
one good work in stead of all other: if we bring forth the works of new
obedience, and if our hearts be purg^d of God i^ we bring forth the fruits of
holiness, this is a sign we have faith: for faith makes a man to choose God
for his God, and raises a man up to see him to be the chiefest good of all and
to see all happiness in him, and a supply of all the good we need in him, and
so it makes a man to love God, and by love to do the works of God.

Fourthly, Good works are necessary also by necessity of commandment, not
only to be effects and signs of faith, but they are also such things as are
commanded of God; God has commanded good works, that we should walk in all
holiness of conversation, to be holy as he is holy, that we should be holy in
our carriages and behavior, Tit. 3. 8. The same God that commands us to
believe, commands us to maintain good works, as we may see there; we s^e that
Ministers are to urge people, and maintain it against all gainsayers, that
there is a necessity of good works, and that the Lord will have us to go on in
them; for faith through the Object of it, as it justifies, is the promise of
God in Christ for forgiveness of sins; yet faith in it self looks upon the
whole word of God, and looks whatsoever it sees joined together by that, it
joins together of it self; as the Promises and Commandments are bound
together by an inviolable knot, so faith joins them together; it cannot take
the promises of God, but it must take the commandments of God also; faith
looks upon God, and as it sees him to be gracious, whereby it comes to have
faith to rely upon him, so also it sees him to be holy, a God that is severe
against sin, and hates unrighteousness; so that it is necessary that works be
together with faith, for the commandment and nature of God require it.

Fifthly, They are necessary also by necessity of end; for God has ordained
his people to this end, that they should bring forth good works. Ephesians. 2. 10. We
are his workmanship created in Christ to good works, which God has before
ordained, that we should walk in them. We are created in Christ Jesus, not
only that we should be saved, but that we should bring forth good works. Now
good works are necessary by necessity of end in diverse respects.

First to this end, To glorify God in the world; Let your light so shine
before men, etc. Matthew. 5. 16. So 1 Pet. 2. 12. the Apostle says, Having our
conversation honest amongst the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you
as evil doers, etc. For when a Christian that professes he believes in God and
Jesus Christ, is plentiful in all manner of good works, this stops the mouth of
all gainsayers: You know Piety and Religion is hated in the world, the Gospel
finds opposition among men. Now when those that are Professors are loose and
licentious in their lives, this opens their mouths against the truth; but when
our lives and conversations hold forth Jesus Christ, as we take up the
profession of his holy name, so they are agreeable to his will, they are just,
and holy, and righteous, and good; this makes men think in their conscience
this is of God; this stops their mouths that they cannot rail at the Gospel.

Secondly, They are necessary to do good to others, and convert others, as the
Apostle instanceth in women that believe, if they be zealous of good works, if
they be chaste, and humble, and meek, and discreet; by this means they may be
instruments to convert their husbands that believe not, 1 Pet. 3. The Lord
looks that his people, all that believe in him, should be fruitful in good
works, that they may win and gain others to the faith.

Thirdly, Another end is to purify our selves; for it is virtue that must
throw out vice; we are all borne by nature filthy and unclean, and full of
noisome lusts, and the way to expel these is by the contrary virtues, 1 Pet. 1.
22. Seeing you have purified your souls by obeying the truth.

Fourthly, Another end is to qualify us for Heaven; we cannot be qualified for
the Kingdom of heaven unless we be holy and godly in Christ Jesus, except we
have our conversations honest as becomes Saints; for though it be faith that
entitles a man to the Kingdom of Heaven, and gives a man right to the Kingdom
of God; yet holiness and conformity to the mind of God, and the image of God,
is that which does fit and qualify a man for to enter into the Kindome of God;
as Christ says, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, you can in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Though it be true, we are saved by grace, and so good works have no causality,
no proper efficiency in our salvation; yet notwithstanding they are a cause
sine qua non, without them there can be no salvation; we cannot enter into Gods
Kingdom, except we be humble, and meek, and lowly; except we fear God, and be
according to his mind in all things in some measure, we cannot enter into his
Kingdom. Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. A
man cannot be admitted to the Beatifical Vision of God, except he be pure in
heart; and he cannot enjoy the Kingdom of grace neither here unless he be pure
in heart, Rev. 21. 27. Without holiness a^ man shall see the Lord, Heb. 13. It
is impossible we should enter into Gods Kingdom by having actual possession of
it, except we be holy and fitted for it, as the Apostle says, Col. 1. 12. It
is impossible that drunkards, and unclean persons should have society with the
blessed Trinity, with the eternal God, with the Spirit of holiness, to dwell
with them for evermore; we must be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance
of the Saints in light.

Fifthly, To proportion our Reward; for though we are saved only by grace, yet
God does proportion our reward, according to the multitude, and zeal, and
fervency of our good works; for Gods Covenant is a remunerating Covenant; for
mercy does not consist only in the pardoning of a man, but also in the
sanctifying of a man, and the inclining of a man's heart to new obedience, that
there may be remuneration; for though God does not reward people for their
works, yet according to their works he does. 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly, etc. Though a man be a Believer, and a godly
man, if he be sparing in his godliness, he shall fare accordingly, and if he be
abundant in the work of the Lord, he shall reap abundantly; for as there are
differences and degrees of torments to the wicked, so there be degrees in the
Kingdom of God, and in glory, and the Lord does reward his people according to
their works.

Lastly, Good works are necessary by necessity of thankfulness; it is necessary
that we having received the forgiveness of our sins, and God being pleased to
be our God, and to deliver us from the wrath to come, and the power of Satan,
that we should be thankful for these mercies; as David says, Psalm. 118. 19.
Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, and be thankeful, Col. 1. 15. When
David had considered what the Lord had done for his soul, says he, what shall
I render unto the Lord for all his benefits? as soon as ever God has been good
to a man to open his eyes, to let him see his damned estate and condition, and
to let him have hope, and comfort, and encouragement in him, concerning
deliverance from it, and bestowing upon him his heavenly Kingdom and glory, it
cannot be but the soul must be thankful; what shall I do unto the Lord for all
his benefits? you know there is nothing that we can do back again for these
benefits, except we will praise and glorify him, by living unto him and not
unto our selves; therefore when the Psalmist had reckoned up the benefits of
God to Israel, Psalm. 105. 46. he concludes that they may keep his statutes and
observe his Laws.

First, Here we see how horribly the Papists wrong us when they say we Carter
said, we teach people holiness and righteousness, and good works, as if there
were no way to be saved but by good works; and again, we teach that there must
be as much hanging upon the grace of God, as if we could show no more to be
saved then the vilest drunkard or adulterer; all our righteousness is as a
menstruous cloth, and it is Gods mercy that any of us have an heart to do good;
you see how the world runs after their hearts lusts, and every man is of this
disposition; and it is Gods grace and mercy to incline any man's heart to walk
in that way that tends to his heavenly Kingdom; and if God should not be
infinitely gracious to pardon us for our best doings, they would rise up in
judgment against us; God might condemn us for all our prayert and performances.

Secondly, This teaches Ministers how to preach to people, to call upon these
things speak, Tit. 2. 14, 15. We must speak these things, and rebuke our
hearers with all authority; rebuke evil workers, and tell them they turn the
grace of Christ into wantonness, they trample the blood of the Covenant under
their feet, and kick at the spirit of grace, and misconstrue the meaning of the
Covenant of God in Christ, and rend themselves off that they cannot enter into
life; for no man without holiness shall see God: Ministers should tell people
plainly, and affirm constantly, that unless they bring forth good fruit they
shall be cast into the fire; and that without holiness they cannot have license
and dispensation to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; for God is an holy God,
and our faith is an holy faith, and the promises are made to none but those
that lead an holy and a godly life; we must preach these things, and reprove
with all Authority, and let people know that are loose Christians, and
Hell Hounds, that if they do not depart from iniquity, they shall see God as a
Judge to condemn them for evermore.

Thirdly, This confutes all the graceless conceits of men, that think to be
Joh. 3. 6. whosoever sinne^h, but (...)en him, neither kn^wn him; if a man live
in his sins still (that is the meaning of it) and walks not after the spirit*
but after the flesh, that man has not seen him, neither ever known him; he
does not know Jesus Christ otherwise then the Devils know him, otherwise then
Hell Hounds and reprobates may know him; for the second Covenant is as holy as
the first, and rather more holy, and before God has done, it shall bring a man
to a nearer communion with God, and a nearer likeness; it will raise the powers
and faculties of the soul, so as I believe A^am in innocence never attained
unto so much participation of God, as God by degrees will bring a man unto by
the Covenant of grace; therefore no man can look to ^e saved by Christ except
he mean to be ruled by Christ, and to have him for his Lord and Master, and to
obey him in all things; if a man should lie sick in his bed of a burning
fever, and should say he were well, would you believe him* so if we see a man
that is burning in lust, wallowing in sinful courses, that has a carnal and a
worldly heart, unmortified and unsubdued to God, if he should say that he were
in Christ, and hoped to be saved by him, believe him not; all the world cannot
save this man; for the Lord Jesus Christ has this very name Jesus, not only
because he shall save his people from hell, but also from their sins, and make
them fruitful in all the works of God.

Fourthly, To exhort that we would consider of this, the Gospel does Tit. 3. 4.
let us maintain good works for necessary uses, etc. We are barren trees;
whatsoever we are, we are barren and dead Christians, and have no life of God
in us, if we bring not forth good works; for good works are necessary for many
uses.

First, They are for signs, to show us what estate and condition we are Motive
1.
in; we may know what estate and condition we are in by our carriage and
conversation; whither it be earthly or heavenly, holy or profane, so is our
condition either happy or damned.

First, They are signs of a man's election, 2 Timothy 1. 20. this is a sign and a
badge, and a token whereby we may know that we are vessels of honor, if we be
sanctified and made meet for our masters use, and furnished and prepared for
every good work; if we do not deny all ungodly lusts, and live righteously and
soberly in this present world, we have rather badges and tokens of reprobation
then election; we cannot say that God has appointed us to attain salvation by
Jesus Christ, but have rather marks of hell and destruction upon us; and what
is the reason that men that profess Christ, do so much question their election?
no wonder when we are so scanty in our holiness and obedience to God, and so
backward to do good; there is no nickling of Gods everlasting favor breaking
out, whereas if we were plentiful in good works, it would break forth as the
Sun out of a cloud.

Secondly, They are signs of effectual calling, Jude 1. if a man be called of
God, he is sanctified also and kept in an holy course; preserved in Christ. 2
Pet. 1. 3. you are an holy Nation, a peculiar people, to show forth the virtues
of him that has called you, 1 Pet. 2. 9. so that we may be sure that we yet
abide in darkness, and are under the power of sin and Satan; if we have not
given over our sinful courses, and conformed our selves to the Gospel of God,
we were never called according to Gods purpose, but lie under the wrath of
Heaven to this day; it is holiness and righteousness that is a sign of our
effectual calling.

Thirdly, They are signs of justification also; as the Apostle shows, but you
are washed, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 11. you see if we be justified, we are also
sanctified; so 1 John 1. 7. if we walk in the light, as he is in the light,
etc. We have not one drop of the blood of Christ sprinkled upon our souls by
Gods eternal spirit through faith, unless we walk in the light, and bring forth
the works of the light.

Fourthly, They are signs of adoption, John 8. 39. If you were Abraham's
children, you would bring forth the works of Abraham; so if we were Gods
children, we would do the works of God, the will of God: The Apostle having
spoken of the adoption of Saints, behold what love the Father has showed to
us, etc. presently he tells us that holiness and righteousness follows from
hence; he that has this hope purifieth himself, as he is pure. So Romans 8. 14.
As many are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God; this is an
infallible sign, if we be the sons of God, we are led by the spirit of God; so
that we have no mark that we are the children of God, but rather of the Devil,
unless we walk in pureness of conversation from day to day.

Fifthly, They are the marks of our love to God, as Christ says, if you love
me, keep my commundements, John* 14. 15. we love not God except we keep his
commandments; as ever you would be able to say in truth you love me, keep my
commandments; look that you yield not to the corruptions of the world, look
that you renounce the Devil and all his works; I will conclude you love me not
at all, if you keep not my commandments; and he that loves not Christ, let him
be Anathema Maranatha, says the Apostle.

Secondly, Consider this, that the reason why we cannot pray better is Motive 2.
because we are no more abundant in good works; not only because we want faith,
but because we want good works; for certainly this is a great help to prayer, a
great support to the soul, a great encouragement to go to the Throne of grace,
and a great sign that God means to hear a man when God has given him an heart
to fear him, and love him, and make conscience of his ways; as the Apostle
says, 1 John 3. 22. Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his
commandments, and do the things pleasing in his sight: As who should say, when
we go to God, and entreat him to be merciful to us, and entreat such and such
favors that we stand in need of; we know that we shall receive them, because
we keep his commandments. These are admirable supports to hold up the hands to
the Throne of grace, and to make us importunate in prayer, and confident,
because we know God has poured forth his gracious good will and pleasure into
our hearts, and has given us a mark he loves us, and bears us good will
indeed. Why can we pray no better, our hands are weak and our knees feeble;
there is no power in our supplications to the Almighty, the spirit of grace is
departed from us; why the spirit of holiness is gone; there is the reason of
it, when people are loose and do not mortify their lusts, when they are not
abundant in following God, in fearing God, and serving God, and obeying the
commandments of God, they cannot have confidence at the Throne of grace.

Thirdly, Consider this would be a great chearing and rejoicing in the Motive 3.
evil day; whatsoever afflictions come upon us in this world, if we can carry
letters testimonial in our own conscience, that we do serve God with a pure
conscience in this world; as Paul says, 2 Cor. 1. 12. God knows what evil may
befall us before we are a little older, what temptations may await us, what
distresses and calamities may fall upon us; happy are we if we have the
testimony of a good conscience, that we walk in the ways of God, and fear him,
and love those things that are beloved of God; if we love his children, his
Ordinances, his glory, and are tender of it; a good conscience tender of the
commandments of God and his wa^es, is the best comfort a man can have in the
world, setting aside his faith in God; and this is an evidence of his faith
too; how can we tell what may be? may be the best of us may come to David's
pass; you know ho^ he was put to it once in the time of his misery and
affliction he was fain to look if he could see an honest life and conversation,
whither he had pleased God: says he, I communed with my spirit, and made
diligent search, P^al. 77. 6. How have I pleased God, and followed God? what
manner of ^e have I led? he ransacked all his life and conversation, and would
be glad to see he had done the things pleasing to God; i^ would be more comfort
th^n if all the Angels in heaven had spoken comfort; so temptations or
af^^ictions may be upon us, that we would be glad to see signs and tokens of
Gods favor in sanctifying our hearts, and making us to be obedient to his
will, and tremble at his word; and if we cannot see these things, woe unto us,
1 Timothy 6. 19. charge them that be rich in the world, that they be not high*
minded, etc. So we do not know what times may come, we had need l^y a good
foundation for comfort against the time to come, and charge rich men that they
be rich in good works; charge all Christians, all that desire to had* in the
evil day, to be rich in good works, and abound in them, and lay up in store a
good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold of eternal
life.

Lastly, Consider that your want of obedience and good works is the cause of
all Gods temporal judgments, why God does stop the bottles of Heaven, and
turns the Earth into dust, and parcheth our Corn; we see God has begun the
plague among us in the principal place of the Kingdom; wherefore is all this?
see what the Prophet says, Jer. 3. 3. therefore have the showers been
withholder, because you have been wicked; thou have an whores forehead, and
refusest to be ashamed; thy carelesseness and barrenness under the means of
grace, thy impenitency and hardness of heart, these have caused the showers to
be withholden, and have made God to deny the former and latter rain.

The second point is this, As the Covenant of grace requires works, so it
Doctrine. The Covenant of grace requires perfect works. Objection.
requires perfect works he tells the Church of Sardis that he looks for works,
and perfect works, but c^nnot find them; so that the second Covenant requires
perfect works.

But you will say, how can that he? Paul himself that was as forward a man, and
had as perfect works as any man, yet he confesses he was not perfect, Phil. 3.
12. so likewise here we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 10. perfection is not yet
come; in the world to come it may come. Heb 12. there we read of the spirits of
just and perfect men; then men are made perfect, but they are not perfect in
this life.

I answer, it is true, therefore there is a double perfection. First, A
perfection

Therefore secondly, There is another perfection, and that is a perfection by
way of sincerity and uprightness. Job 1. 1. Job was a perfect and upright man.
Now this perfection differs from the other five ways; the perfection God
requires in the Gospel from that in the Law.

First, The Law stands upon performances, as well as the will and desire: The
difference between Legal and Evangelical Perfection.
and a man is not perfect unless he perform all as well as desire to do it;
But now the perfection of the Gospel is without these performances, indeed that
man labors for as many performances as he can, but it may be only by desires,
Romans 7. 18. Paul was perfect by Evangelical Perfection, he was upright before
God, yet he could not reach performances; no, he had a will to be good he did
unfeignedly desire to be godly, and serve God in every thing unfeignedly,
endeavoring after godly courses, yet could not attain to that which he did
desire. So it was with Nehemiah, and all the good people of God, Nehem. 1. 11.
O Lord, I beseech thee lot thine ear be atten^ive t^ the prayers of thy
servants who desire to fear thy name. He could hardly say that he did perform
it, but he did desire it; he could hardly say he did love, and obey God, and
do his will, but this he would say, he did desire to do it, and unfeignedly
desire it; as Solomon says, Prove. 21. 21. He that follows after
righteousness and mercy, finds life. He does not say, he that reaches in he
cannot reach it may be, but he that follows after it shall have life: it is a
sign that he has the life of justification, and that he shall have the life of
glory.

Secondly, The perfection of the Law it stands upon quantities as well as upon
qualities and truth; it is not satisfied though a man be never so truly holy
and religious, unless man has quantities, and is so much holy: But now the
perfection of the Gospel, indeed it will have as much quantity as a man can,
but yet it will stand with truth; though a man has not that quantity of
humiliation and self-denial, and power against sin, yet if he have it in truth,
he is Evangelically perfect in some measure, he is sincere and upright before
God; as Solomon says of his Father, 1 Kings 13. 6. M. Father had great mercy
according as he walked before thee in truth. He does not say he walked before
thee in legal perfection, he was perfectly righteous; but he was truly
righteous, he was humble in truth, and godly in truth, and zealous in truth; he
had none of all these things to the utmost, yet he walked before thee in truth.
So Josh. 24. 14. Fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and truth. He does
not say, serve him as if you should do every thing he commands; but do it in
truth and sincerity, Now sincerity is, when there is no commandment but a man
sets himself to do it; there is no sin but he labors to avoid it, and there
is no right manner, but he sets himself to do it in the right manner to his
power; this is the perfection of the Gospel.

Thirdly, The perfection of the Law stands upon full measure; whether a man
have power or no, that is nothing to the purpose; the law will have all
holiness and righteousness, whether a man has power or no: But now the
perfection of the Gospel by way of sincerity, it looks at what measure God has
given and bestowed, and no more but what God has given and enabled a man to
do; as you may see the Lord does not require the gain of ten talents, when he
gave but five, nor the gain of five when he gave but two; the widows two mites
were accepted, and taken for a good and sincere gift, because she gave all that
she had, Luke 21. 4. as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 8. 12. If there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according
to that a man has not. The law will have perfection whether a man has power
or no, or else it will damn a man; but in the Gospel a man may say as Peter to
the lame man, Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have, that give I
thee. Lord, such a memory, and such parts and gifts have I not, but such as I
have, that give I thee; according to that measure of knowledge I have,
according to that grace I have, I will give it thee: If a man can say thus, he
is accepted, not according to that he has not, but according to that he has;
as it was in the law of Moses, Levit. 5. 6, 7. Atrespasse-^ffering should be a
lamb or a kid; but if a man were not able to give that, then two turtle doves,
or two young pigeons; if he be not able to give that, let him give two or three
handfuls of fine flower, Levit. 5. 11. So Levit. 14. 20. Let him give according
at he can get, he shall be accepted according to that. This is the perfection
of the Gospel* according to the help and assistance God gives a man, and
according to the means God afford^ a man, it shall be accepted.

Fourthly, The perfection of the law admits of no failings; if a man fails, no
matter though it be out of infirmity, the law condemns him the law requires
perfection without failings; but the perfection of the Gospel, by way of
sincerity admits of failings; as the best gold has his allowances, so it is
with a true Christian; he may be sincere and upright, though he has a thousand
failings; as it is said of David, 1 Kings 15. 5. He did that which was right in
the eyes of the Lord in all things, but only in the mo^ter of Uriah. That
indeed would not stand with sincerity, his sincerity was quite in a swo^m then:
that could not stand with sincerity; if he had gone on to sin in that fashion,
he could not have been sincere; but in all other things he did that which was
right in the eyes of the Lord. You will say he had a thousand failings, yet
says the Text, they all stood with sincerity; he numbered the people, and God
was mightily angry with him, and you know how unjust he was in the matter of
Zibah and Mephibosheth; you know how he told a lie to Abimelech, and was the
occasion of the death of the Priests of the Lord; you know how he counterfelted
himself mad, and he had horrible disorders in his family, and had lost the
power of control over his children; were not these horrible failings? and what
a company of Wives and Concubines had he? yet all these stood with sincerity,
because they were either done out of ignorance, or want of due consideration
sometimes, or through humane frailty and infirmity, or through violence of
temptation, contrary to his constant course, and intendment and purpose; they
might all stand with sincerity and an upright heart according to the perfection
of the Gospel.

Fifthly, The perfection of the Law makes nothing of repentance; if you break
the commandments of God, if you shed tears of blood, and repent your heart
out, what cares the law? the law will have perfect obedience, or else to hell
you shall. But now in the perfection of the Gospel, repentance is a great
matter; nay, if a man be never so vile and wretched, if yet he humble himself
before God, and be unfeignedly sorry for sinning against God, this is a great
matter; this man is an upright man, that is unfeignedly humbled and abased
before God; The sacrifice of God is a broken spirit, a broken and contrite
heart thou shall not despise. This is the voice of the Gospel. So Ez^k. 18. 21.
If the wicked will turn from all his sins, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. As it is Joh 23. 27, 28. He
looked upon men, and if any said I have sinned, he will deliver his soul from
going down into the pit. In the Gospel a man is an upright man, if he come
before the throne of grace with shame and confusion of face for all his sins,
with unfeigned sorrow that he has broken Gods Covenant; if he has never so
many failings, if he set himself to please God, and when he fails, he repents,
and humbles himself before God, this man Doctrine. Every man ought to labor
for perfection.
has the perfection of the Gospel. Thus we see the meaning of the words,
Perfect before God.

The point of Doctrine is this, That every man is to labor to be perfect, that
is the thing that God will require, and enquire after at the last day, whether
we be upright. You see this, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. and so likewise in other places of
Scripture.

The first Reason is from the nature of God, with whom we have to do, Mat. 5.
48. Be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect. we know his spirit is the
spirit of truth, himself is the God of truth, his Son is the way, the truth,
and the life, he is the faithful witness; and as God is upright, so he looks
that his servants should show what Master they serve, that they may make it
appear that their Master is an upright Master, Psalm 92. ult. to show forth
that the Lord is upright; This is our duty; God is upright, and Christ is
upright; and therefore we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22.

Secondly, God has commanded us to be sincere; though he remit from the first
Covenant of absolute and perfect righteousness and holiness without sin, ye he
will have his people truly fearing him, and hating sin, universal in obedience,
that they shall be from the bottom of their hearts followers of him; therefore
this slung David to the heart when he committed sin: O thought he, Thou
desire truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. 6. As who should say, thou
look into the heart, thou requirest truth of thy servants; O what a false
heart have I had in this business! God has many worshippers in this world,
such as they are; but God cares for none, but such as deal faithfully in his
Covenant; as Christ speaks, John 424.

Thirdly, God knows our hearts; therefore though we serve him, and do duties to
him; though we call upon his name, hear his Word, come to his Table, observe
his Sabbaths, keep his Ordinances; yet if we do not do these things in truth,
his eyes are ever upon our bosoms, he casts his eyes upon the secrets of men;
if our hearts be rotten, and proud, and vain, and loose, and filthy; if our
hearts be not of a right frame, all is nothing; if there be any way of
wickedness in us, if there be any secret sins, or cursed corruptions that we
favor our selves in; if there be any false way we secre^ly haunt, the Lord
shall search it out, for the knows the secrets of our hearts; therefore it
becomes us to be upright; as he says of Ephraim, Hos. 5. 3. I know Ephraim, he
is not hid from us. So if we preach never so zealously, and do not according
to our preaching, the Lord knows ^s; so if we hear never so zealously, and do
not practice what we hear, he knows it; therefore it concerns us to be upright.

Fourthly, Because the Lord will let down the Covenant no lower. Now God has
been pleased to moderate the first Covenant, which it was impossible for us to
keep, and has brought it down to the Covenant of faith, to believe, and to be
sincere in all our ways; this God requires, and will let it down no lower.
Isa. 63. 8. the Lord says there, Surely they are my people, children that will
not lie; and so he was their Savior. So he requires his people should be
children that should not lie, and be base-hearted, and deal deceitfully and
crookedly in his Covenant; he was their Savior, so they would be children that
would not lie. So Ephesians. 6. 24. Grace be with all them that love Christ in
sincerity. There is no man is under the Covenant of grace, unless he be
sincere in all the will of God in Jesus Christ: There are two things the
Covenant of grace gives; the one is the forgiveness of sins, the other is a
sincere heart; if a man has not these two, he is yet in his sins; as we may
see, Psalm. 32. 2. Blessed is the man, etc.

Fifthly, The Examples of all the Saints in all Ages; all the people of God
that ever were upright, to begin with Noah, Genesis 6. 9. The text says, he was a
just and perfect man in his generation. You know it was in a corrupt time, all
the Earth had corrupted their ways; no question a man that was religious in
those days, he could not choose but be scorned and derided; but what cared he?
he would be a just man, and was perfect in his generation; though it were a
devilish generation, yet he was an upright man, and would not do as the world
did, but he would draw near to God, and walk with him from day to day. So it is
said of Job, Job 1. 2. That he was an upright and perfect man; though Job lived
in a blind corner out of the Church, and setting aside 304, generally the whole
Country were Heathens and Pagans, and he was as an Owl in the Desert; yet he
would not do as the world did, but keep himself to God. So Luke 1. 6. Zachary
and Elizabeth were both righteous before God, etc. You know the times were then
very bad, and all the devotion that went for current, was nothing but to be
zealous of humane inventions and traditions, and worshipping God after the
imaginations of men; this was the holiness of the world, yet the Text says
this man and his wife would be righteous before God, and walked in all the
Ordinances of God blameless; not in the Ordinances of the Scribes and
Pharisees, but they were righteous before God, and walked in all the Ordinances
of God blameless.

Then this may serve to reprove these days, and times, and places of Use 1.
Reproof.
ours where we live; where are hardly any upright people? we may say of them as
the Prophet Micah said of his time, Micah 7. 2. The good man is perished off
the earth. As who should say, we had a great company of godly and holy people,
religious Ministers, painful in their places, and abundance of private
Christians, faithful before the Lord; but now there is hardly an upright man;
there are so many drunkards and adulterers, so many unclean persons, so many
covetous: there are so many mockers and enemies to sincerity, so many
complementers with God, so many ignorant, nay willingly ignorant, though they
live under the means of knowledge, so many that have a form of golinesse, but
deny the power thereof, so many that are come to the birth, but have no
strength to bring forth, they will never come to be godly indeed; there are so
many that are dead-hearted, and never were quickened by Jesus Christ, nor endued
with the life of the spirit of grace, that we may say as Solomon says, A
faithful man who shall find? Prove. 20. 6. Many fathers we have among us, but a
faithful father who shall find, that does discharge his duty toward his
children? many Masters we may find; but who carries himself toward his
servants as he ought to do? so we have many in place of Authority, that might
stand for God, and hinder sin, and do some good in their places; but a
faithful man who shall find, but here one, and there one, rare birds, and they
are the offscouring of the world, and are hated; and mocked and persecuted? so
we have a great many that have gotten a great deal of light, God has awakened
their consciences, and made them see their miserable condition; but a faithful
man that does discharge a good conscience in that place wherein he is, that
carries himself uprightly under the means of grace, under the Word, under the
preaching of it, under Gods Ordinances, such a man where shall we find? as
David says, Psalm 12. 1. Help Lord, etc. He had occasion, through the
persecution of S^ul, to travel thorough the most of the Towns of Israel, and
all were so loose and licentious, and carnal, and worldly, and serving the
times, and pleasing and humouring the Court; he saw the Country so empty of
goodness, that he prays Help Lord, etc. and as the Lord says, Isa. 1. 21.
How is the faithful City become an Harlot? etc. So we may say, How is the
faithful City become an harlot? a faithful Town, that has had the Word
sincerely taught, that has had many walking sincerely in obedience according
to the Word in some measure, and has set up the power of the Word in their
Families; but what is become of them? there was judgment and righteousness;
but now where is it? there was truth, and truth could have abode, but now it
can have no admittance: But how may we complain that our faithful Country is
become an harlot* I do not speak of Papists, and Turks, and Pagans, but of the
Church of God; the faithful are diminished from among the sons of men.

Secondly, This may serve to humble the best of all Gods children, it Use 2.
Humility.
may serve to ashame us before God, to think what a deal of corruption is in
our hearts; if David might complain of himself, how much more may we? Lord,
says he, thou do require truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. 6. As who
should say, Lord how far am I from it? who would ever have thought that David's
heart should so play fast and loose, that ever he should s^ abuse Vriah his
faithful servant, that ever he should so abuse Bathsheba that good woman, and
bring her to sin? If David himself may thus complain; how much more may we
complain and loath our selves for the deal of rottenness that is in our hearts!
O what windlings and fetches are there! Austin himself says, I can hardly tell
when to believe my own heart; so I say, what a company of windings, and
turnings, and tricks, and starting^oles are there in the hearts of Gods people?
sometimes we are ready to think we have the good we have not; and what evasions
have we to put off any good duty, if we have not a mind to do it? what put
offs, what tricks to slip our neck out of the collar if we do not like it?
what a company of deceits are in the heart? So what a company of slights to do
evil? such a company of blindin^s, and besottings, and carnal reasons; and
foolish arguments, as if we did well in doing it, whereas it is but the
falseness of our hearts? As Mr. Hearn says, It is better for a man to be
delivered up to the Devil, then to his own heart. We read of a man delivered up
to Satan, as Paul says, and yet we read that that man was brought home again;
but we never read of any man brought home that was delivered up to the
corruptions of his own heart; therefore if God has made us see the falsenesse
of our own hearts, and made us humble our selves before him for it, and made us
to endeavor more and more after sincerity; what a mercy of God is this? but
the people of God have cause to com^lain of the falseness of their hearts.

Thirdly, Is it so that we must be upright, then let this serve to exhort us
that we would be upright more and more; for this is that which the Lord does
look for and especially look for: What though we should do things never so good
for the matter; yet if we do them not with an upright heart, all is nothing,
though the children of Judah fasted and that for 70. years together, four times
in a year they sought the Lord extraordinarily; yet because they did not seek
him thoroughly, he did not count it sincerely done, Zach. 7. 4, 5. As who
should say, You did not fast unto me. Doubtless they themselves thought they
were very religious; what not only to do the duties of religion, but to do
extraordinary duties, no question they thought this was very much; yet every
one were cast off, because their hearts were not upright before him. A^^ziah,
the Text says, did those things that were good in the eyes of the Lord; yet
the Text makes this exception against him, that it was not with an upright
heart, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2.

Con^ider first, That God delights only in an upright heart. Prove. 11. 20. They
that are of a froward heart are an abomination to the Lord; but those that are
upright in their ways are his delight. Upright Prayer, and upright hearing of
the Word, and upright Preaching of it, upright walking in a man's Family, and
upright carriag^ in a man's conversation, when a man carries himself uprightly
in all his ways, this man is a delight to God, as he says, Isa. 66. 2. I can
look over heaven and earth, but at him will I look that trembles at my Word.
The prayer of the upright is his delight, Prove. 15. 8. When a man can make
faithful pleas to the throne of grace for mercy, faithful pleas that God would
pardon him, faithful pleas that God would enable him, and accept him, and he
does not make these pleas falsely, but his own heart can say, there is no sin,
but he sets himself against it, and there is no commandment but he sets
himself to obey it; but the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to him,
he cannot abide it; let them pray a thousand prayers, God abhors their prayers,
if they have not upright hearts. So 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. see what David says; as
who should say, Lord, thou have pleasure in uprightness; and then certainly
thou have some pleasure in me; for with an upright heart, and in the sincerity
of my soul have I sought thee. Now on the contrary, if a man be not upright
before God, if a man have a loose conversation, and he be not sincere, the Lord
abhors that man.

Secondly, Consider that this is the total sum of all that God requires in
the Covenant of grace, that they should be upright and faithful in his
Covenant; as when he made his Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. he says, Walk
before me, and be upright. This is that God requires, and he would be an
Almighty God unto him, and bless him, and do him good to all generations. 1 Samuel 12. 24. It is the saying of Samuel to the people, Only fear the Lord, and
walk before him with an upright heart. As who should say, this is the only
thing, and God requires no more; if God had required more, he might lawfully
have done it; if he had required the fulfilling of the Law to the utmost
rigor, he might have done it; but this is the only thing that God does stand
upon, that we should be upright before him; he does not look that we should be
Angels upon earth, but that we should be sincere, and no^ go a whoring from
him wittingly and willingly.

Thirdly, Consider, The least faith, the least grace and goodness, if it be
with uprightness, is better then all the goodly performances of the whole
world; God liked more of the poor woman's two mites, then of all the abundance
that the Scribes and Pharisees cast into the Treasury; And he that gives a cup
of cold water to a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, shall no^ lose his
reward: Therefore you shall see many poor beggarly things, over those things
that other men have done, have been accepted; whereas the building of Hospitals
and Colleges have been rejected; though a man have but a little knowledge, as
many of the Martyrs hardly knew how many Sacraments there were; yet having
uprightness, died at stake; so if a man have but a little faith with sincerity,
it shall pass, when a thousand presumptuous fools shall go to hell.

Fourthly, Consider, God will wink at manifold and grievous faults, so there be
sincerity and uprightness. Asa his faults were horrible faults, 1 Kings 15. 14.
yet his heart was perfect: What a company of faults had he? what an horrible
failing was this that he should cast the very Prophet of God into prison that
reproved him? Now God answers, he had his failings, and horrible ones; yet he
was a good man, for his heart was upright before me. Asa was not himself in
that business; Asa was not Asa then; his heart was upright with the Lord. So
good Jehosaphat, a man that was grievously besmeared with corruptions and
infirmities, and those no small ones; how fearfully did he marry his daughters
into a most devilish Family, as if he had no fear of God before his eyes? he
married them to the house of Ahab, and another time he helped the enemies of
the Lord, and loved them that hated the Lord; I know not how he was hooked in
to join with Ahab, and go up to Ramoth* Gilead; and when he had done this, and
had humbled himself for this, he did it again, 2 Kings 3. 7. And the
Reformation he wrought was not thorough, as it ought to have been; yet says
the Text, 2 Chro. 19. 3. There are good things in thee; because he was upright,
the Lord was pleased to accept him; nay, I will tell you more, look upon the
people at the Passover in the days of Hezekiah, what a company of people came
to Jerusalem to keep the Passover, and came horribly unprepared? the Text
says, they were not prepared according to the Law of Moses, which was a
grievous thing; yet the Text says, the Lord heard the prayers of Hezekiah for
them, because they prepared their hearts to seek the Lord; they did endeavor
to grieve and be ashamed for their failings and want of preparation; now on the
other side, what goodly men does God reject, not being upright and sincere? as
Jehu, what a glorious King was he? I warrant all the good people of Judah and
Israel blessed God that ever he sat upon the Throne; what to root out Baal,
and to destroy all the Idolatrous Priests, and to be zealous in it? come and
see* my zeal for the Lord; these were admirable things; yet the Lord does
discharge him, and would have none of him, because he was not upright: Look
upon the Scribes and Pharisees, the none suches, and mirrours of their times;
that was a Proverb in Israel, that if but two men in the world should go to
Heaven, the one should be a Scribe, and the other Pharisee; they were thought
to be the holiest men in the world; yet when the Lord saw this was not with an
upright heart, he denounces woe upon woe against them.

Fifthly, Consider, That if we be upright, it will help us to profit by all
Gods Ordinances; take the preaching of the word; Micah 2. 7. the Prophet brings
in the Lord speaking thus, that the word shall do such people good; is there
any man in the world that walks uprightly, that my word does not do good unto,
that it does not comfort his heart, and quicken his soul to obedience? is it
not a light unto his feet, and a Lantern to his paths; so that an upright
man, when he comes to the Ordinances of God, he shall be the better for it;
when he goes to prayer, he shall be the better for it; when he comes to the
Sacrament, he shall be the better for it; all the Ordinances of God shall do
him good; whereas if a man have a false heart, the word hardens him, prayer
deads him; if he come to the Sacrament, it is not for the better, but for the
worse; if he be reproved for his sins, if he have not a sincere heart, he is so
much the worse, it will do him no good, it will make his heart rise up against
those that reprove him, and hardens his heart so much the more.

Sixthly, Consider that if we be upright, what a deal of comfort this will be
to our hearts; there is no comfort in the world comparable to the comfort of
one that has walked uprightly; as Hezekiah when he had received the sentence
of death, what did comfort him? did all his wealth, and greatness and renown
comfort him? no, but remember Lord how I have walked before thee with an
upright heart; mark what he says, he does not say, Remember Lord how I have
reformed the Church, and purged the Temple, and thrown out all the abominations
in the Land, and purified the Passover, and set the Ordinances of God in his
house in due order; no, none of all these comforted his heart, but look what
he did he did with an upright heart; as who should say, I might have done all
these things, but if it had not been with an upright heart, it had been
nothing; that which I did I did from my heart, with a fear of thy command; I
sought thee in it, and no by-ends; all my care was to approve my self before
thee; how Lord, remember this; remember the infinite goodness and promises
that thou have made to those that are upright before thee. Nay, if thou have an
upright heart, whatsoever troubles come upon the earth, or upon thine own soul,
if thou be cast into prison, or made to fly from one Country to another, I
tell thee, in the midst of all thy afflictions and troubles, if thou have an
upright heart, thou shall have peace and comfort, Psalm. 97. 11. in the midst of
darkness, in the midst of afflictions there is some light, some cranney, some
hold, some comfort for the righteous; on the other side, if a man be not
upright, what a woeful case is this man in; nay, though a man be upright, yet
if he do not apprehend himself to be so, what a lamentable case is he in? he
can have no comfort; all the skilful Physicians in Gilead can hardly fasten
comfort upon that man; tell him of all his reformations and prayers, and good
duties he has performed; O says he, all this is but hypocrisy, I am so dead
and dull, God has not all my heart; tell him of his good desires and purposes,
and endeavors, he is afraid he is not right; tell him of Gods promises to
pardon him, he says, I am not sincere, I am not upright.

Lastly, If we be upright, we shall be blessed our selves, and not only our
selves but our very posterity shall be blessed; as the Prophet David says,
Psalm. 112. ^ His seed shall be mighty upon the earth; he speaks of the
upright, nor only himself shall be blessed, but he lays up a blessing for
the generation that shall come out of his loins; so Prove. 20. 7. his very
children are blessed after him; if thou set thy self to serve God uprightly
with all thy heart though thou can not leave thy children any great outward
matters, yet thou shall leave them a blessing from Heaven; thy children shall
fare the better for it; if we would know what shall become of our children, and
would feign provide for them, let us be upright, and that is the way to ^ay up
a blessing in store for our children; now on the other side, if a man be not
upright, he is so far from treasuring up mercy for his children, that lie
rather treasures up wrath both for them and his own soul; nay, though a man
has been never such a convert to outward appearance, never so strangely
reformed, that all the Country admires at it; as it was the case of Simon
Magus, he was a Conjurer, yet this man was converted very much to see too, he
was wonderfully reformed, and gave over his Conjuring, and embraced the Gospel,
and would follow the Saints, and joined himself to Peter, and to Philip also,
when he came to Town; yet having not an upright heart, the Text says, he had
no Lot nor portion in Jesus Christ, nor in the Covenant of grace and mercy, but
was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.

The fourth Use is for examination, To examine our selves whither we be

Therefore first, Consider, A sincere man is universal in regard of all the
Signs of uprightness.
commandments of God, he does set himself in all his ways, to obey God in all
his statutes; as we may see, Psalm. 119 6. This is an upright man, that has
respect to all Gods commandments; but a false-hearted man, may be he will do
something, he will pick and choose, and take what he likes of the commandments
of God; some things he will do, others he will not do; he cannot be gotten to
stoop to all Gods holy will, he will never yield to that; may be he will not
commit adultery, but then he will drink horribly; may be he will not swear,
but then he will lie; if he be good in one thing, he will not be good in
another; if he be diligent in his particular calling, he will be negligent in
his general calling; he will not be holy and strict, and one that does walk in
Gods holy Laws; a true upright man does not deal with the commandments of God
as the swine does with the pease-cods, that will squeeze them, and then leave
the rest; but an upright man digests all the commandments of God.

Secondly, An upright man, he is universal in all graces, he is a man of all
graces; for why is God said to be the God of all grace? but in respect that his
people have all graces in them, and he is the Author of all; 2 Cor. 8. 7. the
Apostle says, therefore as you abound in every grace, etc. As who should say,
if you be sincere, for so it is in the next verse, etc. you do not show your
selves to be sincere in your love to God and his Church, unless you abound in
this grace and that grace, and all the graces of Gods holy spirit; so that a
man must have all graces that is upright; there must be none wanting; he must
have the whole image of God, he must have the whole new clothing, he must be a
new creature, he must be endued with all the cluster of graces, Ephesians. 5. 9. And
as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. you may see there how all graces are
concatenated and linked together, that if a man have one he must have all;
suppose a man should have faith, if he should not add to his faith virtue,
what would his faith do him good? he is never the nearer, his faith cannot save
him, he must add to it virtue; and when a man has faith, if he have not
knowledge, what is zeal without knowledge? the Apostle preaches the doctrine
of reprobation against the Jews for their zeal, when they had not knowledge; a
man cannot be really virtuous, unless he has knowledge, and does it with
wisdom and discretion; now if a man had faith, and all other virtues, and were
not temperate, he were a very beast; and if a man had all these, and had not
patience, a man cannot possess his s^ul; though a man has faith, yet without
patience he cannot inherit the promises; so that you see an upright man is one
that has all graces; so that a man that has not all the graces of Gods
spirit, if he want one, he has never a one of them; and thus it is with every
man that is not right, though he may have admirable qualities and endowments of
Gods blessed spirit, yet if he have not all, he is not upright; but now an
upright man has all the graces of Gods spirit; it is true, some of Gods
children are more eminent in one grace, and some in another, but every child of
God has all the graces of Gods spirit; if a man want one, he cannot have
another.

Thirdly, An upright man is universal in regard of place, he is not only good
among good company, but good also among bad company; he is good out of the
Church, as well as in the Church; and good at home, as well as in the streets,
among such and such; he is good abroad, as well as in his own Town; as you may
see, Psalm 16. 8. I have always set God before mine eyes; an upright man
wheresoever he is, he sets God before his eyes, that he may not provoke him,
nor offend him; The upright dwell in his presence, Psalm 140. 13. you will say,
may be they go an hundred miles off, but wheresoever they go they dwell in his
presence, and this makes him good in all places, now a rotten-hearted man, may
be he will be good in the Church, but leaves his Religion at the Church door;
may be he will be good abroad, but he will neglect his own family; or if he be
honest and well ordered while he is in his own Parish, yet let him go abroad
afar off into another Town where no body knows him, may be there he will fly
out; you shall see many a professor, that joins himself to the people of God at
home, and will be drunk abroad; these are false and unsound hearts, that are
not good in all places; if they be godly openly, they are not so secretly; thus
it is with wicked and ungodly men, if they come among good people, they will
not for shame drink nor swill nor swear, nor speak against goodness; but if
they be among wicked people, they will side with them, and may be gird at the
Saints of God, and give them back blows; just as it is with water, put it into
a Tub, it will have the shape of a Tub; put it into a Beaker, it will have the
shape of a Beaker; it still fashions it self according to the vessel into which
it is put; but an upright man is like a solid thing that keeps its own figure,
he is the same in all places.

Fourthly, An upright man is universal in regard of time, he is good at all
times, Psalm. 106. 3. Blessed is he that keeps judgment and righteousness at
all times; not as though a child of God may not fall fearfully many times, but
it is against the absolute bent of his heart, and care and study of his soul; a
Divine sets it out by a spring between a couple of hills, it will always run,
it will either run thorough those lets that stop it, or else it will run over
those lets; it cannot cease running if it be a living spring; so a godly
sincere heart is good at all times; now an unsound Christian, that never had
the true grace of life in his heart, he will not be good at all times, he will
be good by fits and turns; when he is smitten at a Sermon, when he is under the
rod, under a cross, then he will fall foul with his ^ins, and when conscience
is up, then he will be good; as a Windmill goes as long as the wind sills the
sails; but if the wind be down, the grist may lie long enough till the wind
blow again; but a true Christian is like a good boat man, if the wind blow he
may go the better, but if the wind be down he will go too, nay, he will labor
so much the more; he will go though it be against wind and tide; so it is with
an upright man, he is good at all times, not only when he is well, but also
when he is sick; he is good in prosperity, and good in adversity; good when his
conscience is up, and good when his conscience is not so stirring; though he
wants some helps, and drives so much the more heavily, yet he strives and will
be good; but an ungodly heart, may be he may be good sometimes, but it will not
hold; as it is said of Sigismund the Emperor, when he was sick, then he would
be good and godly, and thought of repentance, and sent for a Confessor, and
would repent, and asked him Have I not repented? yes says he, if it hold; but
a wicked man's repentance will not hold; let God but pluck out the arrow, he
will return to his old byas again, and he is never the nearer, nay, may be he
is worse then he was before.

Fifthly, An upright man is universal in regard of parts; as Christ speaks of
his Spouse, Thou art all fair my love, Cant. 4. 7. She was all fair in all
parts, and there was no spot in her; he does not deny but there was failings
and weaknesses, but no such soul spots as upon wicked men; so a godly man is
all fair; his understanding that is teachable, and made to savor of the truth,
and capable to be guided and informed by the spirit of God* you know there is
rebellion in the understandings of men, carnal reasons, and strong holds, and
haughty and proud principles of reasoning; if they are convinced of a sin, they
will not leave it, they have reasonings for that ^n; and if they have never
such convictions for a duty, there is rebellion in the understanding to put off
this; but an upright heart, his understanding is good in some measure, he is
unfeignedly willing to be instructed of God; whatsoever course he takes, tell
him out of the word of God that it is not good, though his life depends upon
it, it shall go, he dares not stand out against God; but a wicked heart has
not a teachable understanding* it is still under its stubbornness and
stoutness, and reasoning against God: and things he does not like, he will not
see; when there is any sin he would not leave, or any duty he would not do, as
Christ says, Mat. 13. 15. he thus his eyes, and will not see. What wicked man
that lives under the Gospel of God, but may see his courses are naught, but he
will not see it? how many sins do ungodly men keep? there is light enough, and
reason enough against their sins, but they have sturdy minds, and will not
be convinced of it.

Again, An upright man his heart is converted and made godly, his will is made
pliable to be led by God, and guided by Gods blessed spirit: the stone is taken
out of it; there may be much hardness, but the stone is gone, the heart of
stone is gone, and he has an heart of flesh given unto him, to be sensible of
God, and sensible of his word, and sensible of the light that shines in his
face; and his heart being converted, he is moved by an inward principle, and so
moves the more willingly, and the more freely; as David says, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
He has a willing heart. But now a carnal heart, and a heart that is not turned
to God, the stone is not taken out, a man rebels to this day; if he be moved to
goodness, it is not by an inward principle, but by education or goodness of
nature; or by the stings of conscience that overpower his heart; or by reason
of a great light that breaks in and overawes his heart: Therefore a naughty
heart, be he never so good and fair-carriaged, may be his conscience sometimes
makes him forbear more then he would, and makes him do more good then he
would; but a godly heart is willing to do what good he can, nay he would do
more good then he can do, nay he never can do so much as he would, he is
ashamed of all his works; look what he does, ^he does it with a willing heart.

Again* A godly heart is good in his memory* as David says, Psalm 119. 16. I
will never forget thy precepts. His memory is turned to good things, and made
to remember good things; he hides the word of God in his heart, that he may
not sin against him: But a carnal heart forgets to be good, and zealous, and
please God, and obey God; his memory is not washed and sanctified in any
measure.

Again, A good man is good in his thoughts; he does not only purge the outside
of the platter, but the inside also; he labors to have his thoughts set upon
things above; he labors that vain thoughts may not lodge in him; nay his main
care is within doors, in his own bosom, to have his thoughts upright toward
God.

So again, he is good in his affections, he does hunger and thirst after
righteousness, he does desire the things that are most excellent, he does
delight in God and his presence; he mourns for his sins, and mourns that he can
mourn no more; he has all his affections in some measure rightly seated and
qualified; he is good all over, as the Apostle Paul says, 1 These. 5. 23. The
God of peace sanctify you throughout. As who should say, This is sincerity,
and I pray God give it you, that you may not deceive your own souls, but that
your whole spirit and body, and soul, and whole man may be true in the eyes of
the Lord: But now a carnal heart is not thus; though he be like a whited
Sepulcher, he does seem outwardly to be a good man, and a man cannot check him;
if a man should say, such a one is rotten, he should be th^ught to be
censorious and uncharitable; yet in his inward parts he is naught, if a man be
not upright, he does not look to his thoughts, but can let them be vain and
unfruitful, and can let his affections run at random; he is not affected with
God, he does not mourn for his sins, he does not delight in good things, his
affections are not set upon things that are above.

Sixthly, An upright man is universal in regard of cases and conditions, if he
be under any kind of temptation whatsoever, as we may see, James 1. 12. It is
nothing for a man to be godly, and meek, and patient, and virtuous, when he is
not tempted; the Devil himself is good when he is pleased, as we say: This is
godliness and uprightness, when a man resists temptations* when a man does
watch and pray, and is careful that he may not enter into temptations; when a
man is careful of all the objects, and beginnings, and occasions of sin; when a
man fights against the temptations of the flesh, and wars against the
suggestions of Satan, and puts on all the armor of God, to withstand the fiery
darts of the Devil; though he be tempted to be proud, and wrathful, and
impatient, yet he will not; it is true, now and then he may be overcome against
his principles, and care, and labor, but that is as a dagger to his heart.
This is his course and practice to fight against temptations: nay take him in
the desperatest cases, yet a godly man is sincere; take him when he is most
afraid that he is not sincere, when he cries out, how dastardly am I for God?
how dead in good duties? how full of unbelief? what a vile heart have I? how
filthy and untoward? take him in these desperate lifts, he is not without
sincerity; and in this case he does one of these two things; either he walks
according to the measure of grace given unto him, or else according to the
condition wherein he is; it is true, the conditions Gods people are in, are
sometimes better, and sometimes worse; sometimes horrible distempers are up,
and sometimes they are down; but when they are never so up, he does as a man in
that case may do; as a man when he is bound hand and foot, what can he do? if
he roll himself upon the ground, that is all he can do; and this he will
do, as you may see what David says, Psalm 119. 40. It seems he felt himself
marvellously dead, and dull, and wonderfully inobedient, and he could not get
hold of Gods commandments to do them as he ought; yet he rowls himself, and
thrusts himself forward to do them; he longed for Gods commandments, he
longed for the spirit of grace to assist him and quicken his heart. Now a
naughty heart is not good in all cases; nay there are but a few cases wherein
he is good at all.

Again, Take an upright man in the lowest ebb, he does question his sincerity,
and he cannot quiet himself, because he thinks he has it not, but this is
certain, a man that has most sincerity, does most suspect the want of it; that
man is most eager, and most questions himself; as David, was not he an upright
man? yet no man did suspect himself more, Psalm 119. 80. as who should say,
Lord I am afraid I shall be ashamed in the end, I am afraid my heart is not
sound toward thee; and directly sometimes, I am horribly afraid I shall be
confounded in the end: Now good Lord let me be sound in thy statutes, that I
may not be confounded. So it was with Christ's Disciples, when he said one of
them should betray him; though eleven of his Disciples were privy to themselves
that they had not the least thought to betray him, yet eleven of the Disciples
did suspect themselves, I may be the man that he means; though they were privy
to themselves for the present they had no such thought, nay it was against the
love and principles they had in them; they did love him, and fear him, and
believe in him to be the Savior of the world, and they durst not do it, yet
they suspected themselves, Master, is it I? As who should say, I have a base
corrupt heart, and it may be I for all the goodness that is in ^e and the love
I bear to thee; they were all more unquiet then Judas that was the man: indeed
when all questioned it, he would question it also for company.

Seventhly, an upright man is universal in regard of relations. Consider him
with good people, and the Saints of God, O how he loves them* he honors them
that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4. Though they ^e never so poor and vile, yet he
honors them that fear the Lord; as Elisha says, he would not have spoken, but
only for Jehosaphat; so an upright man he honors the Saints of God. All my
delight is in the Saints, says David, Psalm. 16. Psalm. 119. 63. Nay an upright
man is faithful with the Saints; as it is said of good Judah, she was faithful
with the Saints, Hos. 11. 12. So an upright man is faithful with the Saints,
his heart closes with them, they are his bosom friends, and the beloved of
his soul: But one that is not sound, though he take himself to be a Christian,
and one of Gods servants, ye^ he cares not for the people of God; may be he
cares for those that seem to be religious; but if a man he religious indeed, he
cares not for him, he is too nice and precise for him, and he is false to the
Saints, and will show them some slippery trick in the end.

Now again Consider an upright man with the wicked; he carries himself
uprightly toward them, he will not be acquainted with them, nor all one with
them, lest he should countenance their wicked ways; as the Psalmist speaks, He
despises them that are wicked, Psalm. 15. 4. Let a vile man be never so brave,
and excellent, and noble, and high in preferment; yet if he be a wicked man, in
the eyes of a godly man he is despised; I do not mean for his person; he gives
him the honor due to his place, as he ought to do, a child to his Father, a
servant to his Master, etc. as Paul, Acts 22. 1. Though they persecuted him, he
gave them their due; but he abhors their courses and practices, as Solomon
says, A wicked man is an abomination to the just. Now an unsound heart, though
he join himself to the people of God, yet he cannot close with the Saints of
God, but abhors them, and counts them vile.

Again, Consider an upright man with his friends; he is true to them,
especially to their souls. Consider him with his enemies; he does not yield
them railing for railing, he dares not hate them that hate him, but blesses
them that curse him, and prays for them that despitefully use him. Consider
him in his Family; he sets himself to walk uprightly in the midst of his
house; if he be a Master, he labors to be a servant to Christ; and if he be a
servant, he labors to be the Lords Freeman, and to be a profitable servant to
his Master; if he has Superiors, he gives them the reverence due unto them;
and if he deal with inferiors, he makes himself equal with those of low
degree. Thus an upright man is good in all relations.

Lastly, An upright man is good in all the manners and circumstances of his
actions; he is careful to do, not only for matter what God commands him, but
for the manner as God commands him; though he does what God commands, yet if he
dot^ ^ot find the love of God setting him a work, he is not contented; he must
(...) in a right manner, constantly, duly, faithfully, and to a right end, to
the glory of God; he is not content to pray and hear, but he must pray and hear
in a right manner, or else he is not content. Now if thou have these signs and
tokens of an upright heart, blessed be God, thou may take all the comforts
spoken of before concerning an upright heart, and may take all the promises
of God to thy self that are made to an upright heart; may be men may call thee
hypocrite, and say all manner of evil of thee; but either they are such as do
not know thee, or if they do, they are some vile wretches, they have not the
fear of God before their eyes; may be the Devil will accuse thee, and cast in
all accusations against thee before God; but what of all that? God himself
said Job was an upright man, and yet the Devil accused him for an hypocrite;
therefore care not for the Devils accusations; may be thine own conscience may
accuse thee; but if thou labor to humble thy self for thy failings, and stir
up the gift of God that is in thee, if thou unfeignedly desire and endeavor to
please God, and serve him, no matter though thy conscience accuse thee. 1 Cor.
4. 3. Paul says, I cannot be my own Judge, but God shall judge me. It Is true,
conscience is a judge, but it is subordinate, and must be guided and ruled by
the Word of God; as the clock is the judge of the day, but it must be ruled by
the Sun; David's conscience was his judge, I have cleansed my hands in vain, but
the clock lied; so thy conscience may lie, and accuse thee falsely, and speak
things against thee that are not so; but if thy conscience has things against
thee indeed and in truth, that thou art guilty of such and such sins and
failings, yet it does not follow but thou may be sincere; therefore believe
not conscience, when thou have the Word of God on thy side; nay, may be God
himself will seem to accuse thee, and to be thine enemy, and discountenance
thee, and will not own thee for one of his children; when thou come before
him, he will seem to dash thee under his feet, and give thee no countenance,
but look upon thee as an enemy; yet be not dismayed, if thou have these things
in thee in any measure; the Lord does this, that he may do thee good in thy
latter end; he does it that he may humble thee, and try thee, whether thou will
live by faith or by sense, and whether thou dare trust him; but if thou have
not these signs of uprightness, thou art in the gall of bitterness, and bond
of iniquity, and thou can have no true comfort to thine own soul.

The next point is, That as we must be perfect, so we must be perfect before
Doctrine. We must labor to be perfect before God.
God; I have not found thy works perfect before God. As who should say, I looked
thou should be perfect before him, and I have not found it so. Well then for
the meaning of the word perfect before God; that is, so as God may approve and
allow of them. Now a man's works may be perfect so as God may approve of them
two ways.

First, So as God may approve of them in his strict Justice; and so no man's
works can be perfect. Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into judgment, etc. No man
living can be justified before God. So Romans 3. 20. By the deeds of the Law
shall no man be justified before him. This therefore is not the meaning.

Secondly, To be perfect before God, so as God shall approve of ^s in his mercy
in Jesus Christ for his own faithful people; as it is said of Zachary and
Elizabeth, Luke 1. 5. This is the meaning of the place.

Now if you would know what it is to be perfect before God, it is this in one
word: when a man is for matter and for manner right in the eyes of God; not
only right in the eyes of men, to be a(...)ed of men, but right in the eyes of
God, to be approved of God; for matt(...)n a man does those things that God
commands him; and for manner, (...) he does them as God commands him, out of
faith in God, and love to God, and fear of God; when a man does it with all his
heart, soul, and strength, when a man does it constantly, and frequently, and
livelily in some measure, this is to be upright before God; you may see both
these set down in one verse, Deuteronomy. 6. 25. Here is the matter, If ye observe to
do his commandments; and then here is the manner, right in the eyes of the
Lord as he has commanded. If we do thus, then we are upright before God. Now
if either of these be wanting, we are not upright before God; if we do not for
matter what God has commanded; if we lie, or swear, or be covetous, or proud,
or worldly, these things are of the Devil, and not of God; we do the things of
the Devil, and not the things of God.

Again, If a man should bow the knee to Baal, and do the inventions of men,
this is not to be unright before God; but if we do the things that God does
not bid us, God will say as he did, Matthew. 15. 9. If we do for the matter the
things that God has commanded, yet if the manner be wanting, if we do them
not as God has commanded, if we do them not with faith, and love to God, with
conscience, and fervency, and quickening, all is nothing; as it is said of
Amaziah, he did those things that were right in the eyes of the Lord, but the
Lord cared not for it, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. it was not with an upright heart;
Therefore when both these concur, this is to be upright before God.

First, Because God has so commanded, thou shall have no other gods before me;
that is, I will have thee sincere before me; As who should say, thou may vow
and swear, and protest thou do love God, and fear God; but if it be not so
indeed, thou have a false heart; if thou have carnal ends, if thou love the
world more then God, and thou love thy lusts more then him, if it be so, woe
unto thee; God will have thee upright before him. As God says to Abraham, Genesis
17. 1. Walk before me, and be upright: As who should say, Abraham, if there be
any way of wickedness in thee, thou art not for me; look thou be perfect before
me; if thou do acknowledge that I am God Almighty, and I am able to help
thee, and succor thee in all estates, then be upright before me; when a man
sins, it is for something he sins; now, what is there that is good but we may
have it in God? God is Almighty, and therefore he would have us upright before
him; and if we be not upright, he is Almighty and can crush us and destroy us
for ever; so that we should not only be upright before men, but before God.

Secondly, As the Law is so, so is the Gospel; if a man has not faith in
Christ Jesus, that man is no true Christian; howsoever he may hope to be saved
by Christ, yet if he be not upright before God in all his ways and
commandments in some measure, in studying and endeavoring to keep himself
unspotted of the world in all things, he has not faith, he does not believe in
Jesus Christ, Psalm. 116. 9, 10. as David says, I will walk before the Lord in
^^e land of the living; how comes David to speak that? O, I believed, therefore
I have spoken; if a man believe in God, it will make him walk well not only
before men, but before God who is privy to all his thoughts and affections;
privy to what he does both at home, and abroad; privy to what he does alone,
and in company, in his shop, and in the market; unless he be upright before him
that knows all things, he is not a believer; though Simon Magus were baptized,
and did partake of Christian Religion, and had some kind of faith, and joined
himself to Philip and the Church, as a member of the Church, and gave over his
witchcraft and wicked courses, yet when Peter saw his heart was not right
before God, mark what he says, Acts 8. 21. God has sworn an oath, that
whomsoever he delivers from sin, from Satan, from Hell, from the wrath to come,
they shall be holy and righteous before him. Luke 1. 73. God will not be
forsworn; if thou do hope to be saved by Jesus Christ, and prayest, and
howlest, and criest in thy afflictions from the bottom of thy heart, with all
thy eagerness to be saved by Jesus Christ, God has sworn an oath thou shall
not be saved by him, unless thou will walk in holiness and righteousness before
him all the days of thy life, and be conformable to his will in all things; so
that you see the Gospel requires it, that we should be thus.

Again, This is the end of the redemption of the world by Christ, that they
should not only be upright, but upright before God; as Paul tells the
Coll^ssians, chap. 1. To present you holy and unblameable in his sight; not
only to present you holy and unblameable before men; for if a man in his
outward carriage be civil, and honest and fair, this is to be holy and
unblamable before men; but if a man be holy and unblamable before God, he must
have a pure conscience, and his ends must be right; this is the end why Christ
redeemed his people, to purchase to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works.

And as it is in the end of redemption, so it is the end of election;
whomsoever God does elect to eternal life, he does elect to this end, not only
to be holy before men, but before God. As the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1. 4. he has
chosen us to be holy before him, not only to be holy before men (though those
that are not holy before men, cannot be holy before God) but it is not enough
for us to be holy before men, but before the piercing eye of the all-seeing
God; that he may see who knows our* hearts, that we do unfeignedly desire to
serve his name, and walk before him in the shunning of all sin, and in the
practicing of all good things, so that we have not an argument of our election,
unless we be upright before him.

Fourthly, Because the Lord will search us out; certainly though we be upright
before men, if we be not upright before God he will search us out; it is not
our profession shall bear us out, if we have an unbelieving heart, to depart
from the living God; if we have a mind to live in any one sin, and to allow
our selves in any one wicked way, God will find us out. Neh. 9. 8. he speaks
there of Abraham; what a comfort was it to Abraham's heart that God sound his
heart upright before him? God will search us, and put us upon the trial, and
bring something or other, that if we be not upright, though we be affected, and
pray, and be Protestants, and seem to be godly, and seem to hold our godliness
and uprightness, yet if we be not sound at the core, God will have something or
other that shall discover us, and it shall appear what we are; nay, God does of
purpose bring in heresies, that those that are approved may be manifest, 1 Cor.
11. 19.

Lastly, It is God only that does esteem of the worth of things; holiness is
nothing, but that which is holiness in Gods esteem; and Religion is nothing,
but that which is Religion in Gods esteem; Religion is a divine thing, and no
man has the judgment of it but God; it is God only that has invented
Religion, and framed it to us, and it is he only that can tell the worth of it,
and approve of it; and unless we fear his name, and hate all sin, and be
upright before him, all is nothing. As the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 3. 4.
concerning meekness in women, in the esteem of God it is of high price; may be
a beautiful woman, of rare parts and great gifts, this woman is of high esteem
with some men; but a woman of an humble and meek spirit, she is a mockery in
the eyes of the world, but in Gods sight it is of great price: so far a man to
be outwardly Religious, this man is very devout and religious in the sight of
men, but it is the broken heart, and the co^^ite spirit, one that is holy
inwardly as well as outwardly, that is upright as Paul says, 2 Cor. 5. 9. all
our care and labor is that we may be accepted of him; it is no matter what the
world say of a religious man, and a devout man; all our care is to be accepted
of him, that he may account us upright, for we must appear before him.

This condemns the ceremonious devotion that many content themselves Rome; they
are so religious, and whatsoever they do, they think it is with such devotion;
therefore they have ceremonies for every thing; they have ceremonies to show
that we must be strangers and Pilgrims upon earth, therefore they have
Pilgrimages to such and such places; other ceremonies they have to show that we
must take up the Cross of Christ, and follow him; they will have a ceremony to
show that they believe that Christ was offered for a sacrifice; and a ceremony
to show that they believe he was God and man, and so mix Wine and water
together; the one shall signify that they believe he was God, and the other
that he was man; again, they will have other ceremonies, to show that they
believe the departure of the Saints, therefore they bring in a catalogue of the
Virgin Mary, and of the Saints; again, they have another ceremony to show that
they honor the Lords prayer; another ceremony they have to show that they
believe the resurrection of the dead; another ceremony to show that they should
not be ashamed of the Christian faith; and they are so devout and think
themselves the only Saints in the world* so that they account a man that is
godly indeed, according as God would have a man to be, that makes conscience of
the word, that is careful to please God, and fearful to offend him, and
scruples every thing that is not according to the word, this man is worse then
a drunkard, or an hell-hound in their account; they are counted the vilest
hypocrites and dissembl^rs that can be; what an horrible thing is this! men
love a life such a Religion as this; this shakes no Corn, this breaks no bones,
what care men for this. Mat. 15. 8. there is an excellent place for this; you
know we are bound to be pure, and always pure; now the Jews to show this* they
would never eat nor drink but they would wash their hands, to show that they
must be pure; which was as good, and as clean, and as handsome a ceremony as
ever was in the Church of Rome; and would you think that Christ should ever
find fault with such ceremonies? they took on because they neglected this, Why
do thy Disciples transgress the tradition of the Elders, by eating with
unwashed hands? now Christ was so far from bidding his Disciples yield to this,
that he calls the Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites for it, and tells them they
made the commandment of God of no effect through their traditions; if this were
to be devout and religious, the vilest drunkard may be religious, for they may
perform this as well as any other, therefore this is nothing.

Again, This may serve to condemn carnal Protestants, who give God now and then
the hearing of a Sermon, and frequent the Sacrament, and do the outward things
of Religion, but never come to worship God in spirit and in truth; let me tell
you all this Religion is nothing at all; suppose a man comes to Church only,
and lives in his lusts, what then? Who required this at your hands to tread in
my courts? Isa. 1. 12. Who? why God requires it; it is true, but not without
uprightness; to be proud still, and worldly still, he requires you to come into
his courts, but not in this manner; so likewise for preaching, it is an
ordinance of God, but if a man will preach, and does not lead an holy and
mortified life, and is not zealous for God and against sin, and to hold forth a
blessed pattern of uprightness, God had as live have that man's room as his
company, Psalm. 50. 16. What have thou to do to take my word into thy mouth, and
hate to be reformed? As who should say, what make thou here? it is fitter
for thee to be in an Alehouse then in a Pulpit; so God has commanded prayer,
but if a man pray not in spirit and in truth, and is not an holy man, his
prayers are nothing. Prove. 15. 8. The prayer of the wicked is an abomination to
God; As who should say, if you prayed with an upright heart, your sacrifice
would be a delight to God; but seeing you are not upright, all your prayers and
sacrifices are abominable in the sight of God.

For humiliation to humble us; how should we be ashamed, there is no
uprightness among us? the most of us are not upright before men, much less
before God.

For exhortation, that we would strive and labor to be upright, and upright
before him; that we would cry out with the Prophet David, O let my heart be
upright before thee, that I may not be ashamed; if we find listlessenesse, and
backwardness for God, if we find our hearts side with the ungodly, let us know
we are wicked people, and cannot be of God; therefore set us labor to be
upright before God.

REV. 3. 2. I have not found thy works perfect before God.
THe point of Doctrine is this, that the Lord will search whither Doctrine. God
will search whither we be perfect.
those that seem to be upright be so or no; finding presupposes searching; I
have not found thy works perfect. Now for the meaning of this searching, we
must know that Gods searching and man's searching do much differ, and they
differ in five respects.

First, Man's searching may be without finding; though a man search all that
ever he can, yet may be he cannot find out the matter how it stands; Laban
searched in Jacobs tent, and Leahs tent, and the two maids tent, and in Rachels
tent for his images, and when he had done all he could not tell where they
were; but now when God searches men, he is sure to find men out; O Lord thou
searchest me out, says David, Psalm. 139. 1. This is the reason why men that
are sligh and subtle, they care not much though they be si^^ed by men,
especially if there be none to witness against them; you shall have them swear
and swagger they were never guilty of such a thing, because they are confident
it shall never come to light; but if God searches, he will be sure to find.

Secondly, Man's searching has ever ignorance foregoing, though after search
may be he comes to know, yet before searching he knows not; Job, 29. 16. the
case I knew not, I searched out; he searched because he knew not; but God as
after searching he is sure to know and find out, so he knows before all
searching; as the Church says, if we be false in thy covenant, shall not God
find us out? for thou know the very thoughts of the heart and the reins,
Psalm. 44. 21. you see God searches because he does know, man because he does
not.

Thirdly, Man's searching is properly so called; but when searching is spoken of
God, it is after the manner of men; God does rather act a kind of searching,
then search indeed; as he does act a coming down, whereas properly he does not
come down, for he is everywhere; and so he acts a kind of ignorance, as if he
knew not, and yet he knows all things; as he speaks to Abraham concerning
Sodom, Genesis 18. 21. I will go down no^; there is an horrible noise, what
horrible sinners these Sodomites be; I will g^ down now, and see whither it be
altogether according to the cry that is come up unto me; if not, I will know:
He speaks after the manner of men; he need not come down, for he is present
everywhere, and cannot move from one place to another; and whereas he says, if
not, I will know; these things a^ improperly spoken after the manner of men.

Fourthly, It is man's duty to search if he know not any particular passage of
his life, whither it be warrantable or no; so Magistrates ought to search
matters before they determine sentence, otherwise they may judge unrighteous
judgment; now God searches not as though he had any need of searching, but to
tell us our duty, to give us a good example; this phrase is given to him, to
show us what we should do; as when there was an horrible attempt in the old
world among the Builders of Babel, they would build a Tower whose top should
reach up unto Heaven. Now the Text says, The Lord came down to see the Tower
and the City that was built; not as if he came down, so as taking this phrase
unto himself; but to show what our duty, and Magistrates duty is; to search
before they pass sentence, and to see whether reports given out be true or no.

Fifthly, Man's searching is for himself, that things may appear to himself;
but when God searches, it is not that it may appear unto him, but to the
world, that it may be manifest abroad, that a man's self and others may see it;
it is spoken only in regard of the nature of the thing; some things are
manifest, and some secret. Now God is said to search, when he makes other
things that in their own nature are hidden to men, when God brings them abroad,
and unveils them, and unmasks them, and openly reveals them. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Judge
not before the time, till the Lord comes, who will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness. He searches them not for himself, but to make them
manifest; he saw them before, but they were not manifest abroad; they were
under the hatches, no body could tell whether they were so or no. Now God is
said to search to bring them abroad.

Now God is said to search five manner of ways.

First, By his own Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 10. So says David, Whither shall I fly
from thy Spirit? if I go up into heaven, thou art there, etc. If thou should
go into the Alehouse, or any bad place, God is there a spectator; though the
Devil only, and such as are his Imps, are there keeping company with thee, yet
God is there beholding thee; though we should dig never so deep, God can trace
us, and find us out; though we should be never so closely and cleverly wicked,
God can dive into us what we are; Come in thou wife of Jeroboam, says the
Prophet, why dissemblest thou thy self to be another? The Spirit of God
revealed it. When Gehesai wiped his lips, O thy servant ^ent no whither; Did
not my spirit go with thee, says Elisha, when the man returned? He shows how
the Spirit of God, which he calls his spirit, because it dwelt in him, did
reveal his wretchedness.

Secondly, As the Lord searches by his own Spirit, so also by the spirit of
man; as for example, by the spirit of the Magistrate, he does search out sly
offenders; when Solomon had said, The King does scatter the wicked, Prove. 20.
27. in the next words he answers an Objection, How shall he find out whether
such a man be wicked or no? A man may be brought before a Magistrate, and yet
have all the hands in the Parish for his good behavior: Now how shall the
Magistrate find it out? says he, The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord;
that is, as Tremelius expounds it, the Lord helps the Magistrate to find out
these fellows, though they be never so subtle; and how does he help him? by the
Magistrates own wit and wisdom; it is the candle of the Lord, the Lord gives
him light to sift things, and bring things to light; and though wicked and
ungodly men hang together, though they swear and combine themselves hand in
hand together, yet if a Magistrate be an able man, and gifted of the Lord, the
Lord has set a candle in that man's mind, to light him how to discover them:
As when the two Harlots came before Solomon, the spirit of Solomon was the
candle of the Lord that lighted him to discover which was the mother of the
child.

Thirdly, God does search a man by the conscience in a man himself; sometimes
you shall have a child of God much afraid that he is not sincere, and calls
all into question; anon the Lord discovers he is sincere, and reveals he is
upright; how does he do it? by his own conscience; as the ease was David's; one
time he concluded all was naught, and he had nothing of God in him, and God was
gone quite away, and had shut up his mercy for evermore; at last God revealed
David to himself, and that by his own conscience; My own spirit searched,
says he, Psalm. 77. 6. and then he saw that it was but his infirmity; his own
spirit and conscience, the Lord stirred it up to make diligent search, and
David perceived himself to be as he was; so on the contrary a wicked man may
seem to have good hopes to be godly, and to have an honest and sincere heart,
and be a good Christian, and he professes himself to be so; and if any one
should charge him with the contrary, he would say they were uncharitable. Now
this is a secret. Now the Lord searches him out by his own conscience; thus it
was with Pharaoh; he thought he did well in not letting the children of Israel
go, nay he thought Moses was unreasonable to demand such a thing; what, to let
six hundred thousand of his servants to go out of his Kingdom at once! there
was no equity he should let them go. Now the Lord discovered this was nothing
but the wretchedness of his own heart, and made his conscience cry out, The
Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. Rightly does he call for it
at my hands, and rightly does he punish me for not doing of it, and I am a
wicked man, and have done it out of the wickedness of my heart.

Fourthly, The Lord searches men out by his Word; he does thereby discover men
to be what they are, Heb. 4. 12. The Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper
then a two-edged sword, etc. and is a searcher and discerner of the thoughts
and intentions of the hearts; the Word of God does search and discover men;
though they be never so secretly covered, yet notwithstanding the Word of the
Lord finds them out; as you may see it discovered the woman of Samaria; it made
her give over all her wrangling and disputing the case with Christ; it made her
cry out at the last, O come and see a man that has told me all that ever I
have done, John 4. 29. So the Apostle when he would exhort the Corinthians to
expound the word in a known tongue, he gives this reason; O says he, if you
do thus, it will discover people; if a man should come in, he will be judged
by you, and the thoughts of his heart will be made manifest, 1 Cor. 14. 24. The
Word of God is a divine thing, and it is a plain sign that it is the word of an
all-searching God; for it can meet with men's thoughts, and men's secrets. When
King Ahasuerus said, What shall be done to the man whom the King delights to
honor? what man living could tell what Haman thought at that time? yet the
Word of God revealed the thought of his heart, Hest. 6. 6. When David was
dancing before the Ark, and Michal looked o^t at the window, what man could
tell what she thought in her heart? yet the Word of God sets it down, She
despised him in her heart, 2 Samuel 6. 16. When Foelix was talking privately with
St. Paul friendly and kindly, what man or Angel could imagine what Foelix
thought at that time? yet the Word of the Lord lays it open, He thought to
have a bribe: You will say, who could tell that it is true? men know not peoples
hearts; yet many times the Word meets with them, insomuch that they are ready
to say sometimes, who told the Minister of me? certainly he has some blab, how
should he come to know this, and speak of this in the Pulpit? the Word of God
meets with them.

Fifthly, the Lord searches men by his providence; though men carry it out
never so handsomely and fairly, and can go in the dark, and under the hatches
for a long time; yet the providence of God will have a time to find them out,
as Job speaks, Job 12. 22. He discovers the deep things out of darkness, etc.
That is, he does it many times by his providence, he reveals things that are
otherwise secret and unknown, and lie hid, yet he brings them out; men may
blear the world, and deceive their own souls, but the providence of God in the
end will search out all secret things, and make them as manifest as things done
on the house top; it is a strange thing to see how many, that have boiled in
their hearts against the Saints and Ministers of God, and they have carried it
it out slyly and fairly, yet God has discovered their malice and spite, and
their venomous speeches, and the envy they have borne against the people of
God: What strange things has the Lord discovered? when men have concluded no
eye should see it, I hope no body shall know it; yet the providence of God
comes to find it out either first or last. Now the providence of God discovers
men's works that are in secret diverse ways.

First, By letting his people to suspect men; it is true, we ought not to give
way to an humor of suspicion, for it is directly against charity; for charity
thinks no ill; therefore we should take heed of suspicion without just cause
of suspicion; for hereby we may wrong persons, as the Disciples, though Paul
was a true Convert, yet they suspected he was not, and so wronged him: It is a
dangerous thing to suspect any man without infallible ground; yet many times
the providence of God does discover men by this means, as you may see an
example in those false-hearted ones Ezra 4. they would come and build with
Zerubbabel and Jehoshua; they made as if they did intend the promotion of the
Church and Commonwealth. Now verse 3. they suspected them. Now when they saw
that they were shy of them, they displayed themselves, and laid themselves
open, and turned to the contrary side, and did them all the mischief they
could.

Secondly, by letting of good people to injure and wrong them; this is very
true, that the children of God should wrong no body, especially none that are
Christians, that we may have any hope they are godly; if a child of God should
^ong any man in the least degree, he is guilty of all the mischief that shall
follow after; therefore we should be mavelous careful that we wrong no man in
thought, word, or deed; but yet it will be so long as we dwell here in the
flesh; wrongs will be committed by good people sometimes against their wills,
sometimes by corruptions rising in their hearts contrary to their minds and
principles they go upon. Now when these wrongs fall upon those that are not
sound, this discovers them; for their venom and madness falls not only upon
them, but upon all Professors; these are your Professors, and precise fellows!
nay let but the children of God be indiscreet, this by the providence of God
does diverse times discover men; as Saul a great hypocrite, indeed he had many
admirable things in him, he had admirable Government; and though he were not a
man that truly loved holiness, yet he did abundance of good things, and he
hoped he was right. Now the Lord discovered him by this, by letting him have
some indiscretion showed toward him; as the women in the Song, Saul has slain
his thousands, and David his ten thousands; it was indiscreetly spoken of them;
though it were true, they ought not to have made such a Song of it; though no
question the women meant well in what they did, and were honest and well-minded
people; yet through their indiscretion Saul stomachs David, and grows to be a
persecutor; From this time forward be eyed David.

Thirdly, By guiding of his Ministers to home-preaching; this discovers people
what they are; if they be godly and upright, when the word of God meets with
any corruption of theirs, then it shows they are of God; for then they fall
down before God, and acknowledge their sin, and repent of it, and part with it,
and loath it, and cry to Heaven for the pardon of it, and labor to have it
rooted out of their souls and consciences, and so they are discovered to be
sound; but when this meets with an unsound heart, and comes to display his
secret lusts, and vile courses, not being able to stoop to this, it shows what
it is; as when Christ preached something sharply, John 6. 55, 60. O say they,
It is hard hard saying, who can bear it? And from that time many of his
Disciples forsook him. It fares with Gods Church in this case, as with
Ishbosheth; Abner seemed to be his dear friend, and stuck close to him; yet
when Ishbesheth told him of his faults, of his whoredom, and lying with his
Fathers Concubines, then he 2 Samuel 3. 8.
was mad, and was not able to brook him; presently he falls off from
Ishbesheth, because of this away he goes, and turns his enemy: So it fares with
the Saints of God, many seem to be their dear friends, and keep close to them,
and join with them; but when they are dealt withal about things amiss in them,
they discover what they are, they do not like such men, they care not how
little they come in their company, they fail off, and so are made manifest what
they are.

Fourthly, By their own lusts and corruptions; for you shall have men many
times hear the Word, and being wrought upon in their consciences by the Word,
or by Gods judgments, that startles them, they give over their sins upon this,
and reform, and will have good orders in their Families, and take up good
duties; and not having a sound, but a false heart, a covetous heart, in the end
this worldliness, or any other lust that is unmortified, the Lord does use it
as an instrument to discover that all th^se Reformations of theirs were never
sound; in the end they come to count this a burden, and such a burden as they
are not able to bear, and so grow to be something weary of their strict
courses, and give over by degrees not to be so careful in their Families to
pray morning and evening, and sometimes omit it, and not to be so forward for
God and goodness; and at the last they come to show plainly that there was
never any soundness in them; thus the Lord does many times lead them forth
among evil doers, Psa. 125. 5. and so such as have kept company among good
doers, are discovered to be evil doers, thus Demas was discovered; for a time
he followed St. Paul, but having a worldly heart, the Lord discovered him by it
in the and, it made him weary of Paul's company, and he fell to embrace this
present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10.

Lastly, By the times, by persecutions that arise against the Church of God;
and this knocks off all that were but mere hangbyes; it knocks them off from
the good course they seemed to follow before, and they follow the contrary; as
Christ notes, Matthew. 13. 20, 21. They that received the seed into stony ground,
when persecution arose, they f^ll off. When persecution and trouble did arise,
they were offended; this discovered them; as if there be any rift or unsound
place in the house, a sharp tempest will discover it, and show where is a flaw
in the building; so if there be a flaw in a man's faith or profession; if a man
be not right toward God, the times will discover this.

The Reasons of this are, First, because it is Gods Prerogative thus to Jer.
17. 10. I the Lord search the heart, etc. The heart is deceitful above all
things, who can know it? It Is true, but I the Lord search the heart, and try
the reins. So you see God takes it to himself as his own Prerogative Royal, to
search men out what they are: And indeed the Lord sometimes in Scripture is
described by this very thing, the searching of the heart. Romans 8. 27. He that
searches the heart. Who is that? The Apostle does not tell us who it is, but
you may guess who it is by the Epithet he gives him. So that God, I say, is
known by this, and will be known by this, by searching men's hearts, and
discovering what men are, and aim at, and intend; what men hate, and what they
love; what things they do, and how they do them.

Secondly, As this is Gods Prerogative Royal, so of all things in* the world he
will bring that which is secret out, whether men be sincere or no. Men make a
show, O they are baptized, and come to Church, and take pains in their places
and callings; and what can you allege against me? Now of all things in the
world, God will discover this, if men be not as they seem to be; if men have
malice in their hearts, and pride; if they seek the world, and be ambitious,
and seek to please men, and make as if they would please God; if they be
false-hearted, God will discover this; he will discover all things, but
specially Hypocrisy; if any will be Adulterers, and will not be known to be
such; if any will be proud, or scoffers of Religion, and will not be known to
be such, God will bring this to light; as Job says, If you secretly accept
persons, God will surely reprove you, Job ^3. 10. God will bring all the world,
and all their doings to light; but of all things, if men have secret haunts,
and back-doors to do evil; if men have devices and colors to put off their
actions, if men can dawb up wretched and filthy cases as if they were good; if
men will go about in this fashion to dawb with untempered mortar, such sins
and sinners as these, God will lay before him, as Moses says, Psalm. 90. 8. As
who should say, thou layest all our sins before us; but if we have any secret
sins, thou layest them upon a rock in the open Sun, the Lord especially ayms at
them; there be many persons in the world, that are godly and honest, and yet
are covered by the scoffs and reproaches of the world, as if they had no good,
nor did any good; and there are others again that are boulstered up in the
world, as if they were good men, and better then those that keep such a pudder.
Now the Lord, as he will bring every thing abroad, so specially this.

Thirdly, Because it is for the glory of God to search men out; as Solomon
says of a King, Prove. 25. 2. It is the glory of a King to search out a matter;
as when the two Harlots were brought before Solomon concerning the child whose
it was, there was no way in the world to know it, there was nothing but their
own asseverations; the one said it was hers, and the other said it was hers;
the one affirmed, the other denied it before the King; now we shall see what a
glory it was to Solomon* to search out who was the mother of the child; the
Text says, all Israel feared King Solomon because of this thing, 1 Kings 3.
28. They trembled before him, they saw he could search out secrets and hidden
things, therefore they durst not do wickedness in secret for fear he should
find them out; so it is the glory of God to search out secret matters and
bring them on the stage; if a man be upright, and this man is spawl'd and spit
upon, and born down in the world, if the Lord should not search it out, what a
dishonor would it be to God? and if a man should go for a good Christian, and
is not, and God should not find them out, what a dishonor would it be to him?
it is the glory of God to search out secret matters.

Fourthly, It is for the truth of God; he has said he will search every one
out, as you may see Job 34. 22. So he has said, He that hides his sins shall
not p^o^per, Prove. 28. 13. So he has said, He that walks uprightly walks
su^^ly, but he that perverteth his ways shall be known. If God has said thus,
certainly it concerns his truth to see it made good; and therefore he must
search them out.

Fifthly, This is for the Justice of God, that God should search out every one
what he is, and what his works be, how should God judge the world else?
therefore when God said he would judge Judah, and punish them because they had
forgotten him; he gives this as the reason of it; Therefore says he, I will
discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame may appear. So when God means
to glorify his Saints, and bestow the Kingdom of Heaven upon them, therefore
he will discover their honesty, and lay open their godly courses, and reward
them for all the taunts and vile reproaches of the wicked.

The first Use may serve to reprove most men generally; we do not consider that
God will search us; what a company of pleas are there to do evil? what a
company of put offs to do good duties? If men can but find any starting hole,
glad are they; and if they can but find any silly pretense, then they are
made, then a man can never get them to do that which is good. When Moses was
loath to go to Pharaoh, what abundance of pretenses had he to put it off? O,
says he, I am unworthy, who am I that I should go before Pharaoh? and another
time, I am not eloquent. He made as if it had been his modesty, he was not fit
for the office; he did not consider that he was to deal with God, that could
search him out; Moses, says he, go before Pharaoh, for they are dead that
sought thy life. As if he had said, I know thy thoughts, thou have killed a man
in Egypt, and thou art afraid that Pharaoh will kill thee; but that Pharaoh is
dead, therefore go. So when a man is unwilling to do a duty, he will have a
thousand excuses; bid men have prayers in their Family, they will say they are
not book-learned, and cannot pray; and how prove you it to be a duty? any thing
God bids them do, they are willing to do; if you show them but a place of
Scripture for it, they make this the reason; but this is hypocrisy, the reason
is, they care not for God, nor for the Family; they care not whether they be
saved or damned; they care not that the fear of God may be in their children
and servants, they care not for this; but they will not believe this is the
cause. Again, bid another be diligent in his Office, alas what shall a man do?
I shall do no good, he is a peaceable man, and he sees all the Parish bandy
themselves together; if he saw there were any hope of doing good, he would do
it; as if he had a very good heart to do what God would have him, in the end
God discovers his hypocrisy, it was because he cared not for God, he did not
hate sin, he had no zeal to Gods glory, he is a lover of men more then God, he
loves his own ease more then holiness, or piety, or good order; therefore let
us know what a dangerous thing it is for a man to dally and double with God,
when we do not consider that God will search our hearts; the Lord knows
whether thou art loath to have such a thing to be a duty, or whether thou do
secretly desire it may not be imposed upon thee; the Lord knows it, therefore
do not put off God in this fashion, for God will search thee out; it is but a
folly for us not to consider that God will search us out; as Solomon says,
Prove. 10. 18. He that covers hatred with lying lips, is a fool; that is, if
a man do bear secret malice against a man, do not love a man, and is not in
sincere charity with him, may be the man covers it with lying lips, O it is not
for this reason and that reason, God forbid I should hate him, whereas indeed
he does not love him; says Solomon, this man is a fool; as who should say,
God will find him, and discover him; therefore what a folly is it not to lay
this to heart.

The second Use is to bid us take heed how we hide our sins from others, or
from our selves.

First, From others, you shall have children, so they can hide their faults
from their parents, that is all they care for; and so servants, if they can but
hide their faults from their Masters and Mistresses, they care not how bad they
be, or how false; so it is with many, you shall have many a man his own bosom
knows what an hard heart he has, what a dead heart, how careless he is of
God, how that he has no delight in good duties; yet if he can but cover it
from the Saints, that when he comes to pray before them, he may carry it off
something handsomely, this is all he cares for, or look after; what an horrible
thing is this, that people should have no more consideration that God will
search us out? we had as good that all the world should know it, as that God
should know it; if we do iniquity, and be careless of his commandments; if we
do evil, though never so secretly, it were better all the world should know it
then God; now God will search it out. Jer. 23. 24. Prove. 5. 21. Therefore we
should ever take heed that we may not have this humor in us, to venture to do
evil, so we can hide it from men; for what though no man knows it? yet we shall
find that God knows it, and will bring it to light one day.

Secondly, We should take heed how we hide our sins from our selves; this is
fearful, and in some sense a great deal more fearful then the other; for many
times when a man hides his sins from others, he knows them himself; but when a
man has a deceitful heart, that he hides them from his own eyes, how can he
repent? a man cannot repent without the sight of his sins; yet, as a Divine
says men desire to hide their sins from God, and from others, but most of all
from themselves: Now what a madness is this, though a man do hide his sins from
himself, he cannot hide them from God, God will search it out; though a man
has never so many colors for his sins, he will not believe it is a sin; alas
poor creature, God will find thee out; as a pluralist, he will think it lawful
to have two livings, but what do thou get by hiding it from thy self, God
will find it out; so for jesting, they think it is lawful to do it; Elisha
jested; and did not Aristotle account it a virtue? and the like; I deny not but
men may have jesting if it be convenient, but when men are excessive in this,
and have no meetings without jesting, and will stand for it, God will find them
out; so men that will not believe that a man should be so strict and precise,
God forbid that none should be saved but such; thus they hide it from
themselves; but when they have done all they cannot hide it from God; but God
will discover them at the last day, may be in this world: so a man that was
never converted, nor never had faith, he thinks he is converted and has faith,
and is religious, and a good Christian. Thus he hides his woeful and vile estate
from his own eyes; but can thou hide it from God? assure thy self God will
search thee out.

Thirdly, This may be for comfort to good people. First, It may be a comfort
against others that shall judge them. Secondly, against themselves.

First, Against others that judge them; may be others are harsh toward them,
and think all manner of evil of them, and may be speak it too. Now this is a
great comfort, that God will search them out; as they be true and upright, and
as they do from the bottom of their hearts set themselves to please God, so
they shall not be judged by men's conceits, but by the Lord; this is that which
comforted Paul against the censures of the Corinths, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. I count it
a small matter to be judged by you, it is the Lord that judges me. As who
should say, I shall not stand or fall at your sentence what you think of me;
no, the Lord judges me; this is a great comfort. So this comforted Peter when
Christ put that triple query to him, Simon thou son of Jonah, love thou me?
As who should say, thou say thou love me, but how can I think it? have thou
not denied me thrice? therefore I ask thee thrice do thou love me; what says
he now? Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. This was
his comfort, that God that searches the heart knew it was his weakness, and
he loved him unfeignedly; as who should say, men may judge me to be a wretch
and an Apostate, and that I love my life and my liberty more then thee; they
may justly judge thus; but thou know how I have grieved for it, and have
been ashamed of it, and it has been as a dagger to my heart; Thou know all
things, and thou know that I love thee.

Secondly, This may be a comfort against their own selves; as a man's Conscience
many times may have shrewd thin^s against the people of God; for the conscience
by nature is legal* and by nature a man is borne under the Covenant of works,
and conscience is apt to be very strict and severe against the children of God,
and to have shrewd things against them, that they can hardly tell how to
answer. Now what a comfort is this to them, though their consciences be unquiet
many times to think that God will search them out, they shall not be judged by
their consciences altogether, but the Lord shall judge them! As Paul did not
only set down a comfort against the censures of the Corinths, but against his
own conscience, I am not my own Judge. Many times conscience may be abused and
cry out, there is nothing good, nothing sounds no true good in my soul Now a
man should say I must not judge my self, but the Lord must judge me* and
search me out; so that this is a great comfort to the people of God, that God
will search every man.

Thirdly* This may stir us up to be able to stand out Gods search, when he
shall come and search.

First, That we may be able to stand when offenses come. When offenses come,
the Lord searches whether people love themselves or love his commandments,
and love his servants; there be such horrible offenses sometimes, that if he
do not love God indeed, he will stumble; the commandments of God, and his
pure worship and service may be so derided and opp^ed, a man may be offended at
it that professed it before, if he love it not indeed, therefore Matthew. 18. 10.
our Savior says, Woe to the World, because of offenses. As if he had said,
when offenses shall come, they shall discover thousands in the world to be
naught* woe to the world when they come, for these be searching things;
therefore let us labor when offenses come, that we may not be offended, as
Christ says Matthew. 11 5. bl^ssed is the man that is not offended in me. That
man is a blessed man* that when all off^nces arise, nothing can make him
offended at Jesus Christ: This does pla^nly show that a man has the grace of
God in him* when nothing can offend him, not the means of Christ in the world
in his members, not the cross that does accompany Religion, not the multitudes
of evil men, not persecutions, revilings, nicknames, poverty, and disgrace,
nothing in the world can offend him but he will love God, and fear him, and
keep close to his commandments; this is a sign we shall stand when God
searches us.

Again Let us be able to stand out against aff^ictions and persecutions; these
search men* as it is said of Josep^, when he was laid in prison because he
would not yield to his Mistress, the Text says, The word of the Lord tried him,
Psalm. ^05. If he had not been sincere, when he saw how the times went, he would
have been afraid, and yielded to the temptation; but the Word of the Lord tried
him, and he was found to be sincere and godly indeed. So when God afflicted
Job, Job 10. he says, Thou search ^ for ^y sins. When God afflicts us, or
persecutes us, or suffers any evil to fall upon us, then he searches us, and
then if we be hypoc^ites, and have only a form of godliness, and are not
sound at the bot^ome then God will find it out, it will appear; when crosses
and afflictions come, it will lay a man open; therefore let us be able to stand
in afflictions to be dead to the world and worldly things, to be able to deny
our lives and livings, and forgo all the world rather then any of Gods
commandments, that when we come to be tried, we may be found to have faith
more precious then gold.

Thirdly, Labor to stand in time of difficult commandments sometimes God
calls a man to difficult commandments that he cannot do except he cut off his
right hand, and pull out his right eye, except he will lose his life, except he
will be driven up and down like a vagrant Traitor, and cast into prison;
sometimes may be God puts a man upon commandments that he must lose all that
he has if he does them. Now know, God comes to search whether we love him
best, whether we will rather obey him or the world, whether we love profits, or
credit, or any thing more then him. So when the young man in the Go^pel made as
if he were well-minded to enter into eternal life, he was an observer of the
commandments of God: Now when Christ would search him he does it with a
difficult commandment; the man was rich, and he bids him go and sell and give
it to the poor; this was a very difficult commandment and this discovered him
to be a very wretch, he was not ^ble to do it, ^n^ h^ w^nt aw^^ ^or^owful;
this commandment could not ^nk ^own unto h^s he^rt: It is so many ^imes, the
Lord puts a man upon difficult ^^mm^^dements; such common^ements, that if he
do them, the world will think him m^d; such comman^ements, that if he do
them, he must part with his living, and all that he has. Now if we be not able
to do this, we shall be discovered not to be ^ood.

Lastly, Let us be able to stand out against judgment, for then God searches
people most of all: there may be something left after all the other searchings;
a man has stood out persecutions, and yet has turned Apostate; but when the
pan^s of death, and the day of Judgment comes, nothing shall be hid then
therefore let us labor to stand then, when the King of terrors shall appear
before us; nay, when the Judge of quick and dead shall stand before us.

The last Use is for exhortation. Will God search us out? then we should search
our selves what our works are, whether good or evil; as the Apostle says, 2
Cor. 13. 5. Ex^mine your selves whether you be in the faith.

First, Consider, we can never repent of what is amiss in our selves, or in
our works, except we search our selves. Let us search our selves, and turn
unto the Lord, Lam. 1. 43. If there be hypocrisy or hollow-heartednesse in us,
if we do not search it out, we cannot bewail it, and shake it off.

Secondly, Consider it is a character and mark of the child of God that he
does desire, and is one that does search himself; nay, he does not only use
all the means he can to do it, but he does cry and groan to God to help him*
as David says, Psalm 139 23. Search me, O Lord, etc. As who should say, Lord,
help me to search my heart* I have looked into it, and turned it ^opsy tur^y,
and I cannot find but I am upright, but I fear m^ self still; O help me; if
there be any way of wickedness in me, show it me. A child of God is one that
does indeed de^^re to know himself, and to know the worst of himself.

Thirdly, Consider, if we do not search our selves, it will b^ the worse for
us, for God will search us; and if we do search our selves, we shall escape
well when he comes to search us; but if we neglect ^^is duty, what says J^b,
Chap. 13 10. So I may say, Is it good that God should s^^rch us o^t? is it good
for us to leave all this w^^^ to him? to negl^^t (...) souls, to lay aside our
lives, and consciences, and bos^m^s, and never to ^ansick them from ^ay to day,
never to enquire into our own bosoms, that we may refor^^ our selves, but
leave all to God to search us? do you think this ^ill do will, says Job?
Then when afflictions, and death, and judgment shall come, that then God
should search you, and lay before you your works; therefore as you desire when
God shall search you you may be found upright, be careful to search your selves.

FINIS.
2 TIMOTHY 1. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.
IN this verse the Apostle declares what God has done for him and for Timothy,
he has saved us, that is, he has redeemed us with the blood of his Son, and
freed us from sin and from Satan, and from hell, and has given us title to
eternal life, he has saved us.

2. He has called us, that is, he has given us a pledge of this, that we
shall be saved, that we shall The reasons of Gods mercies to Paul and Timothy.
certainly have salvation completely and fully, for he has called us. Now he
illustrates this two ways; first, by showing what kind of calling it is which
he here means, and that is an holy calling, he has called us with an holy
calling, and then, 2ly. By showing the reason why God would do these things for
him and for Timothy, these are great things, what to save them, and make them
heirs of his Kingdom, and to call them to the fellowship of Jesus Christ, and
give them interest in all Gods goodness and mercy? what should be the reason
that should move God to do so much for Paul, and for Timothy? he does here
express this three ways.

First, by removing all false causes, not according to our works; as who The
removing of false causes.
should say, it is not for any thing in us, there was nothing in us that moved
God to do this.

2ly. He lays down the true cause of it, in the next words, but according to
The true cause of it.
his own purpose and grace; that is, he has done it freely, out of his own
mercy, and love, and according to his own purpose.

Lastly. He proves this, and that by three arguments, that this must be the
Proved by three arguments.
cause and no other: the first is this, it was a gift that was given us,
therefore it must needs be free. 2ly. It was given in Jesus Christ, as who
should say, he did not look at any thing in us; there was nothing in us that
was in his eyes, no it was merely for the merits of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Lastly. Another argument is taken from the time when, and that is from all
eternity, before the world began.

The point that I will handle out of these words, is this; that it is an
excellent Timothy, and as a pledge of Gods everlasting love and salvation to
them both, that the Lord had called them, and had been pleased to take them out
of the world, and to make them partakers of his Kingdom and glory.

Now for the opening of the point, I will here first show you what kind of For
the opening of the point
calling it is that is here spoken of, and it is not that calling whereby God
does call people to an office, as of a Magistrate or a Minister, but he speaks
of a general calling, of a calling out of the Kingdom of sin and Satan, into
the Kingdom of his dear Son, to be made partakers of eternal communion with
himself. 2ly. It is not an outward call, whereby wicked men that go on in their
sins are called, for so a reprobate may be called, he may be called out of his
own sinful courses, and wretched estate and condition, to the participation of
Jesus Christ, thus every man is called, all men are called by Gods Ministers,
as Mat. 22. 9. the King sent out his servants, to bid all that they found to
the marriage.

Secondly, A reprobate may be called inwardly by Gods Spirit, I mean the How a
reprobate may be called.
Spirit of God may go along with Gods Ministers, to strive and wrestle with the
soul and conscience of a man that remains in his sins. Prove. 1. 24. because I
called, and ye refused, therefore will I laugh at your destruction, and m^^ke
when your fear comes.

Thirdly, A wicked man may be called, not only with an outward call of How a
wicked man may be called.
the Minister, and with an inward call of the Spirit, but with some efficacy it
may go a great way, so far forth as to make a man come in some kind^, as it was
with the man, Mat. 22. 12. He was called together with the r^s^ ^^ come to the
wedding and he came, but he came without a wedding garment, n^w one of these
callings are meant here, for in this sense, many are called, but (...) s^n,
Mat. 22. 14. But the calling here meant, is a different calling from them, and
that in three things.

First, It is a call according to Gods own purpose, when God calls a man, and
has a purpose to make a man come in deed, and to come home, this is A calling
to Gods purposes.
the calling here spoken of, Romans 8. 28. We know that all things work together
for the best to Gods children that are called according to his purpose, as God
calls them, so he does purpose to make them come to himself, and make them
partakers of everlasting mercy; God has no such purpose when he calls the
reprobate, he has a purpose indeed to do them good, if it be not through their
own default; but yet notwithstanding he has no such purpose, and absolute
intention to do them good, he has no such purpose to bring them to his
Kingdom, and carry them quite through in the business.

Secondly, This is a secret in Gods own bosom, and that is another difference,
How one calling differs from another.
wherein this calling differs from the other; it is such a calling wherein God
puts forth his power, and the greatness of his power too; God called the light
and it came, God called the Heavens and they came, when as they were not, God
calling of them they were made to come: so when God does call a man by his
Spirit, he calls a man powerfully, he does power in divine instincts of grace
and faith, and all other holy virtues, whereby the soul is made able to come to
God; the Lord gives the heart a kind of touch, that being touched by his
Spirit, it must, and shall, and will know God in Jesus Christ, it puts in
divine things into the soul, whereby the soul must needs know him, and come to
him, and be reconciled to him, 1 John 3. 9. he puts his own seed into him, he
that is borne of God sins not, for the seed of God remains in him; the
Lord puts an holy kind of ointment upon his eyes, and makes him see, and that
abides in him, 1 John 2. 27. The holy anointing which ye have received abides
in you.

Thirdly, It is a continual call, it is not a call and so away, a call for a
year Gods call is an effectual ca^l.
and so an end, but it is a continual call; he never leaves calling of him,
till he comes home to him, as 1 These. 5. 24. Faithful is he that has called
you, who will also do it, as who should say, he has called you, and does call
you* and he is faithful, and will do it; he has called you heretofore, and
made you come to him in truth and sincerity; and he will still continue his
call, he will still do it more and more, the Lord draws his people nearer and
nearer to himself.

Now I will prove the Doctrine by diverse particulars.

First, Because, a man then may be able to look back upon all his life, even
from Then a man may reflect on his life past.
his cradle to this day; even before his call, and see Gods love to him as
Paul, though he could not see it before, yet when God had effectually called
him, he is able to look back upon all his former time and space he had lived,
even from his mothers womb, Gal. 1. 15. Who has separated me (says he) from
my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, and so it was with David, I have
been cast upon thee, (says he) even from my mothers belly, Psalm. 22. 9, 10. it
is not likely, that David was converted then, but when God had effectually
called him, then he was able to go back all along, even to his very infancy,
and trace Gods goodness toward him in this and that, even to his very bringing
him into the world.

Secondly, This interests a man in all the promises of God, 2 Pet. 1. 3. Who
This interest a man in the promises.
has given unto us all things pertaining to life and godliness, through the
knowledge of him, that has called us to glory and virtue, if we know that God
has called us to glory and virtue, then we know that God has given us all
things that pertain to life and godliness, to this life, and the life to come
we know it; when God has effectually called us, we know that all the promises
belong unto us, as the Apostle speaks, Acts 2. 39. For the promise is to you,
and to your children, and to yours that are afar of, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call, look how many God calls, so many do the promises belong
unto, all the promises of mercy and grace, and comfort, of strength and
direction, and eternal redemption, the complete working of it, all these
promises from the first to the last, they all belong to a man, when God has
called him: when the Lord effectually calls a man, he takes him out of the
world, to have fellowship with the Lord Jesus Christ; and in whatsoever he has
done, or suffered, or purchased for his people.

Thirdly, It does sweeten all Gods promises to a man? what is the reason we can
hear such admirable things out of the Word, and yet they affect people It
sweetens the promises to a man.
generally, for the most part no more then a dry chip, though they hear of the
promises of God, what promises he has made to his people, to their Prayers, to
their hearing of the Word, to their receiving of the Sacrament; what promises
he has made in adversity, and prosperity, in sickness, and in health, in life,
and death, when they sin through frailty, what promises they have to help them
up again when they are to do any thing, what promises to assist them, and go
along with them, when they are called to any employment, what promises to
sustain them, and bear them out; I say though all these things be delivered to
people, things that were sweeter to David, then the honey, and the honey comb,
Psalm. 119. 103. Yet generally, people are not affected with these things; the
reason is, because they are not able to say, that God has effectually called
them, therefore when they hear such things, the heart cannot lay hold upon
them, they think with Francis Spera, I have no part in these things, they think
it is true, they are so to Gods people, but they think there is little comfort,
little sweetness in them, because they cannot say, that they are effectually
called of God.

Fourthly, If a man be effectually called, this helps a man to pray, Psalm. 119.
94. I am thine save me, when David was able to say, thou have called me to be
one of thine, then he was able to pray to God, Lord save me, Lord help me, It
helps him to pray.
I am thine, thou art my God; when he was able to say, that he had interest and
propriety in God; this did exceedingly help him, and encourage him with
boldness in prayer; but when a man questions his effectual calling, every
petition a man puts up, it is choked, a man cannot pray to God, but he is
beaten off, there is no strength in such a prayer, as soon as ever Paul was
converted, says God to Ananias, behold now he prays, Act. 9. 11. Paul had
prayed a thousand times before, no man in Judea prayed more then he, but God
took no notice of his prayers; but when God had effectually called him by his
grace, now the Lord took notice of his prayers, and observed them, and heard
them, and regarded them, and inclined his ear to them, behold now he prays.

Fifthly, This is a great encouragement to all goodness in outward things,
Knowledge of our effectual calling, a help to good actions.
it is a great encouragement to a man to take them in hand, when he sees he
has a calling thereunto; Gideon was very earnest with the Angel, that he might
see he had a calling to that he was to go about, Judge. 6. 11. So it is in this
divine calling, it is a great encouragement, when a man can see that he is
called; true it is, that every man is called, but I speak not of the general
calling, but of the effectual call, when a man can see that he is effectually
called of God; this helps a man in all good actions, then a man may go to God,
as to ^ Father; he may go to the Sacrament as the seal of his righteousness
and says; then a man may take Gods name into his mouth, God challenges the
wicked for doing of it without his call, Psalm. 50. 16. What have thou to d^, to
take my name into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed? now a man may
take up the profession of religion, and hold forth the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ as Paul says to Timothy, fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on
eternal life, now mark the encouragement, whereunto thou art also called, 1 Timothy 6. 12.

Sixthly, It is an excellent ground of a godly life, when a man can say he is
effectually called of God, that man has laid a good foundation to be a godly A
foundation of godliness.
man, he has laid it low, he has built it upon such a ground, that can never
be shaken, nor removed; he that builds upon this foundation, shall never be
removed. What is the reason why so many thousands undertake to be godly, and
are never able to carry it through; others go about it, and through the mercy
of God are carried through stitch with it? the reason is, because those that
are effectually called of God, they have a good foundation, they go upon the
right ground, as the Apostle Peter exhorting Christians to holiness, and
sanctity, and righteousness of conversation, be ye holy in all manner of
conversation; he does presently lay down the ground, whereupon he exhorts them,
whereunto you are called, says he, 1 Pet. 1 15. so 1 Pet. 2. 9. says he, ye
are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, etc. that you
should show forth the praises of him that has called you out of the darkness,
into his mavelous light.

In the last place, this is the best means to help a man up again; suppose a A
help against falling.
man have fallen, as the best of all Gods Saints and Children may fall, and
fall fowlly; but when a man is effectually called of God, this does help a man
up again, as it was with David, Psalm. 51. 14. Deliver me from
blood-guiltiness, O God of my salvation, etc he being able to say, that the
Lord was the God of his Salvation, this made him to get up again; as who
should say, Lord I have committed murder, I am guilty of innocent blood, yet
Lord thou have called me by thy grace, to be a God unto me, thou art the God of
my salvation; I beseech thee purge me from my filthiness, and cleanse me from
my sins: whereas there be thousands, when they have committed murder, it
breaks their necks, they never get up again, they are never able to find
repentance, and a broken heart, and to obtain favor of the Lord, that the sin
be not laid to their charge; but David, though he had such a heavy fall, and
though it burst his bones, and put him to much grief, yet he got up again,
because God had effectually called him.

The first reason of the point is this, because effectual calling is an evident
It is an argument of his election.
life, as Romans 8. 30. Whom he has predestined, those has he called, etc. as
who should say, them, and none but them, this is the lowest link of that
golden chain, if a man can but once find that he is effectually called of
God, he has a part of that chain, whereof one end is eternal predestination
to life, and the other is eternal glory; now he knows that all the whole chain
of mercy, from first to last, from eternity to eternity; all belongs to him,
when he finds himself to be effectually called.

Secondly, This effectual calling, is a sure and certain pledge, that a man
It Is a su^e (...).
shall have all Gods acts of mercy, when God effectually calls a man, he does
this for him, not only as that particular mercy, but as a pledge of all after
mercies, as it was with the delivering of the people of Israel out of Egypt; he
did not this only as a particular mercy, but as a pledge of future mercies for
time to come; therefore whenever the Lord would assure the people that be
would show them mercy, and do them good; many times this is set down, I have
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, open thy mouth wide, and I will fill i^,
Psalm. 81. 10. Nay, when they pleaded for mercy, they pleaded this as a pledge,
that God would show them mercy, Neh. 1. 10, 11. Now these are thy servants,
which thou have redeemed by thy great power, we beseech thee let thine ear be
attentive to our supplication. So it is with effectual calling, it is an
evident pledge, and sure token, that God will show a man all his other mercies,
when a man is once effectually called, though he has all yet to do, all the
whole business; yet to wade through, it may be he has abundance of estates and
conditions to fall into before he dye: why? now he has the whole compass of
Gods mercy to carry him along in it, God has given him a pledge of it, and he
may say to God, Lord thou have effectually called me by thy grace, I beseech
thee to justify me, I beseech thee to sanctify me and help me by thy grace to
pray, and to go on through the several passages of this life, to bear
afflictions, to humble me in prosperity, and to stand upon my guard, in
sickness, Lord sustain me, and in troubles and afflictions Lord give me
patience; thou have called me, and I have the pledge, therefore I beseech thee
do this for me, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful, who has called
you to the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ; as who should say, when God
called you to the fellowship of Jesus Christ, he did not this as a particular
mercy to you only, but as a sure pledge that he would show you all other
mercies; and assure your selves, he will be faithful, and make good all these
mercies to you; go on with faith and affiance, and courage, for God will be
faithful as the Apostle Peter says, 1 Pet. 5. 10. mark how he pleads, that
God would be pleased to give them grace; the God of all grace that has called
you, he make you perfect, establish, and settle you; he that has called you
settle you, he that has given you a pledge, he that has vouchsafed you a
pawn, he will make it good, he will strengthen you, and enable you, and carry
you through, from the beginning to the end.

Use 1. Then certainly the thing is a possible thing, a man may be able to
preserve my soul, for I am holy, says David, Psalm* 86. 2. his conscience did
not excuse him only in that he had done holy duties, but in that he wa^ an
holy man, his conscience could witness with him, that he was an holy man: and
on the other side, the conscience does not only accuse in evil actions, but
also in an evil estate, I and my people are wicked says Pharoh, Exodus 9. his
conscience did not only accuse him, that he did evil actions, but that he was
in an evil estate; not only that he had done a wicked thing, but was a wicked
man: and the reason of this is, because how else should a man be commanded to
shun a bad, and follow a good estate, if it were not discernable who are in a
good and bad estate, as we see we are called to avoid the one, and follow hard
after the other, therefore it is a thing that may be attained to; nay it is not
only a thing that may be attained unto, but the children of God are wont to
know it, as Paul here to Timothy, he has called us; we are able to speak it,
our consciences choke us not in speaking of it; nay the doubtfullest man that
ever was, was H^mar, Psalm. 88. 1. O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried
night and day unto thee? as who should say, I am very much bewildered, and much
to seek, and lost in doubts and fears, marvelously oppressed and overwhelmed;
yet this I can say, thou art my God, the God of my salvation; thou have
effectually called me to partake of thy mercy, and I have relation to that thou
have given me union with thee, thou art the God of my salvation; and so it was
with David, when he was at his worst, has God forgotten to be gracious? will
he c^st off for ever, etc? Psalm 77. though he had named all their grievous
passages, of fear and despair as a man would think, yet at the self same
time, ver. 5. I have considered the days of old, he was able to lay hold upon
this certainty, I have been called, such a time the Lord was gracious and
merciful unto me, I have believed, I have tasted of Gods goodness, and partake
of his mercy, and known the forgiveness of my sins, he looked unto the days
of old, he could not deny it, though he were now miserably put to it, he could
not deny this, but in the days of old, God had been his God, and he his
servant: and so Jonah, when he was dejected, and cast down, and seemed to be in
the belly of hell, Lord (says he) I am cast out of thy sight, as if he had
been cast off, and quite at a loss, yet at the self same time, (says he) I
will lo^k toward thy holy Temple, Jon. 2. 4. as who should say, I cannot deny,
but thou have effectually called me; I have looked to thy Temple heretofore, I
have looked to Christ, and rested upon thee for eternal life, and for mercy,
and thou art my refuge* therefore I will look again to thee, So Joh. 14. 5, 6,
7. Thomas he speaks as if he had not known Christ, Thomas (says he) ver. 7.
thou do know me, nay when he made a vow, that he would not believe, except he
saw the print of the nails, yet this was but in a fit, for within a little
space, (he says) my Lord, and my God, Joh. 20.

I will prove this by reason, that a man that is quite to seek; that a man that
is not able to speak with any certainty, he has not a jot of faith in this
point to believe that he is the Lords, for that man walks in darkness, our
Savior makes it a brand of a man that walks in darkness, that knows not
whether he goes, Joh. 12. 35. He that walks in darkness knows not whether he
goes, whither to heaven or to hell, whither he goes right or wrong, to Christ
or not; it is a shroad sign, that that man is in a bad estate; that God never
yet took him out of the world, to the fellowship of Jesus Christ.

The first reason is, because it is the office of the Spirit to make known to a
The spirit make* known the things of God*
man, the things given him of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. now says he, we have received
the Spirit, not of the world, but the Spirit of God, that we might know the
things, that are freely given to us of God, as who should say, as God has
given us such and such things: So we have the Spirit of God, that can tell us
the things that God has freely given us, when God has given a man effectual
calling, it is a free gift, and then it is the Spirits office to let a man know
it* and the Spirit will do his office; nay, when God effectually calls a man by
his Spirit; the Spirit says to a man, as the disciples of Christ said to the
man that was brought to Christ, Matthew* 10. 40 Be of good cheer; he calls thee,
so when God effectually calls a man, the Spirit says, arise, be of good
cheer, the Lord calls thee; the Lord of heaven and earth, gives thee a
gracious call to come to his heavenly Kingdom, to believe in his name, and to
rest upon him for Salvation, and for every needful thing, for this life, and
the life to come: the Spirit whereby a man is called, does speak internum
verbum, (as Divines speak) an inward word, which the soul hears, as well as the
outward ear hears the external word; our Savior shows this, Joh. 6. 45. he
that has heard and learned of the Father (says he) comes unto me; when a man
is effectually called to come unto Christ, he hears of the Father; there is a
word that the Father speaks, not only the word of the Minister; but an inward
word, and that man hears a word from the Father, and how can it be but a man
may know it, when he hears it? for there is a word, and an audible word, a word
whereby the Lord of glory speaks to a man, when he effectually calls him to
come out of his sins.

Secondly, Because a man that is effectually called of God, he is commanded How
to make our calling and election sure.
by God to make his calling and election sure; as we may see, 2 Pet. 1. 10. as
who should say, you may make it sure; it is true, in legal precepts, this does
not follow; that if so be God bid a man to do it, therefore it is possible to
do it; for the law commands things, not possible to be done, by reason of the
weakness of the flesh, but this is an evangelical precept; now when a man is
effectually called of God, and is commanded to make his calling sure, he may do
it, the thing is possible and it may be performed, and it is a man's own fault
if he do it not; if a man that is effectually called of God, do not know it, it
is his own fault, and negligence, and carelessness; when God bids his people
that are called, make their calling sure, it implies, they may do it; the Lord
lays no impossibility upon his own servants, that he has called to his
Kingdom and glory, but together with his precepts, he shows them, where
grace is, and the throne of grace is open for them; and they have an interest
in God that quickens the dead, and have an open highway to the throne of grace
to have any thing that they are required to do.

Thirdly, Because the knowledge of our effectual calling, is the ground of Of
the knowledge of our effectual calling.
thanksgiving for it God requires, that they that are effectually called to
have such mercies, should be thankful to God for it? now how can a man be
thankful for that which he is ignorant of, whether he have it or no? that is
but a mockery, as carnal people in their thanks, will put in things they know
not, we return unto thee O Lord, all possible praise and thanks, for election,
vocation, justification, etc. Carnal people put these things into their graces,
blessing God for these things; now if a man come to them, do you know that you
are elected, and called, and justified, and have a true ground and hope of
glory? nay, that we cannot tell say they, this is a foolish thanksgiving, this
is to make a mock of God, and to lie before him; the Lord will have no such
thanks, but sing praises with understanding, as the Scripture speaks, he will
have real, and reasonable service; now unless a man know this, he cannot be
thankful to God aright. The Apostle willing the Corinths to be thankful for
their calling, the poor Corinths that were despised, and ignoble and mean, and
of the lower rank of all the Town, he wishes them to glory in Gods goodness,
and in nothing of their own; how does he urge it? you know your calling, not
many wise men after the flesh, not many noble, etc. but God has chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 26. you see
it, many there are that God has called among you, and you see what manner of
persons they are, it is palpable, and you cannot deny it, therefore I would not
have you glory in your selves, but in God, so Col. 1. 12, 13. giving thanks
unto God the Father (says he) that has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints, who has delivered us from the power of darkness,
and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son; the Lord expects
thanks for this effectual calling, when God has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son; that is, when he
has effectually called us, we should give thanks to God for it; now how can we
give thanks to God for it, when we are uncertain and ignorant of it? surely the
Spirit of Christ, and the Lord Jesus Christ loves the glory of God, and that
God should have praise from his people for every mercy; therefore without doubt
they may come to know it, because otherwise God should require that of them,
which they are not able to perform.

Fourthly, Because this is the very end of the word of God, it is one of the
Why the word of God is written to us.
ends why the word of God is written to us: indeed there are other ends besides
this, it is to convert, to strengthen, to direct, to comfort, to counsel, it is
to build up, and to pull down; the end of the word is to pull, and hew some
down to be cast into the fire; but one end is to acquaint the people of God
with the mercies of God, and with graces, and mercies, and kindnesses, he has
laid up for them in Jesus Christ, and how they are called to these things, this
is one end of the word, that they may know these things that God has
vouchsafed, 1 John 5. 13. These things have I written unto you, that believe on
the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, etc. I
have written to you that do believe, to you that are effectually called, that
you may know that you have eternal life; you have it, but I would feign have
you know that you have it: Now the Word is a sure Word that will not fail us.

Fifthly, Because the soul of a man, it has the power of reflection in it, and
The soul has the power of reflection.
it is able to reflect upon it self, and know what it self does, and what it
self has; the soul of a man is a reflective being, and reflects upon its own
bosom, whereby it is privy to what it thinks, and what it says, and what
passages there be therein, 1 Cor. 2. 11. What man (says he) knows the things
of a man, but the spirit of a man? the spirit of a man that is in him, knows
the things that be in a man, it is privy to its own affairs, as it is with
wickedness, so it is with good actions and thoughts: now for wicked courses, we
see that the conscience is privy to what sins and corruptions are in a man, as
S^l^m^n told Shimei, thou know all the wickedness which thy heart is privy
to, that th^^ did to David my Father; thou know it, thy heart is privy to
it, thou can reflect upon thine own bosom, and can tell what wretched
speeches thou did speak, thou art able to utter them in order, as thou art
privy to it, as Solomon says, Eccl. 7 22. oftentimes thine own heart knows*
that thou thy self likewise have cursed others; he speaks of one that has
cursed, thy own heart knows that thou have done it says he; so it is in good
actions, and things that are in a man, a man's heart is privy to it; if a man
obey the call of God, how can a man do it, but he must know that he is
effectually called? If a man do mourn for his sins, and grieve for his
iniquities, the heart knows its own bitterness, it is able to reflect upon what
it self does; so if a man do desire grace, and hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and pant after the living God, he is able to say I do this,
Psalm. 42. 1. As the heart pants after the rivers of water, so does my soul pant
after thee O G^^; his own heart shall be able to reflect upon it, if thou
humble thy soul, and set thy self to prayer, and approve thy self to God from
day to day, look into thy bosom, and there thou may see it.

But it may be objected then, how is it that those that are effectually called,
are very doubtful, and have many questions, and are uncertain whether they are
called or no? if it be so; how come these doubts, and troubles, and
perplexities that are in the minds of good people that are effectually called
of God, and we find by experience that they were effectually called?

I answer, first we must know, that though the knowledge of a man's calling
stature and wisdom, so he grew in favor with God, Luke 2. 52. The divine
nature manifested it self more and more to his humane; so God does manifest his
favor and love; and opens himself to his people more and more; according as
they grow in goodness, they grow in this knowledge, as they are more and more
pure in heart, the more do they see God, and Gods goodness to them, and what
God has done for them; this knowledge, though it be to be had, yet it is to be
had by degrees, and the people of God have it not all in one degree; some have
it in a higher degree, and some in a lower; but every man has some of this
knowledge that he is called of God; it is impossible that a man should be
effectually called, and be wholly, and totally ignorant of it.

Secondly, As this knowledge is gradual* so it is experimental; a man knows The
knowledge of effectual calling experimental.
that he is called by experience, chiefly and mainly; as when a man knows by
experience, that he comes to God and draws near to God, and that he does
abstract himself from the world, and worldly ways and practices, and lays
aside more and more the carnal ways of men, and does approach nearer and
nearer unto the things of God in Christ: if a man has experience of these
things, he comes now to say God has effectually called me, and has been
pleased to do me good; when he finds this by experience, that these things ^re
wrought in him then he can conclude this: at the first he was like a man in a
vision, he could hardly believe that God had effectually called him; as it was
with Peter, when the Angel delivered him out of prison, he was as one that had
seen a vision, he had not thought it had been a real thing, he could not tell
what to make of it, Act. 12. 11. but when he came to himself, now says he I
know of a surety that the Lord has sent his Angel, and delivered me out of
prison. At first, he could not tell what to make of it, but afterward, when he
saw he was in the streets, and that the iron gate opened to him of its own
accord; now says he, I know of a surety, that the Lord has sent his Angel,
and delivered me. So it is with the people of God; at first, when they hear
something from the Father, they know not what to make of this call at the
first; but afterward, when they come to see this lust, and that lust fall off;
and these and these heavenly works in their souls; they now know of a surety
that God has sent his Spirit into their souls, and delivered them from sins,
and Satan, and hell, and damnation, etc. At first they were like dreamers, they
were not able to say, whether they were called or no; as the children of
Israel, when they were delivered out of captivity, they could hardly believe it
at first, Psalm. 126. 1. When the Lord turned away the captivity of Zion, we
were as those that dreamed, we could hardly persuade our selves, that God had
delivered us out of captivity, with such a mercy, so great a favor, so
unlikely, so improbable, it could never enter into their hearts almost; we were
like those that dreamed; but when they saw they were in Jerusalem, and were
helped, and assisted, and heard the Gentiles talk of it, and all the people
run up and down when they saw it was so, and had experience of it, then they
saw God had done it indeed, and did believe it; so when a man is first
effectually called to come out of his sins, the Lord knocks off his bolts, and
plucks him out of the jaile of hell, and sets him as it were in Jerusalem, he
is at first as a man that dreams, he can hardly believe it is so; as it was
with David, when God called him to be King, he could hardly believe it, it
could hardly enter into his heart, that he should be King over Israel;
especially being daily persecuteed by Saul, and calamities heaping up
themselves against him, he could not conclude it; but when the Lord had set him
in his Kingdom, and given him victory over his enemies, now (says he) I know
that the Lord saves his anointed; now he could speak it, and found it by
experience, that the Lord had made him his anointed, and saved and delivered
him from all his enemies; before he was ready to deny it, and say Samuel was a
liar, he had anointed him to be King, but I said in my have all men are liars,
but when he had experience of it, now (says he) I know that the Lord has
saved his anointed.

Thirdly, As the knowledge of effectual calling is gradual and experimental, so
likewise it is very spiritual, it is a mavelous spiritual work, and therefore
The knowledge of effectual calling spiritual.
no marvel though it be something insensible; indeed there be things in it,
which are very sencible and conspicuous as may be, a reprobate may be galled at
a Sermon, he may have his eyes broad open to see his sins and iniquities, and
may be wonderfully wrought upon, and may have the sencible work of vocation, by
the very Spirit of God; but the very specificalness of it, whereby this
effectual calling does differ from all other callings; this is a marvelous
Spiritual thing, and therefore no wonder that it is insencible sometimes, and
many of the people of God, fear they have it not; these things may be done in
the soul of a man, and a man not know it, and yet it may seem strange, that the
eyes of the blind should be opened, and the feet of the lame should walk, and
the dead should be raised, and the devils should be cast out! it is strange I
say, that these things should be done in a man's soul, and yet the man in whose
soul they are done, should be ignorant of them; it is a strange thing, but the
works of the Spirit are wonderful secret, the actions of the Spirit are very
invisible; when a man humbles himself, and prays, and mournes, these are
sencible, he knows what they are; many talk of hunger, and thirst, and
reformation, etc. But to see the saving, sanctifying, gracious work of God in
these things, that is a marvelous hard thing to find this, and it is very
spiritual, as Solomon says, Eccl. 11. 5. As thou know not the way of the
Spirit, nor how the bones grow in the womb of a woman that is with child; even
so thou know not the works of God, who makes all! if it be so in natural
things, that we know not how the bones of the child grow in the womb, much
less these things of the Spirit, so our Savior Christ says, Joh. 3. 8. The
wind blows where it lists, and thou know not whence it comes, nor
whither it goes; even so is every one that is borne of the Spirit; that is,
every one that is effectually called of God; for regeneration is a part of this
effectual calling; to be effectually called of God, it is the blowing of the
wind, a man knows not whence it comes nor whither it goes; there is a world
of ignorance about the wind, so there is about the workings of Gods holy and
heavenly Spirit; when our Savior was a working of regeneration in Nicodemus,
his heart was at the same time, saying, how can these things be? Christ was
working these things in his heart, and the very same time when he was
questioning, how can these things be? So Gideon, at the very same time when God
said unto him, the Lord is with th^^, thou mighty man of valor, Judge. 6. 14,
^5. Gideon was doubting that the Lord was not with him, and that he had no
might nor strength, as our Savior said of the seed that was sown in the
ground, Mark. 4. 26. As if a man should cast seed into the ground, and sleep
night and day, and the seed springs up and grows, he knows not how: so says
he is the Kingdom of God, and as our Savior says, so it shall be at the last
day, when Christ shall say come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you, for I was hungry, and ye fed me, etc. But mark at the very
same time, the righteous that did all this, and our Savior Christ did witness
to their faces that they had done it, the righteous shall answer, when saw we
thee hungry and fed thee? etc. They hardly knew they had done these things, the
actions themselves they could not but know of, they knew they had fed and
clothed the poor children of God, but that they did it to Christ, for Christ's
sake, they could hardly see this; when did we see thee thus and thus, and did
so and so? that they looked at Christ in this, they had hardly so good eyes,
hardly so good a heart: so I might instance in more, I say the works of God,
they are marvelous spiritual, and of a wonderful subtle substance; they may be
wrought in the soul of a man, and yet a man may be something doubting, and
questioning whether they be wrought in him yea, or no; nay, a man may be afraid
they are not.

Fourthly, Another reason is, because the knowledge of a man's effectual The
knowledge of a man's calling hindered for a time.
calling may be very much hindered for a time, partly in regard of loathness of
heart to leave some lust, though a man's heart may be subdued, and humbled for
the maine; yet there may be a great deal of holding back; though a man cannot
stand out in sin as the wicked do, yet there may be a great deal of
backwardness, and unmortifiedness in the children of God, and conscience may
see it; now when conscience sees it, conscience will hide effectual calling
from a man, and object; how can you say you are effectually called, when you
are so borne down with such a lust, and hanker so much after it? now if our own
hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and shall condemn us? much
more; it is a pitiful thing, when a man's own heart shall condemn him, and his
own conscience shall be questioning whether he be right or no: sometimes it
falls out thus, even those that are called; yet in regard of unmortifiedness,
there is such a deal of matter that the conscience has to object, that a man
cannot believe indeed, and soundly, that he is effectually called: for at first
when Christ comes into the soul, before it has gotten the mastery and victory,
the Spirit does work exceedingly in the dark, as when it works poverty of
spirit, sorrow for sin, endeavor to leave all sin, hatred and detestation of a
man's own ways; loathing of a man's own self, shame, confusion before Gods
footstool; there is such a smoke in the soul, where the Spirit does these,
that a man cannot see them; as if a man be working in a smoaky house, though he
work excellent things, a man can hardly perceive what he does; so there is such
a deal of smoke in the heart, such a deal of corruption stirring, that it hides
the sight of the work of God from a man, yet the work of God goes along; as
suppose two armies in a field, and the battle be doubtful, the guns fly off,
and the swords clatter, and the dust arises, and there is such a confusion,
that neither themselves nor others, know which way the battle will go, but
sometimes some fall on one side, and sometimes some on the other side; and if a
man should stand on an hill, and see this battle, he cannot tell on which side
it will be; sometimes he thinks it will be on this side, and by and by, it is
turned on the other side; and so while it is doubtful, it cannot be determined
and concluded on which side the victory will fall. So it is with the war
between the flesh and the spirit, the war is very doubtful before the odds
begin, for there is a great deal of evenness at first; nay, the Spirit seems to
be the weaker side, and the flesh to be the stronger, and there are many falls
and foiles given to the soul, and the flesh is too strong; afterward, it
begins to be something equal, and the battle to be poyzed; now while the battle
is so doubtful, a man cannot tell on which side the victory will be, whether on
the spirits side, or on the fleshes side; whether on graces side, or on sins
side; but when the warfare is accomplished (I do not mean perfectly, for that
will never be in this life) a man may then see on which side the victory will
go; a man may see ten thousand corruptions lie dead, with their throats cut,
and the Spirit standing triumphing and conquering more and more, we may now see
which way the victory will go; the Spirit reigns, and grace reigns, and
humility reigns, and heavenly mindedness reigns, and all the graces of Gods
Spirit have dominion over the whole man.

Another reason, why the knowledge of effectual calling is hindered, is because
The knowledge of our effectual calling, may be hindered by ignorance.
of ignorance; a child is a man, though he does not know it, so it is with a
man that is a new beginner in Religion, he is a new man, though he does not
know it, he has that in him, that let him have but time, let him but grow, he
will quickly be able to look upon it, and be able to see what it is; so it is
with the people of God, they are at first very ignorant what God has given
them, as the Apostle prays for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1. 17. that God would let
them be no longer children, but that God would open the eyes of their
understanding, that they might know what the hope of their calling was, that he
would let them know what he had given them; they hardly knew what they had at
the first, they had an effectual calling from God, and they had a thousand
hopes; they might hope to be strengthened against corruptions, to be delivered
in six troubles, and in seven; they might hope when they died, to be
translated into the Kingdom of immortallity and glory for evermore: they had
this hope, now (says he) the Lord of heaven and earth, open the eyes of your
understanding, that you may see the hope of your calling, and the exceeding
riches of those things that God has bestowed upon you.

Again they may be ignorant of the voice of the Spirit, they do not understand
A young believer is ignorant of the voice of the Spirit.
the Spirits language, when a child of God is first effectually called, he
comes into a new world, and meets with a new language, he is a Barbarian to it,
and that is barbarous to him, he cannot understand the language of the Spirit;
the Spirit speaks many comfortable things, and there are many works of the
Spirit, whereby the Spirit does speak to a man for his comfort and consolation;
if he could take them as a man that comes into a strange Country, he lives a
very uncomfortable life at first, he hears them speak, but he cannot understand
them; they speak strange language, he cannot tell what to make of it; but the
longer he is there, he comes to understand such a word, and then such a word,
and it may be a sentence now and then; and so in the end, he understands them
plainly: so at the first, when God calls his people into a new world, the
Spirit speaks many things to them, but yet i^ is in an unknown tongue, it is
gibberish to them, they cannot tell what to make of it, but when they come to
understand the dialect, they come to rejoice.

Again, the children of God are ignorant of the work of grace, they think
certainly, never could any of the children of God that were aright, be^n that A
child of God is ignorant of the work grace.
estate that I am, they never find their hearts so like a log in prayer; when I
go to the Sacrament, sometimes I behave my self like a block, and cannot behave
my self in any competent manner as I ought; certainly none of Gods people can
be thus an I am; they are ignorant what may be in the people of God, what may
stand with the truth of God, and so they question their estate, and conditions
out of ignorance; afterward when they come to more experience, and find the
ways of God in them, and come to have a knowledge of their own corruptions,
and of the goodness of God in purging them out more and more; in the end they
are able to speak it to Gods glory, and their own consolation.

Again, the knowledge of a man's effectual calling may be hindered by being
unresolved of a man's Christian liberty, when there be Christian liberties that
a How the knowledge of effectual calling may be hindered
man has need of every day; and yet notwithstanding a man is not resolved upon
it, many a man thinks verily, if he should find any delight in the good
creatures of God, if he should be merry or cheerful at any time, if he should
be talking of his calling in the world, and speak of it in his communication,
and follow his calling diligently; if he should be angry, and let bitter words
fly at any time, though his nature make him so; he thinks verily, and concludes
that he has no grace, he is a very worldly carnal man, he savours of these
things here below, he savours of the creature, and he is carnally merry; though
a man may take care for outward things moderately, and be cheerful, and so for
anger a man may be angry, be angry says the Apostle ^^t sin not; now if he be
angry at any time, though the thing be lawful, and he has Christian liberty in
the thing, yet not knowing his Christian liberty* this does exceedingly trouble
a man many times, and makes him question his effectual calling; there be
abundance of Christian liberties, that we have need of every day, and have need
of the knowledge of; and when the soul and conscience does not know his
Christian liberty, (I do not speak of this in regard of the world, they had
need have straight limitations and curbs, and we had need put in all the
caveats that can be, for they are apt of their own accord to take too much
elbowroome; every man is ready to stand upon his liberty, what he may lawfully
do; but though wicked men damn their own souls in these things; yet it is fit
the children of God should have their portion, and know it,) and the want of
this knowledge hinders a man from the knowledge of the things given him of God.

Again, a man may be ignorant of the tenderness of Jesus Christ, and of A man
may be ignorant of the tenderness of Jesus Christ.
the infinite bowels of the Son of God, and how chary he is over his people,
and that he regards a grain of wheat, under an heap of chafe: it is very
probable, that the son of J^roboam had a taint of the family he was taken from,
which was marvelous foul; yet notwithstanding God takes notice of the good
things that were in him, though in the Churches in the Revelation, foul and
grievous things were found, yet the Lord notwithstanding takes notice of any
thing that was good in them; if there be but a drop of true saving grace in the
heart, God will take notice of it; though a man be but smoking flax, God will
be tender of it; now many a child of God does not know the tender compassions
of Jesus Christ, and that he will accept them notwithstanding a thousand
weaknesses, and though they have but a little hold, and a little strength to
put forth in the ways of God, and they see how many thousand things they can
say against themselves, when they see not the tender compassions of Jesus
Christ, and what a tender Savior he is, the tender mercies of our God, as it
is, Luke 1. This hinders them from the knowledge of that, which otherwise they
might know.

Again, it may be hindered very much through melancholy, it is the very It may
be hindered through melancholy.
coach that the devil rides in, as Divines speak, it corrupts a man's
imagination, and fills it with groundless fears, and doubts, and makes a man
speak he knows not what, and he says he does not do those things he does, when
as those that stand by can see the contrary: this humor blinds a man's eyes,
and presents he knows not what to a man's mind; as when David was in that
passion, he cried out; I am cast off, what is the matter? Psalm. 31. 10. he was
in a melancholy fit, grief has even wasted me, he was even wasted and pined
with grief, sorrow deading his heart, and mouldring, and pining, and wasting of
him; this made him speak words, that he would never have spoken at another
time: the Apostle shows, that when a man is overmuch sad, and grieved, and
dejected, and cast down, and lies moaping, and the devil has a great deal of
advantage by this: therefore he speaks to the Corinths to have a care of that
poor man that had committed an horrible sin, and it pleased God to humble
him, he was excommunicated, and delivered over to Satan: now the C^rinths were
something harsh to this poor man, and were ready to trample upon him, and
tread upon him, as if he were not humbled enough, 2 Cor. 2. 7. O says he,
forgive him, and comfort him, least he be swallowed up of evermuch sorrow;
wherefore I beseech you confirm your love toward him, least Satan should get
an advantage of us, ver, 11. that was the reason why he would have him careful
of this, least Satan should circumvent us; the meaning is, least the devil
should make us guilty of overwhelming a poor man; and others by that example
might do the like, and so the devil might have advantage in aftertimes.

In the next place, it may be hindered by the unskilfulness of a Minister, many
Grace may be hindered by the unskilfulness of a Minister.
times those that are effectually called, may chance to lie a long time
ignorant of Gods mercy, unacquainted with the work of grace which God has
begun in their souls, by the unskilfulness of the Minister; the Minister that
should bind up those that God has broken, may be like those that efflict him
wh^m God has smitten, Psalm. 109. he does not feed the lambs of Christ, and
hold forth the grace of Jesus Christ; perhaps he may preach good truths,
admirable excellent passages, and yet make those sad, whom God would not have
made sad; and make those grieved, whom God would not have grieved, as the Lord
complains, Ezekiel. 34. 4. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye
healed that which was sick neither have ye bound up that which was broken,
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, etc.

A Minister though he preach the ways of God, and Jesus Christ, and the
promises of the Gospe^ and eternal life; yet if he preach it not in a right
manner, A Minister ought to preach the word of God in a right manner.
if he carry it not as he ought to do, rightly dividing the word of life, he
may do a world of mischief, if a man preach hell and damnation, (indeed if a
man be going on in his sins, and be hardened in his wicked courses, we are to
preach hell and damnation to him) but if a man preach hell and damnation to a
man that is sencible of his sins, and is of a tender conscience, and ready to
think too hardly of his sins; it is as if a man should take a beetle to kill
a fly upon a man's forehead, to lay a heavy load upon those that are not able to
bear it. Ministers may do a great deal of hurt, by preaching the law without
distinguishing, and all exceptions being showed, when he has not a tender
heart toward those whom God has wounded, and does not always put in that
that may do them good; when a Minister knows what it is, and has gone through
the pikes himself, he can the better stay up the souls of those that are
dejected, and yet belong to Christ; therefore David prays, give me the way of
thy salvation, and then I shall teach sinners the way unto thee, Psalm, 51. 12,
13. as who should say, if I do not know what belongs to the comforts of the
Spirit, if I have not waded through ^^ese things, and know not how they are
given, and how they are taken, I shall never teach sinners the way unto thee, I
shall never carry my self aright in that way; he that is a Surgeon, had not
need to have a hard hand: so those that have a tender heart, and those that are
truly broken for their sins, and are of a contrite spirit, a man had need
deal gently with them, according to the estate and condition wherein they are:
Ministers many times are too blame, in not preaching Christ aright, as they
ought to do, and so may (...) hinderance to the comfort of their people.

What a woeful thing is it when a man is not able to say thus, what laborinths,
and meanders is such a soul in, and what heart aches, and terrible fears, and
terrors, and afrightments, and quakings, and misgivings are they subject unto?
they must needs be in a miserable, and pitiful case, for whether can they go?
what can they hang upon to get comfort? and this is the case and condition of
most of those that are amongst ^^ even of the best sort, though many of them
have some good things in them; yet who almost comes to know that he is
effectually called of God? these are declining times, and languishing days,
and people are marvelously scattered for want of care and diligence, and
watchfulness, and paines-taking in the ways of God; there is a woeful deal of
unsetling, and want of groundedness in a good estate, people are very much off,
and all to pieces; and that you may see what a woeful thing this is, do but
consider these particulars.

First, Your consciences cannot but accuse you, you cannot say Christ bare
First, conscience does accuse.
your sins, you know not whether you are in him or no; you know Christ bare the
sins of his people, but whether he bare your sins or no that you cannot tell;
all your sins and iniquities lie upon your consciences still, though you have
been bewailing your sins and confessing of them, and craving forgiveness of
them; yet all your actual sins they still ly upon your consciences: what your
consciences could accuse you of formerly they accuse you of still, such
bythoughts, such wandering prayers, such unprofitable hearing, Paul could say, 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a good saying, that Christ came into the world to save
sinners, whereof I am chief; you cannot say so, though you can say that of
sinners you are the chief; yet that you have obtained mercy, your conscience;
will not let you say it, you question whether you ever had any mercy, or any
hold of the mercy of God; therefore you must be like a dry leaf driven to and
fro, or a reed shaken with the wind, and as weak as water, you are altogether
unstable: what a miserable thing is this, that all a man's corruptions and
miseries should lie upon a man, notwithstanding all his prayers, and asking
forgiveness, and many tears and sighs, that they should yet lie upon him, as
they do until a man knows that he is effectually called of God; all the
guiltiness lies upon his soul, he cannot say he has obtained mercy of God, he
is without God, and without Christ, and is yet in his sins for ought he knows.

Secondly, As your consciences must needs accuse you, so likewise you can
N(...)y in Jesus Christ without knowledge of ou^ interest in him, etc.
have no joy in Jesus Christ, nor any of his promises, nor any of the gracious
things in his Covenant, because you know not w^ether they belong to you or no;
when a man knows not a thing, he cannot have any joy in any thing, as Prove 27.
1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know^st not what a day may bring
f^rth, a man cannot boast of that he knows not, can a man boast of to morrow? O
I shall have a fine day to morrow, when he knows not whether he shall have a
morrow or no; he may be dead by to morrow, or his house may be burnt over his
head to morrow, he cannot rejoyee in it: So when a man knows not whether he be
effectually called of God or no, what joy can he have? what joy can he have in
Christ or his ordinances, when his conscience knocks him off, and his soul
stands in doubt whether these things belong to him or no? he may catch at
these, as Joseph's Mistres caught hold on him, but he left his garment and fled
away: so they catch at the promises, and these things, but they fly away from
them, and leave them as a shadow, and they are as much to seek as before: and
it will be thus as long as a man does not go on to make his effectual calling
sure.

Thirdly, Thou can not tell what to make of Gods mercies and blessings to We
cannot tell what to make of Gods mercies, without this knowledge.
thee; God has given thee many blessings, life and health, and means, and
maintenance, and sweetly provided for thee from thy cradle to this day, and
has recovered thee out of many sicknesses and afflictions, and has given thee
the means of grace, and thou have heard Sermon upon Sermon, and have had the
acquaintance of his children, and have dwelt in the land of uprightness, and
seen the Saints of God, and the examples of Gods Saints, and thou have had the
motions of Gods Spirit from day to day, and many good things God has
vouchsafed: but while a man is questioning and doubting, whether he be
effectually called or no, he cannot tell what to make of these things; whether
he should call them mercies or no, whether they be in wrath or no, to fat him
up against the day of wrath, to whom much is given, of him much is required. It
is said of the Virgin Mary, when the Angel saluted her graciously and
comfortably, the text says, she was much troubled, wondering what manner of
salutation this should be, Luke 1. 29. So when the Lord sends abundance of
sweet mercies, the soul is troubled what mercies these should be; are these
mercies that come from Christ, and flow from Gods goodness, as pledges of his
grace and favor or no? he is troubled, and cannot tell what to make of them,
what are these mercies: and he is afraid he had been better to have been
without them, and better he had never known them; it is a miserable thing when
a man is uncertain of his effectual calling; for uncertain of that,
uncertain of all.

Fourthly, Thou do not know what to do in time of affliction, when affliction
We know not h^w to bear our selves in afflictions without this knowledge.
comes, (as thou can not but expect it every day) yet when it comes, how will thou bear it? how will thou be able to suffer for Christ, and to go to prison
for Christ's sake; when thou do question whether the truth ever made thee
free? if thou were able to speak of God as thy Father, and a Kingdom prepared
for thee, this would cast out fears, fear not little flock, it is your Fathers
pleasure to give you a Kingdom; Luke 12. 37. but when a man questions whether
God be his Father or no? questions whether he has given him a Kingdom or no?
yea whether any such thing belongs to him? nay he thinks he is a wretch, and he
should wrong God. if he should lay hold o^ such things; this exposes a man to
fears; what is the reason that many ^all away in time of persecution? it is
because they want hold of God, as D(...)as, what is the reason he could not
bear Paul's afflictions, but fell away and (...) the world? it was because he
wanted Paul's hold: a man must have hold some where, if not on God, some where
else: this is the reason why many break their necks, and when persecution
comes, they are troubled, and put by, and make shipwreck of a good conscience
and forbear to go on in that way which they ought to go on in, and to yield to
those things which they kn^w they ought not to yield to. When a man knows he is
effectually c(...) of God, this will make a man suffer for God, as the Apostle
Peter sp(...)g of the sufferings of the Saints, hereunto says he were you
called, knowing th^^ Christ suffered for you; when a man is able to say, Christ
suffered for (...) God has effectually called me to his heavenly Kingdom, to
partake o^ C(...)st it and his benefits, and sufferings; now this will bear a
man out, this (...) able to endure the loss of liberty, of means, maintenance,
or any th(...)t the Gospels sake; but before what shall a man do in
afflictions? as long as a man does not know that he is effectually called, he
does expose himself to lazards, and breaknecks, and who knows what may be?

Fifthly, Thou can not pray with any courage, thy prayers are but (...) and
lanke and weak as water; thou can not come boldly to the throne of We cannot
pray without this knowledge.
grace, thou art afraid thou art none of Gods, and none of Christ's; afraid ^^t
thou have not received the Spirit of God, that thou may be the child of God,
and art afraid that thy prayers are not accepted of God, but he turns them
into sin, thou can never have boldness, (unless it be the boldness of
impude^ce) but never the boldness of confidence, how shall a man call upon him,
(...) ^e has not believed? a man without faith cannot please God, he cannot
pray to God: O my Lord, says Manoah, etc. Judge 13. 8. if he had not prayed
with faith, knowing that God was his God, his prayer had not had success; but
this made him pray with the more boldness and strength; when the Priests of
Baal had done praying, and God would not hear them; mark what (...)h says, I
am thy servant, Lord hear me, 1 King. 18. 36. as who should say, here be
people praying, they pray they know not what, and to they know not whom; they
are none of thine, but I am thy servant h^are me Lord, he comes and acts a
better part, and he will be heard before he goes, and (...) acc^ptance before
he departs; when a man can say, Lord I am thy servant, (...) one whom thou have
redeemed, and effectually called, hear me Lord, this man prays indeed, he
prays to some purpose.

Sixthly, Thou can not sweetly go on in the ways of God, all the duties of
Religion will be a burden to thy soul, and thou will be weary of them, We
cannot go on in the ways of God without this knowledge.
which would be light and pleasant, if thou did know thy effectual calling of
God: but now they will be burdensome; and thou will think the Sabb^th comes
too often, and good duties come too often about; they come so fast, that thou
have no heart or mind to them, for want of that which should sweeten the ways
of God to a man; the knowing of God, and what he goes about, and the knowing
of him he has to deal withal, without this a man can never go on, nay it is a
wonder that thou have not broken thy neck before this day, that thou have not
turned back to folly, and revolted clean to the ways of sin, that thou have
not turned back to be a drunkard and profane person again: it is a wonder that
thou prayest in thy family, that thou have not given over all holy duties, and
reassumed the works of the flesh, and can off all the courses of a godly life;
it is a wonderful mercy of God, that tho^ have not apostatized Take a man that
knows he is effectually called, it is a wonder to see that man fall; I marvel
says Paul that ye are soon removed, Gal. 1. 6. A man may wonder what ayleth
that man, that knows he has an effectual call of God, and falls; that man is
besides himself, he is not his own man certainly; if he turn back to folly,
when he knows God, to turn from his Commandments, to yield to the lusts of
the flesh, and grow careless and negligent; it is a wonder that such a man
should be removed back, but he that never knew of any such things; he has no
knowledge of Gods goodness toward him; it is a wounder that he does not quite
fall off, for the knowledge of a man's effectual calling is that which does
preserve a man, Jude 1. the Apostle says, Jude a servant of Jesus Christ, to
them that are preserved in Christ and called; when a man has an effectual
call, he has that which should preserve him; therefore when a man comes to
know it, what a sweet thing is this, to be preserved of God; to be kept and
carried through, when Gods people know not this, they are subject to falls, and
returning back without the Lords wounderful mercy.

Seventhly, What difference is there between thee, and a very wretch, as We
differ not from wretches wit^out this knowledge.
long as thou know not that thou art effectually called of God? what
difference between thee, and one that is in darkness, and under the power of
darkness, in thy own sense and feeling? when David was but afraid of falling
into this pass, Psalm. 28. 1. O Lord (says he) be not silent, least I be like
them that go down into the pit; he was afraid of falling into that estate of
doubting of Gods love, and the assurance of his love and favor, least he
should be like unto those that go down into the pit: so may I say of those that
are unsettled in their minds, and do not know whether they have any good at all
wrought in their hearts; what difference do you see between your selves, and
those that are wicked and abominable? you can hardly pitch upon any thing,
wherein you differ from a wicked man, as Throgmorton said, brother what will
you say, if I dye a reprobate? so such speeches may come out of thy mouth; what
will you say, if I dye a reprobate? as David when he had committed those two
foul sins, and had blurred his evidences, and could not see Gods goodness and
mercy toward him; he was feign to begin the world again, create in me O Lord,
a clean heart etc. as though he were to begin from the very ground again, as
if he had lost all, and had nothing in him; what a miserable thing is this?

Eighthly, Thou art of all men most miserable, if thou know not thy
effectual We are of all me^ most mis^^a^le without it.
calling; for other men, though they have no comfort in heaven, yet they have
comfort in the world; but as for thee, thou have neither comfort above nor here
below; the wicked of the earth, they care not for thee, because thou little for
thee, because thou art not right; and so thou art as a meteor hanging in the
air, cast out from men and God; conscience will not let thee close with God,
nor close with the wicked; not with God, because thou doubtest whether thou art
his, or no; not with the wicked, because thou art strongly convicted, that
their courses are damnable: now what comfort can thou have? when a man cannot
tell whether to go, this is the case of a man, that knows not whether he be
effectually called of God or no.

Nay lastly, Let me tell thee this, if thou be totally uncertain, thou were We
were never effectually called if we totally want it.
never effectually called of God to this very day, but still remainest under
the guilt of thy sins, and the wrath of God, and the curse of the law, and the
damnation of ungodly men: for if a man be called, he presently comes to be
faithful, chosen and faithful, Rev. 19. it is faith that makes up the effectual
call, for this call differs from the other; in that this call makes a man come
to God by faith; so that a man is a believer, if he be effectually called; now
if a man be a believer, there is some knowledge in faith, Isa. 45. 24. Surely
shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, says the text:
look up and down in all the Scripture, there is some surety in every believer
that he has righteousness in God, that he has salvation in his name, as the
Church says, Isa. 53. 15. doubtless thou art our Father; it is the speech of
people that are marvelously troubled with unbelief and doubting, yet at last
they conclude it, doubtless thou art our Father, they cannot deny it: so says
David, Psalm. 23. 6. Surely goodness and mercy, shall follow me all the days
of my life. 1 John 5. 19. We know that we are of God, he does not only say it
is thus, but we knows it is thus: nay take the doubtfullest man that ever was,
which was H^m^n, Psalm. 88. 1. O Lord God of my salvation says he: he was able
in some measure to speak it, that God was the God of his salvation, he was not
totally uncertain of it; wheresoever there is faith, there is some knowledge.

But then you will say, what is the difference, between the uncertainty that

First, A man that is effectually called of God, as it may be he cannot say it,
Answ. How the uncertainty of believers differs from others.
so he cannot deny it; and as in part he cannot say it, so in part he can say
it, though he has a great deal of fear and terror and affrightment; and in
some measure he cannot say it, yet in some measure he can, Mark. 9. 24. the man
there that came to Christ, as he could not simply say that he did believe, so
he could not simply deny it, but he partly did, and partly did not, Lord I
believe, help my unbelief; though he could not say, he had the grace of faith,
so he could not deny it: but other men, though they would feign say it; yet
they cannot in spite of their teethes, it makes it appear (unless they be
presumptuous) that they do but deceive themselves, and rock themselves asleep
in a fools paradise; but the people of God that are called indeed, as they
cannot say they are so, so they cannot deny it.

Secondly, They that are called of God effectually, though they do not The 2
difference.
know it; but it may be speak bitter things, as though they were not called,
and deny it many times; yet it is only in their haste, in an odd sit that is
come upon them, I said in my haste all men are liars, Psalm 31. 22. it was only
in his haste, it was only in a pang that came upon him: but now other men, they
do not say it in their haste, neither is it only in a passion, when they
question their effectual calling; but they speak it in their sober wits, nay
they are never in their sober wits but then; for when they think it is
otherwise, then they are in a passion, in their haste, they are then in their
sober wits and speak most judiciously, when they say it is not so.

Thirdly, A godly man as he will say he has no grace, so he will let others
The 3 difference.
say so too; and it will humble him so much the more, and he will be the more
abased, and caused to seek out more then ever he did before; but an hypocrite,
though he will say in company sometimes, I was never yet wrought upon; yet if
he hears another say so, he begins to mince and says you are mistaken Sir;
blessed be God I have beeen wrought upon, they cannot endure to hear that
another should say so; but they make as though they had assurance, and these
and these gifts and graces, though their own consciences witness to their
teeths, that they have it not, yet they cannot abide others should say so: but
a child of God, will not exercise himself in things that are too high for him;
as he is to seek, so he is content to be taken to be such a one, and when the
people of God suspect him, it humbles him, and drives him nearer to God.

Fourthly, Such persons that are effectually called indeed, though they are The
4 difference.
very ungrounded, and to seek in regard of their effectual calling; yet they
most love and esteem those that tell them of it, that they may be better
grounded, and see God better; when a man comes to them and tells them, you are
hypocritical and secure and you neglect duties in your families, and you must
give over this and that: those that are effectually called of God indeed, will
love those that are most sound, and most rip them up as it was with Paul, when
he was converted; at first the Disciples questioned him, Act. 9. 26. they would
not believe that he was a convert; did Paul now stomach them, and show himself
offended? no, Paul did go on to manifest the truth of his grace more and more,
till at last it did manifest it self: so those that are effectually called,
they love those most that are godly, and question most their sincerity, and it
humbles them; and they love a life to be in such company, and they cannot abide
those that dawbe them up with untempered mo^ter; but an hypocrite though his
own conscience questions it, and he is as one in a wilderness, and in darkness,
that knows not whither he goes, yet he cannot abide another should bear him
down so.

Fifthly, The uncertainty of the people of God breaks their hearts, and pulls
The uncertain^y o^ it breaks the heart.
them down before God, it bursts their hearts, and tears, and rends them, that
they are not able to endure; they must have the favor of God, and the light of
his countenance, and know where they are, and the things given them of God; and
they count themselves to have done nothing till they come to this, as David was
in this case, Psalm. 55. 5. he was in a miserable case, as if he were quite
lost: what did this make him do? I w^nt to God and mourned in my prayer, and
cried unto him, as you may see in the beginning of the Psalm, it made him
mourn before God, till the light of his countenance shined upon his soul; but
a wretched heart that hopes he is called, though his conscience doubts of it,
this breaks not his heart, nor awakens him, but his vain hopes build him up,
and so he is kept off from being right as he ought to be.

Again, those that are effectually called, though they be uncertain, yet
Faith supplies this uncertainty
they believe they shall be certain, and they follow hard after God, till he
give them assurance, and they build upon it, that they shall have it one day,
and this builds them up: as it was with Mr. Moore of Norwich a reverend Divine,
in all his Sermons for the most part, he would in one passage or other move his
people to get assurance, in the end he sickened himself, and called for all the
good people in his parish, and told them, you know what Doctrine I have
delivered to you; and amongst the rest, this was one that I frequently beat
upon, that you would labor to be assured; now I must tell you that I never had
assurance to my self, but I did ever look for it; and now by the mercy of God
I have it, and as I preached this doctrine to you when I was living* so now I
say unto you being a dying man, labor to get assurance; so that he did verily
believe that he should have it in the end, though as yet he had it not, and
this stayed his soul to go on in all his ways: as David, when he was cast
down, and had much ado to keep his hold, and had no assurance at that time; Why
art thou cast down O my soul? why art thou disquieted within me, hope thou in
God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my
God, Psalm. 42. 11. though he were cast down and dejected, this was his stay, I
shall yet praise him, etc. he did verily believe he should rejoice in his holy
name, and overcome those distresses, and have the Lords mercy sealed to his
soul, and have his mouth filled with his praises, Why art thou cast down O my
soul? I shall yet rejoice in his holy name, I shall yet show forth his praises,
I shall yet be able to apply his promises, and be able to say he is my God and
my Redeemer.

Again, the children of God, that are effectually called, though they doubt
Faith contrary to doubting.
never so much, yet their faith is of a contrary nature to their doubting, and
excludes doubting, Mat. 21. If you believe and have faith, and doubt not, says
the text; not as though faith cannot have doubtings stand with it, but faith is
of that nature, as excludes, and expells doubtings, and fights against it, as
fire against water, and such a man fights against doubtings, as he would ^ight
against temptations; to murder and adultery; he knows that infidelity is the
mother of all sin, and therefore faith fights against doubting, and goes to
the throne of grace to be established.

Lastly, Though a child of God doubt of his condition; yet this is certain,
that Christ is the power of God to that man, though he know not whether he A
child of God may doubt of his condition.
be effectually called by Christ, yet Christ is the power of ^od to his soul,
as 1 Cor, 1. 24. Unto them which are called Christ is the power of God, and the
wisdom of God. He is powerful to his soul, for the humbling, awakening,
quickenning of him, for strengthening of him against sin, for the making him
hold out in the ways of God: he is of power to him in all his ordinances, in
prayer, in hearing the Word, and in all his ways: But it is not so with others
that question the effectual calling, Christ is not the power of God to them,
Christ is of no effect to them; he may be of some effect, for enlightnings, and
stirrings, and outward reformation; but to bring them to goodness, and holiness
indeed, and to hatred against sin, Christ is not the power of God to those
persons, but he is foolishness to them.

Now the next thing that I will show you, is a point that has been a little
touched; but I will pass over what has been spoken, and will speak more at
large of it: I desire to speak more particularly, and punctually of this same
effectual calling.

And the first point we will take out of it is this; that effectual calling is
the Effectual calling is the first gathering of men unto Christ.
first gathering of men unto Christ, the first making of men to come to Christ,
the first putting of a man into the estate of grace, it is the very portall ^o
religion, the very entry into eternal life; it is the first bringing of a man
to partake of the Lord Jesus Christ, and to have fellowship with him: so it is
called in Scripture, the gathering of the elect home, Isa. 56. 8. I will gather
(says the Lord) the out casts of Israel: he prophesies there of the effectual
calling of the Gentiles; and God says here, this is the first thing that I
will do, I will gather them to my people, I will make them come home to the
Lord Jesus Christ^ this is set forth unto us by our Savior Christ in two
principal parables, one of the Net. Mat. 13. 47, 48. again, the Kingdom of
Heaven is like unto a Not, etc. So that here speaking of the effectual calling
of people, this is said to be the first act of God in it; namely, the gathering
of them for the Kingdom of heaven by the preaching of the Word, and this net is
the Gospel that is preached* the sea is this world, the fishes are men, and the
good and bad are elect, and reprobate; (not as though the elect were good
before they are effectually called, but they are called good, because of Gods
designation and decree to make them good; and he looks upon them as such as
shall be good, and such as he has purposed to make good in his time) Now the
Gospel does draw out of the world Gods elect (by a general call, it calls both
elect and reprobate) but effectual calling, is the gathering of good fishes,
that in the end of the world shall be put into vessels by themselves, so that
effectual calling, the first act of it, is the gathering of men home to God;
the other parable is, Luke 15. 4, 5. What man having lost an hundred sheep,
etc. all the lost sheep of Israel, and of Gods election that are in their lost
estate, as well as other people, before God takes them in hand: here you see
the first act God does toward them, before which they were altogether lost,
and are now found again; is the fetching of them home, the taking of them upon
Christ his shoulders, and bringing them home unto him: I say, effectual
calling, it is Gods first making of a man to come to Christ, you may see it, 1
Pet. 2. 4. To whom coming as to a living stone, ye also are built up, etc. he
alludes unto their first effectual calling, when God did first deal with them,
he made them to come to him to be put into this building; the children of God
after that they are effectually called, are said to be in this building, but
this first act of God, is the putting of them into this building; the bringing
of them to be laid into this excellent edifice, for there is no such building
in the world, is it a building, whose foundation is Christ, and all the Saints
of God are built upon it; it is the most admirable building in the world: now
effectual calling brings a man, and lays him into this building; before a man
is effectually called he is as a stray sheep, as a sheep scattered abroad, and
roaming and ranging up and down the ways of sin, and of death, whom the devil
has po^nded as a stray; he is departed from God, and is roaming up and down in
the world; he is in a lost estate, till God come with this effectual calling
and bring him home, 1 Pet. 2. 25. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are
now returned to your shepherd; that is, ever since your effectual calling you
are come home to God, that was your returning time; before you were as chickens
subject to the kite, till this ^hen gathered you under her wings, and made you
safe: so again, it is called the drawing of a man unto Christ, Joh. 6. 44. No
man comes to me, except the Father draws him; that is except the Father
effectually call him, he cannot come unto me; now this bare and naked calling
cannot do it without drawing, therefore it is here called drawing of a man,
before which a man was altogether out of Christ: therefore this is the first
act God performs upon a man, to draw him to Christ; the man is as unwilling to
come to Christ naturally, as any else; his lusts draw him another way, and he
is as heavy as a millstone, and his heart is lumpish to the things of God, till
the father draws him, and pulls his affections, and thoughts, and mind to come
home unto Christ; this is the first act God does; and again, it is called the
bringing of a man to Christ, Joh. 10. 16. other sheep also have I, says
Christ, which I must bring unto this fold, he speaks here how that he means to
call the Gentiles, (all the elect of God among them) now because they cannot
come, they have no strength of their own to come, therefore he says, he must
bring them unto him.

Again, there must be application of Christ unto a man; now effectual calling
is the first step to the application of the Lord Jesus Christ to a man; There
must be applying of Christ to a man.
we know the Lord Jesus is the Redeemer of the world, he has taken away the
sins of the world, satisfied the wrath of God, wrought righteousness for Gods
elect, he has overcome death, and sin, and Satan, and has expiated for us,
and wrought an everlasting salvation by his own death and passion, in the days
of his flesh, Christ has done this; now except this be applied to a man, what
is a man the nearer? now the first step of the application of the redemption of
Christ is wrought by this effectual calling of a man unto him: then the Lord
begins to make a man have union with Jesus Christ, before a man was like a
branch out of the vine, a dead branch that could do nothing, he could not
repent, or serve God, or please God, or do any thing, he was estranged in mind
and heart, and will: but when God does effectually call a man, he does first
work this application of Christ, that a man may have union with him, and
effectual calling is the first putting of a man into the estate of grace; the
first estating of a man into eternal life, it is the first ingraffing of a man
into the Son of God, it is the putting on of Christ; the Saints of God, after
they are called wear Christ, and walk in Christ: but at a man's first
effectual calling, there is the putting of him on: it is the first notice that
a man has of salvation, the first tidings that comes to the soul of eternal
redemption by Jesus Christ; people hear it with their outward ears before, but
never do they come to hear this in their souls and spirits till now; this is
the first notice and inkling of it; when God does effectually call them, then
he begins this work, as Col. 1. 6. which Word is come unto you (speaking of the
Gospel) it is come unto you, and brings forth fruit, since the day you heard
of it, and knew the grace of God in truth; that is, since the day you were
effectually called, then was the first time of hearing this blessed Gospel;
your ears were deaf till then, your hearts were dead in sins and trespasses
till then; but when you were effectually called, then was the first knowing of
the grace of God in truth; therefore it is called in Scripture, the first
beginning of God to do a man good: it is the first beginning of all the
goodness of God toward a man, as Phil. 1. 6. being confident in this, that he
which has begun a good work in you, will perform it till the day of Jesus
Christ; that is, he that did effectually call you, as he did begin a good work
in you, and did begin to put forth his eternal good will and pleasure in you,
and powered forth the beginning of his mercy, and grace and favor into your
souls; now he that has done this, will never leave it, till he has brought it
to perfection. So again, it is called the first building of a man for heaven,
this is done in effectual calling, Acts 15. 14. Sim^on has declared how God at
the first did visit the Gentiles (says the text) to take out of them a people
for his name; that is, the Word had effectually called the Gentiles, and this
ver. 16. is called the first building of the Gentiles, and the first plucking
of them out of the other people of the world, to be a people of God. This is
the first day of a child of Gods consecration, it is called the forming of
Christ in a man's heart, when a man comes to be formed in the womb of the
Church, before he was a non ens, he had no being in the world, he was but a
natural man; but this new workmanship never came into the world till now, when
a man is effectually called. So again, it is called a man's first entering into
Christ, enter in at the straight-gate, as who should say, obey the call of God,
come in; a man's effectual calling, is a man's first entering into the estate of
grace (I speak the more largely of it, because I would have you understand the
Scripture that speaks of it in these phrases) I say, effectual calling is the
first step to the application of Jesus Christ, the first step of putting a man
into the estate of grace, the first bringing of a man to Christ.

The first reason of this is, because, before effectual calling, a man was
without Before effectual calling no interest in Christ
out Christ, and had no interest in Christ, no communion or fellowship with
Christ, he was altogether dead in trespasses and sins, a cursed creature, a
damned creature, in the estate of sin and condemnation; whatever parts or
gifts he had, all were no better then may be in a reprobate, Ephesians. 2. 12. before
that time you were without Christ, aliens and strangers from the commonwealth
of Israel; may be you were civil, but you had no union with Christ; though you
were constant hearers of the Word (which is a laudable thing) yet you had no
union with Christ; may be you were decked with admirable qualities and jewels,
as the Prophet shows; a man may be decked with golden virtues, and afterward
turn to dross; a man may have admirable things in him, before he has this;
but there was nothing of God in a man, nothing of Christ in a man, no saving
operation of Gods Spirit at all in a man, no union with Christ: this is the
first passage of a man from death to life, from nature to grace, from the devil
to God, we are passed from death to life (says the Apostle) this is an
allusion to a man's effectual calling, afterward a man brings forth the fruits
of life, and is alive to God; but when a man is first effectually called, there
is his passage from death to life, he was a dead man before. Now this effectual
calling therefore is the first work that is wrought in a man, because it is the
first passage of a man from death to life; it is a transition from sin, hell,
and damnation, to be in Christ; therefore mark how Peter speaks, when he had a
hope that his hearers were effectually called, Acts 8. 40. Save your selves
(says he) from this untoward generation; as who should say, this is your first
parting from the world, the first shaking of hands, and bidding them farewell,
if you be effectually called as you seem to be, come out from among them, and
save your selves from this untoward generation, this is the first bursting of
the bonds between you and sin; the first breaking of the league between you and
carnal company; now save your selves from this untoward generation, and make it
appear that you are called, this the Apostle shows, Gal. 1. 13. that before
he was called he had nothing in him at all; you have heard says he, how in
times past beyond measure I persecuted the Church, etc. I confess I had goodly
things in me, and I profitted in the jewish Religion above many my equals in my
own nation, being more jealous for the traditions of my fathers; I was
mavelous strict and forward, and for the letter of the law; I was mavelous
zealous and blameless: there were excellent good things in me; but I had
nothing of Christ all this while, but when it pleased God, who separated me
from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, etc. as who should say, now
here was the first dawning of that blessed light in my heart, now begun that to
appear when God called me by his grace, and first revealed his Son in me, then
was the deed done, and never till then: so also he shows that he was a cursed
creature living in iniquity; it may be himself, and his companions, took him to
be as good a man as any was in all Israel, but see how he casts his own water,
Tit. 3. 3. We our selves also, were sometimes foolish, serving diverse lusts,
etc. but after that the kindness and love of God appeared, etc. from thence he
began to be in the estate of grace, when God called him out of that bad estate,
when God made a breach between him, and his old courses; when he made the first
rent, and division, and revoke, then grace began to appear, from that time
forward I was in Christ: thus you see that effectual calling is the first work
of God in a man's soul, it is the first bringing of a man to Christ, and the
first making of a man to put him on.

Secondly, Because before effectual calling, all was within God; what Effectual
calling declared in the heart.
God would do with this or that man; may be he meant to save him, may be he
meant to dam him, may be he meant to open his eyes, man be he meant to let him
go on, and live and dye in blindness, may be he meant to turn his heart, may
be he meant to let him go on with the world; all was within his own bosom,
there was no inkling, that ever this man should have grace, and eternal life,
nor man, nor Angel, nor himself, could perceive any such thing: a man might
have vain hopes, and false conceits; but no inkling from heaven, but he was as
fair to be a reprobate, as the devils in hell? but when God effectually calls
a man, then he begins to declare what he intends to this or that man, he begins
to open his breast, and show what purpose he had in himself from all eternity,
as Ephesians. 1. 9. having made known unto us (says the Apostle) the mystery of his
will, which he purposed in himself, etc. it was all in himself before, shut up
in his own secret and privy bosom, but when God did effectually call us says
he, then did he make known unto us the mystery of his will; it was a mystery
locked up, it was a secret thing that ever he had a purpose to bring us to such
things, to let us see such mercies; now here was the breaking open of this
seal, now it began to show it self, now the Lord declared what purpose he had
in himself, now he makes it appear, that we are his elect and chosen, and his
beloved ones, as Paul says of the Romans, to all that are at Rome, beloved of
God called to be Saints, etc. Romans 1. 7. you will say, how do you know we are
beloved ones? If you be called to be Saints, I dare be bold to say, you are
beloved of God, God has made it to appear that he loves you: I could not
speak thus before, you were as vile drunkards and profane persons, as any were
in Rome; but now I dare be bold to say, you are beloved of God; nay more, grace
and peace be to you from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, you
are called to be Saints, and if you are once called, then it does appear you
are the beloved of God; it is Gods golden scepter, no man could tell whom the
King would call to him, no man could tell, this or that man should be called
rather then another, till he held out his golden scepter, Hest. 4. 11. So it is
with God; when God does hold out this golden scepter to a man, now a man has
an inkling that the Lord has chosen him, and will be good to him, and hear
him, and help him in all his ways and pardon him, and do every good thing for
him, as Mark. 3. 13. (I use it only as a similitude) our Savior Christ was
there in the mount, and the people were below in the valley, now says the Text,
he called unto him, whom he would, and they came unto him; he was in the mount,
and all his Disciples were in the valley; now no man could tell, who should be
an Apostle: Andrew says Christ, come up; now he was one who should be next no
man could tell, Peter come up, then they knew he was one too, etc. Therefore
this calling was the first intimation of Christ's purpose to them, it was secret
in his own bosom, whom he would make Apostles before; but when he called them,
it came forth, Andrew sees he is the man, and Peter sees he is the man, etc.

Thirdly, Because all other works, follow this work of effectual calling; All
works follow the work of effectual calling.
there be abundance of works that God does work upon his people, that he has
chosen to his Kingdom and glory; he does justify them, and pardon their sins,
and sanctify and cleanse them from iniquity, makes them grow in grace, hears
their prayers, makes them depend upon him in all their needs and necessities,
he makes them deny themselves, and works the grace of humiliation more and
more, and a trade of godliness, and a course of holiness and piety; now not
one of these works are, till a man is called, all things work together for the
best to those that are called, Romans 8. 28. this is a lea^ing work, now all
works come in; now the word works, and prayer works, and the Sacrament works,
and afflictions work, and sin works, when a man is effectually called; this
is the great wheel of motion, now all things work together for the good of him
that is called according to Gods purpose: this is the first ground work, the
first breaking of the ice, the first setting of a man forth toward heaven;
therefore we shall see when the Apostle is to write to any man or Churches,
commonly before ever he bids them do this or that, the first thing he speaks to
them about, is this; he tells them they are effectually called, as Romans 1. 7.
afterward he bids them yield their members, as weapons to righteousness, and
advises them to walk in the Spirit, and give up their bodies and souls, as a
living sacrifice to God; not to be conformed to the world, but to be
transformed in the spirit of their minds, and to walk in love, and redeem^ the
time; and abundance of other works he sets them about: but first of all he
names their effectual calling; as who should say, I take it for granted that
^o^^re called; it is a folly for me to bid you do this or that, if you were not
effectually called, else I should always be beating, what damned and ^iserable
creatures you are; shall I bid you pray, and profess Religion, and you not
effectually called, you can never do this: therefore this is the first thing,
(...) called of God. So when he writes to the Corinths, 1 Cor. 1. 2. called ^^e
Saints, it is the fore front of all his Epistles; as who should say, I shall
speak abundance of things to you, but you are called of God; therefore he bids
them do this and that, and the other, all works come after this effectual
calling, as it is in other particular callings; suppose a man be called to be
an Apostle, all the acts and performances that an Apostle does, they come after
he is called, else they are not the acts of an Apostle, but a medler; therefore
in all the Apostles writings, when he does the acts of an Apostle, to exhort
them, and rebuke them in the Lord, he shows his calling, Paul called to be an
Apostle; as who should say, do not judge amiss of me; you may think, what have
I to do with you? we have a Minister already, what have you to do in Corinth?
meddle with your own places where you live; mistake me not, I am called to be
an Apostle; so that his calling to be an Apostle, is before all other actions;
first he is called, and then exhorts, instructs, reproves, etc. Several names
given to effectual calling.


Fourthly, Another reason is taken from the names that are given unto effectual
calling: first it is called a man's gathering unto Christ, as Joh. 11. 50, 51,
52. it is the prophecy of Caiphas, though he spoke he knew not what, yet he
spoke right, as the place does imply, it is expedient, says he, that one man
should dye for the people, and gather together the children of God that were
scattered; as who should say, this is the first act that the Lord Jesus does
upon those that are his, they were scattered till then; and now when he comes
effectually to call them, he puts his first act upon them, and gathered them to
himself; so also it is called a drawing unto God, Joh 12. 32. When I am lifted
up* I will draw all men unto me; that is when he was lifted up upon the cross,
he would call the Gentiles, all his elect people unto him; he does not speak of
all men, but he speaks of the elect, he will draw all them to him* he will call
them home. So again, it is called in Scripture, the entering of a man into
Christ, as a Scholar that is admitted into a College, his name is first
entered; so effectual calling is a man's first entering into the School of
Christ, into the family of Christ; when a man is first entered into that blessed
society, as Joh. 10. 9. I am the door, if any man will enter by me, he shall
be saved, and go in and out, and find pasture; he speaks here of the first act
of a man's coming before that he was quite out of doors: this is the first act,
his first entering into Christ to be of his sheepfold, and flock, to feed upon
his pastures, and to have the benefit of his Scepter, and be governed and
guided by him, as the true shepherd: effectual calling enters a man into
Christ. Again it is called a man's coming in, Romans 11. 25. until the fullness
of the Gentiles is come in, that is, until the elect Gentiles be effectually
called; now because he would express what effectual calling is, he calls it
the coming of a man in; he was without before, as other dogs were, that had no
part in the tree of life, no interest in the salvation purchased, as far off as
those that were reprobates; but now is his coming in* and so I might instance
in other names.

Lastly, Because it is the first extract of election, and predestination unto
eternal life, as Romans 8. 30. Whom he did predestinate, them also he called.
there was the first impression of the seal upon the wax, there was the first
image that he made, whom he did predestinate, them he called; afterward he
justified them, etc: therefore you shall find in Scripture, that election and
calling are put together, because this is the first blush of it, as Rev. 17.
14. The King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and they that are with him are called and
chosen, he puts them both together; what a marvelous comfort is this to those
that know they are effectually called of God! election and vocation, are
individual companions, and cannot be separated one from the other; that man
that is elected, it is certain he shall be called; this is that which makes a
man actually elected; my meaning is this, though a man were elected before all
worlds, though now living in the estate of sin and death, and damnation, a
vile wretched sinner; he was elected it may be, but not actually elected in
himself, there was nothing of election in him, there was no image nor seal of
election stamped upon him, nothing of it put forth in him; therefore this is
the reason, why in Scripture vocation is called election, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. You
see your calling brethren, not many wisemen after the flesh, not many mighty,
etc. are called, but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise; the one is the image and the effect of the other, he puts
one for the other, you see your calling; how? because God has chosen the
foolish and base people, and not those that are more noble and excellent; this
is the reason, for as election is before all times, so vocation is in time; it
is the electing, or choosing, or calling of a man out of the world; so that
vocation and election are very much a kin the one to the other; it is just as
Gods decree of creating and creating; the creating of the world was just
according to the idea he had framed in his decree, so the calling of a man is
just the image and idea of what God had decreed to a party from all eternity;
therefore it must needs be the first work that is wrought upon a man.

Use 1. This shows us why it is such a dangerous thing for any man in
Dangerous to err about our effectual calling
the world to mistake his effectual calling, and think he is called of God,
when he is not; because it is the first work of all, therefore very dangerous
to err in it! what, to err in the very first work of all, in the maine and
principal, in the very beginning of all the whole workmanship! it is a very
grievous thing: The Apostle St. James, writing to Christians professing
Religion, to take heed they think not they have grace, when they have not; he
bids them take heed they do not err, Iam. 1. 16. he speaks not there in regard
of particulars, but in the general it is dangerous to err in any point; but to
err in such a thing as is of this nature, it is most woeful.

Reas. 1. Because this is the foundation; now it is a horrible thing in
intellectuals, Because this is the foundation.
in matters of theory to err in fundamentals: so it is in practicals; it is an
horrible thing for a man to err in the very foundation of Religion, in the
first acquaintance with God, in the very ground and bottom of all, a man had
need lay the foundation well, because else the whole building falls; effectual
calling is the very ground of a man's going to God, it is the very ground of a
man's laying hold upon God, and of the profession of Religion, and all the
building must come to nothing, if this be not well laid; God forbid I should go
about to shake any man, or call in question any man's Religion, or hope or
comfort; I deny not people the professing of Gods name, or the calling upon
God, or the coming to the Sacraments, I do not deny th^^ this; but I beseech
you, be sure that you have a good foundation for all, for all will come to
nothing elss; you remember what became of the man's house that was built upon
the sands, that had no foundation, Mat. 7. 26. When the winds came, and the
floods beat upon that house, it fell, the house came falling down as if it had
never been built: so have a care of the foundation, it is a most miserable
thing, if the foundation be not well laid.

Secondly, Because effectual calling is a thing that a man must have a thousand
Because man most often have recourse to it.
references unto before he die; if he lives, he must every day have a reference
to this, a man can do nothing, but he must still have a reference to his
effectual calling, he must ever and anon be looking back to this; God has
called me to his glory and virtue; he will be driven to this whether he will or
no; it is like a man's evidence, when any wrangling companion shall question his
right in his estate, he must have reference to his evidences, and if he find
them hardly current, what a stound will he be put unto, if he find his
evidences rotten and unsound, he knows not what course to take: why! effectual
calling is that which a child of God must have reference unto all the days of
his life, from the first estating of him in the Kingdom of God, from the first
bringing of him to partake of eternal life: when David was in affliction in
body and mind, and doubts came upon him thick and threefold, he was feign to
have reference to his effectual calling, and that comforted him, Psalm. 1 9. 50.
This is my comfort in affliction* for thy Word has quickened me, when he was
^n affliction of conscience, and mind, and body, he began to look back; time
was when I was dead in sins and trespasses, I never looked after God, but thy
Word has quickened me; this raised him up, this was his comfort in his
affliction, the Lord had called him to his Kingdom, and made him partaker of
the work of grace, and this cheared him; had he not had reference to this, he
could have had no hold; without this a man is as in a wilderne^s, a lost man:
therefore what a fearful thing is it for a man to take himself to be
effectually called when he is not? it is as it were to lay a spring for a man's
soul, it is as a net for the devil to take a man, and to carry him on in hopes
and expectations; and then when he looks back, and sees his bottom and
foundation he stands upon is nothing but conceit, this is a miserable thing.
Because it is the beginning of Gods works on the soul.


Thirdly, Because it is the beginning of the works of God; now what a thing is
it for a man to strike out of the way at his beginning? if a man have a journey
to go, if he go out of the way as soon as ever he goes out of doors; he must
needs be wide, he had been better have stayed at home; a man were better go out
of his way at any time, then at the beginning, if he go ten miles, and then go
out of his way, there is some hope; it is not all in vain, he has gone ten
miles onward of his journey; but for a man to go out of his way, as soon as
ever he steps out of doors, he is cast further off, then if he had never
stirred a foot; it is an excellent thing when a man begins well, Gal. 3. 3. Ye
began in the Spirit, etc. though they struck out of the way afterward, and
yielded to a great deal of carnal doctrine and fleshly propositions, and were
a world out of the way, yet this was to great purpose that they began well; St.
Paul durst not but call them the children of God, he could hardly tell what to
make of them; yet he says, little children ye have put on Christ, and done
thus and thus, and went out to eternal life in a right manner, therefore God
will bring you in again certainly, you must come again, you began well you
began in the Spirit; but when a man in his very beginning shall err, his error
was in principi^, as ever he set out of doors, he went clean contrary, this man
hardly ever returns, nay he had been better never to have stepped forth; when
a man steps into a way which seems good to him, commonly that way is death to
him; when he has gone a thousand miles, as he thinks, in the profession of
Religion, and has gotten the apprehension in his ow^ soul to be the child of
God then to lay it down* it goes to the heart of him; he will build an high
wall in his own imagination, certainly it is thus; indeed it is better to turn
then go forward, but it is the corruption of a man's heart he cannot abide to
return, it will be a shame to him, and there must be such a do, that he is not
able to bear it; I do not desire to unsettle any man, if a man has but his
fingers ends to lay hold upon Christ, any truth to hang upon him, let him hang,
God for bid I should shake such a one; but if your error be in the beginning,
and if you have gone out of the way, you were better to return, for you will
never go right.

Use 2. Here we may see the reason why the Scripture is so urgent to See why
Scriptu^e u^ge^^ us to make out calling sure.
make our calling sure, because this is the first entrance, and admission into
Jesus Christ; there is an excellent place, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Wherefore the
rather brethren give all diligence to make your calling and election sure, for
he that does these things shall never fall; for so an entrance shall be made
unto you, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; make it sure*
why? for if you do, you shall never fall; that is not all neither, though this
is a great matter, is not this a great matter for a man to be sure never to
fall away? but he shall stand and hold our for ever, what a mercy is this? yet
this is not all; for says he, so shall an emrance be made unto you, into the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, as who should say, your effectual calling is the very
entrance into the Kingdom and glory of Jesus Christ, it is the very first
entering into the way of eternal life, if you are assured of this, you are in a
fair way, you are in the gates of heaven, you are in an excellent way, if you
have made this sure; therefore make that pastlal peradventure, that you were
called indeed of God to partake of Jesus Christ.

Reas. 1. The reason to urge this, is first, because effectual calling is such
a Jud 1. says he I would have you earnestly contend for the faith, which was
once delivered to the Saints; when God did effectually call his Saints, he
delivered to them faith, and he delivered it to them then once for all, never
to give it to them again; but then they had it once for all, as it is said of
Christ, he was once offered for all, Heb 9. So when God does effectually call a
man, he does give him this call once for all, he gives him faith once for all,
and grace once for all; but you will say when God gives grace he renews it
every day, and affoards new helps, and new assistances; it is true, and without
this, no man can stand without supply from God continually, the very elect
could not persevere unto the end; but yet God gives them no new graces, he
gives them more of the same love to God, and more of the same faith, and more
of the same desires, and endeavors after goodness; but the thing is never to
do again, as Christ says to the woman of Samaria, 1 John 4. 14. Whosoever
drinks of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; when Christ
brings a man to this well, and gives him the first draught, he shall never
thirst more, he shall never have it to do again; God does it once for all?
that is, that man that is once effectually called, is never uncalled, if he
has once faith given him, he is never totally deprived of it, it is once
delivered to him, for all times afterward: now this shows us, that it concerns
us nearly to be assured of this, when a man has done a thing, that can be but
once done, it must stand for all; and the thing is good and necessary, would he
not be sure of it? such a thing is effectual calling.

Secondly, Because all the promises meet here, as all the streams meet where
All the promises of God, meet in a man's effectual calling
the fountain opens its self, so all the promises of God meet in a man's
effectual calling; when God effectually calls a man, he says, take my Son,
come unto me, cast thy self upon me; and be ruled by me, he does this
effectually, and says thus to him; thou shall have my Son, and with him all
things, pardon of thy sins, the peace of a good conscience; I will give thee
power against ^ll thy lusts, the gates of hell shall not prevail against thee;
I will keep thee here in this world through faith unto salvation, take my y^ak
upon the, and learn of me, and thou shall have all these things, and
therefore, Rev. 19. 9. Blessed is he that is called to the supper of the Lamb,
these are the true sayings of God, as who should say, though you may question
it, and doubt it, and call it into controversy, I tell you it is true; these
are the true sayings of God and you may build your self upon it, you are
blessed if you be once effectually called of God, all the promises of God
belong unto you, Acts 2. 39. the pr^mises belong to you, and to your children,
to as many as God shall call; all that are called of God, all the promises of
God belong unto them; as soon as ever Christ has effectually called a man, he
opens his liver-veine, and lets out all his heart blood upon him, all belongs
to that man, it is like the first joining of hands between man and wife, with
all my goods I thee ^ndow: when God first takes a man out of the world, to live
unto him, and seek his Kingdom, and labor to please him, and from this time
forward to believe in his name, with all his goods he him endows, he gives him
title to eternal life, to all the help^ and furtherances, that ever he shall
need for this life or eternal life, he shall have all: now what a needful thing
is it, when all the promises meet here, as at a fountain head; here is the
spring let forth, how needful is it I say, that a man should labor that he be
effectually called of God; we should look for i^ every day, and pray to God to
have it, and strive to have it appear unto us* that our calling is sound: here
is the very inlet of all the comforts of the holy Ghost, and all the hope that
the soul can have, here is all the satisfaction and content of the soul of man;
they are bestowed upon a man, when he is effectually called, there is a way set
open unto him, that he may have the same.

Thirdly, Because this is the first of all obedience, a man cannot obey God,
Effectual calling is the first point of obedience
till he be effectually called; nay, it is not obedience till he be called, if
a man should hear Sermons, come to the Sacraments, give to the poor, it is no
obedience till a man be effectually called: when once a man is bound
apprentice, and his indentures are drawn, his running of errands, and all he
does is service to his Master; when thou art bound apprentice to Christ, and
thy indentures are sealed, and thou art called to be a servant unto him; now
all thy works are obedience to him, Come says Christ, learn of me, etc. Mat.
11. 28. first he would have them come to him, and bear his yoke, and then
learn of me; then be meek as I am meek, and humble as I am humble, and then
bear my burden; then it is obedience and you are able to go through, Faithful
is he that has called you, who will also do it; effectual calling is the
fill-horse of the cart, that bears up the cart, this is the first draught; a
Painter cannot lay any color, till the first draught be made: this is the very
ground of a man's workings; this is the ground of all obedience, of all prayer,
and hearing; here is the ground of doing all aright, otherwise God will say,
what have thou to do, to take my name into thy mouth, unless thou will submit
to my Covenant and be bound apprentice with me; a man that is yet in his sins,
he has nothing to do as yet, but to lie at the throne of grace, crying that
God would give him a call, for he can do nothing till he is effectually called
of God.

Fourthly, This is the only way to go forward; a man cannot go forward,
Effectual calling is the only means to go forward.
there is no proceeding unless the beginning be well done, as the Apostle
says, Heb. 6. 1. leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go
on unto perfection; as who should say, taking it for granted, that you are
effectually called of God, that the principals of Religion are laid in your
souls, let us go on unto perfection, let us wax better and better, and pray to
God that we may increase in grace, let us walk in holy and sincere obedience to
all Gods Commandments, let us labor and strive to outstrip our selves, and
amend our selves from day to day; if we have laid the foundation well, if that
be first well laid, a man may go on to perfection, a man cannot otherwise go on
well; nay, the further a man goes on, the more mischief he pulls upon his soul.

Lastly, This is the maine stud in the house, the very ground a man is to
Effectual calling the very ground to stand fast upon.
stand fast upon; this is the ground to keep a man from falling away, that God
has effectually called him, as the Apostle says, 2 These. 2. 13, 14. We are
bound to give God thanks for you brethren, because God has from the beginning
chosen you to salvation, through the sanctification of the Spirit and belief of
the truth, whereunto he called you by our Gospel, therefore brethren stand
fast; when a man is effectually called, a man may say stand fast, otherwise he
cannot persevere unto the end.

MATTHEW. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I will
give you rest.
WE have been large in the opening of effectual calling, and the last thing we
handled concerning it, was this; that it was the first gathering of a man unto
Christ, the first making of a man to come unto Christ; it is a man's first
admission into the estate of grace; it is the first dawning of the light that
shines from above, the first coming forth of Gods good will and pleasure to a
man.

Now before I can proceed to the particular parts of effectual calling, I must
needs take a thing by the way, namely Gods preparatory work, that he does work
as a way hereunto; though it be not the work of saving grace, a man may perish
for all that work, unless the Lord carry a man further on; yet there is a
preparatory work, that God does work in the soul, before he calls a man
effectually, the Lord does prepare a man, by detecting of sin, and showing
him his misery by sin, and letting him see and perceive what a miserable
creature he is in himself; and God does stop and silence a man before him, and
leave him without excuse, and cut him and hew him down by the law, that he may
see that he is a dead creature and a damned wretch; before this a man will not
come, though God call him never so often, he will not here his lusts carry him
away, and stop his ears, and harden his heart, though he seem to come, and sets
diverse steps to come home, yet he never comes home indeed, till God takes a man
down in this fashion.

Now this is the thing we are to speak of, and we have it in the text, in the
which we may observe three things: first the preparatory work which now we are
to speak of, you that are weary, and heavy laden: secondly, the call it self,
come unto me: thirdly, the benefit of this yielding to this call, I will give
you rest.

To speak then, first of this preparatory work, the Lord brings the law to a
There is a preparatory work to effectual calling.
man, and lays load upon the soul, and makes the soul labor, and toil, and
sweat, and makes his heart burst within him, and he is heavily laden, as if
mountains were upon his back; God lays load upon the soul, and then comes
effectual calling: see what the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3. 24. the Apostle here
speaks by his own experience, once we were strangers from Christ and absent
from Christ: now how did God fetch us home? he sent the law, the ferula of the
law, he sent the law to arrest us, and school us to Christ, it was a
Schoolmasters: I can speak it for my part, it was mine as you may see, Romans 7.
from the beginning to the 12. ver. So the law fetched Paul home and struck him
dead, and made him see what a miserable and wretched creature he was; it made
him see he had no hope nor no hold, nothing in the world to trust to in
himself, he was a dead man, the law like a sword stabs him at the heart; and so
it pleased the Lord to bring him home to Christ, that he might be justified by
faith: first, the Israelites were stung with the fiery Serpents, before they
were healed by looking up to the brazen Serpent: first our first parents saw
they were naked, and then came forth the promise of the seed of the woman: so
first God convinces a man of sin, and then of righteousness, Joh 10. 8.
first he convinces a man of his sins, and then shows him where righteousness
is to be had, how he may have righteousness, and peace of conscience, and be
justified before God.

Now for the opening of the point, I will show you three things: first, that it
is thus, God does first prepare a man, before he calls him effectually.
Secondly, the reasons why the Lord does thus: and Thirdly, the uses.

First, That it is true, the Lord does prepare a man, before he does
effectually Proof 1. from texts full of terror.
call him, either more or less; there must be a work of the law one way or
other, and to prove this: first, wherefore else are those many texts of
Scripture, full of terrors* of sharp arrows, and fierce pellets against
sinners? wherefore are these but to terrify a man, and pull a man down? and
that we that are Ministers of God, should fling them against sinners, and the
Lord looks that men should tremble, Amos 3. 6, 8. The Lord says there, shall a
trumpet be blown in a City, and people not be afraid? etc. and ver. 8. When the
Lion roars, who will not fear? all those terrible texts of Scripture, they are
the roaring of the Lion of the tribe of Judah against all that go on in sin;
now who would not tremble says the Prophet? it is true many wicked and ungodly
men do not tremble a jot almost; but some shall tremble, God looks upon some,
and they shall tremble at his Word, Isa. 66. 1, 2.

Secondly, Because this is the office of the Spirit of God, to be a Spirit of 2
From the Spir^ts office.
bondage, before he be the Spirit of adoption; he was so to the Romans, he was
the Spirit of bondage in their hearts, before he was the Spirit of adoption, to
make them cry Abba Father, R^m. 8. 15. You have not received again the Spirit
of bondage to fear, you did receive it once, but you have not received it
again; but now you have received, the Spirit of adoption, whereby you cry,
A^ba Father. Now to deny this doctrine, is to deny the maine office of the
Spirit, which is dangerous, for every man naturally is a bedlam: now how are
bedlams tamed? they are beaten and whipped, and kept under till they come to
themselves: so the Lord deals with a man as with a bedlam; he comes with the
Spirit of bondage, flinging in slavish terrors and fears, and what a miserable
creature he is, this sin and the other sin, and the wrath of God is come out
against him; the Spirit takes a man down from day to day, and undermines him
and breaks his stomach; and then afterward, when he has ^^ought that work, he
comes to be the Spirit of adoption, to teach him to cry Abba Father.

Thirdly, Because the Gospels turn is not come, till the Law has done his 3
Because the Gospel follows the law.
part; th^s was the method that Christ was anointed to observe in his
Ministry, he would first have a man bruised and broken, and captivated, and
blind, and poor, and in misery, and then he preaches the Gospel to him, as
you may see, L^k 4. 19. The Spirit of the Lord has anointed me to this order,
says he; it is an excellent place for this purpose, to stop the mouths of
those that hope there is an easier way; he will preach the Gospel, and liberty,
and comfort, and enlargement; but he will have a broken heart first, and a
tender Spirit first.

Fourthly, You may see an express place of our Savior Christ, that he 4 From
Christ's design in coming.
came to save that which was lost: first a man shall be in a lost estate, and
he shall be in a wilderness, and he shall have his sins discovered, and his
misery, and then the Lord comes to those that he has a mind to do good unto,
Mat. 9. 12. 13. says he, They that are whole need not the Physician, but they
that are s^^k, he means to deal with a man as a Physician, a man must be sick
before he comes to him, the Physician gives Physic to none till they be sick:
now till a man is sick of his sins* till they are the diseases of his soul,
till he is in torments and misery, the Lord Jesus says, he will not be his
Physician.

Fifthly, Because God does see it sitting to deal thus with his converted ones
when they fall into some foul sin, and gross iniquity, the Lord is 5 From
Gods working with believers after gross sins.
pleased to go this way to work, even toward his own converted ones; when they
sin, not only through invincible infirmities, and through temptation; but
when they grow stubborn, when they fall into some horrible iniquity, the Lord
does use to go even legally to work with them* though they lie under grace;
therefore much more toward those that never yet were under grace, that never
had any free Spirit, that never had any part of an ingenious nature, that were
never yet wrought to be led by the fair means of grace; if God work so with
those that he has given in some measure his grace, and given in some measure a
portion of his free Spirit unto; if when they sin, and sin foully, it is
not all the promise of the Gospel, all the covenant of Grace, that will raise
them up again, and make them walk before God with holiness, and zeal, and
fervency; then much more will he deal thus with those that never had any grace
at all: Thus David cries out, thy fears have got hold upon me, and Psalm. 28.
4. his sins were as an heavy burden unto him, too heavy for him to bear; he
did not only set his sins before him, they were not only the objects before
his eyes; so they are to a man that walks in the comforts of the Spirit; they
are before his eyes, every man that walks in obedience, he has his sins
before him at times to humble him, and keep him low, and make him still hang
upon Christ, and depend upon him, and esteem Christ precious to you that
believe Christ is precious, 2 Pet. 4. 5. But now he sets them before them, not
only as objects, but lays them as loads upon their backs, that their sins
shall not only be seen, but felt by them: now this is a legal work, when any
part of a man's sins and misery lies upon his soul and conscience; it is true,
God never shows sin to the utmost to his people, he never lays all the
load; if God should stir up all the stink of uncleanness that is in his
people; if God should discover to them all the ugly looks of their sins, they
were not able to bear it: As a good man said, when I see my self, says he, it
is an intolerable horror to me, it makes my very flesh to shiver and my soul
to quake, to think what I am in my self. Nay, if God should lay all the burden
of sin upon the soul, the children of God their Spirits would fail, they
were not able to subsist under it; but thus far the Lord reveals their
sins, and lays load upon them, to break their hearts, and rend the kall of
their spirits, to tame, and pull them to him, to bring them under, and to make
them bear his yoke.

Lastly, Because, wheresoever the Scripture does speak at large, and
professedly of any man's conversation; we do not read of any conversation, b^t 6
From Scripture examples.
it was after this manner, by revealing their misery in themselves, and
charging their sins upon their souls: Thus the Lord dealt with Manasses, he
did mightily afflict him, he opened his eyes by outward afflictions, and then
charged his misery upon his soul: Thus the Lord dealt with Ephraim, as with an
untamed hei^er, and then he cried out, Convert me O Lord, and I shall be
converted, Jer. 31. 18. And thus the Lord dealt with the woman in the Gospel,
that washed his feet with her tears; you must think it was not ordinary sorrow
that could make her tears trickle down in such plentiful manner as to wash his
feet; thus it was with her before she had the pardon of her sins; and thus it
was with Peter's hearers; he told them, that they were the murderers of the
Lord Jesus, and then they were pricked in their hearts; before he did preach
the Gospel, and bid them repent evangelically: Thus did John the Baptist deal;
first, he comes with the axe and hews at them, and lays at the root of the
tree, and then he tells them of Christ, there comes one after me, that is more
worthy then I, etc. First, he did lay about him to detect their misery, and
reveal to their wretched estate, and then at the last he preached the Gospel,
and poured in oil: So it was with Paul, the Lord made it appear that he
fought against heaven, and persecuted the Lord Jesus Christ and he laid him
flat upon his face; nay, he smote him with blindness; and sent him crying and
roaring, and made him glad to go to their houses, whom before he ha^ persecuted
and scorned; and afterward he told him that he was a chosen vessel: so the
Lord dealt with the jailer, he rent, and tore him, and burst him in pieces, as
if all the devils in hell were about him; and afterward he says, Beli^ve in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Act. 16. 26

But you will say there are some in Scripture are related not to have any such
Lidia she heard Paul preach, and the Lord opened her heart at first, and was a
convert presently, Act. 6. 14. So it was with Corn^lius, and his company, ^eter
o^^ned his mouth, and preached to them, and while ^e (...) spoke the holy Gh^s^
sel^ on them all, Act. 10. 24. Therefore it seems all men's conversions, and
callings home, are not ushered by this legal work

I answer, This is a poor Argument, that because the Scripture does not Lidia
and Cornelius, and (...) prove there was in both places, that there was a
p^eparato^^ work in Lida, is plain by two Arguments, for the Scripture she^^th
(...)efore this evangelical work came, she was a worshipper of God before,
(...)g ^here was something went before this opening of her heart; there was a
work of the Law before, for this was the first work of the Gospel, when God
ope^ed her heart: another Argument is in the 13 ver. where it is said, that
Lidia before she heard this Sermon, resorted to Paul to the Rivers side to
pray; therefore it is a plain sign that she was wrought upon by a preparatory
work, before Paul converted her, and wrought upon her by the Gospel: And then
for Cornelius and his friends, for Cornelius himself; it is a plain case, that
he was wrought upon before the Holy Ghost fell upon him; for in the beginning
of the Chapter, it is said he was a devout man, one that called upon God, and
set times apart, extraordinarily to seek God, before the Holy Ghost fell upon
him, and no question it was so with his kinsfo^^s; for whom did he call to meet
with Peter at this Sermon, but those that he had been conversant with?
therefore it is likely, they were wrought upon before as well as Cornelius,
otherwise he would have had little hope to get them thither: well then, the
first thing we have proved that God does thus prepare his people legally,
before he does effectually call them.

Now we come to the second thing: why God thus? and the first Reason Reas. 1.
To declare Gods justice.
is, because God will declare and show forth his justice; for as God did show
forth his justice in the Redemption of his people; so he will also in the
application of this Redemption, show some part of his justice; in the
Redemption of the World he poured forth the full viols of it, he required full
satisfaction of the Lord Jesus, now he will not let justice be utterly
swallowed up of mercy when he comes to apply this, but justice shall show his
face, and they shall come to see what Christ has done for them; and miseries
he has waded through for a man, he shall ^ee that God is a just and righteous
God, that hates sin, and abhors unquity: what a consuming fire he is against
them that disobey him; the Lord makes his justice appear in the application of
Redemption: you see how he takes up his people upon Mount Ebal, and delivers
the curses of the Law, and makes his own people to say Amen, and subscribe to
them, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Here he delivers the curses, and makes proclamation of his
justice; and says he, I will have all the people say Amen; he will have all
lie a bleeding under this curse; and mark what Moses says in the first verse
of the next Chapter, it shall come to pass, if thou will hearken to the voice
of the Lord, he will set thee up above all nations; here comes in a fire
Sunshiny day afterward; the Lord will have his people see his justice, and
what it is to be delivered from sin; the Lord will make them see, that he is
a just and righteous God, and that there is no sinning against him, there is no
living in his sight, no entering into his Kingdom without righteousness; I must
be a new creature, else I shall be consumed; he charge these things upon the
soul, and that soundly too; because now he will lay down the foundation of a
godly life, the soul shall have need of this point as long as he lives, to
remember that God is a righteous God; he has found him to be a ju^^ God
against sin, though he be a gracious and merciful God to them that truly
repent, and set themselves to obey his Name: yet the soul sees there is no
living in sin, no following after a man's own lusts, and the soul never loses
this; for though the soul many times, through temptations may ^e carried away,
yet he shall never be under that former blindness he was in; never so ignorant
of God; never think so meanly and ignominiously of God ^s he did in his
unregeneracy; he still knows that God is a severe God and there^ no expecting
of mercy at his hands, without holiness and righteousness; if God should
smother up the work all at first, justice would not be seen: as we see it is
among men; suppose a base fellow has wronged a noble man, may be the noble man
means to pardon him; but yet he will have him smart for it, and feel and know
what it is to displease and wrong, and impeach such a great man as he. So if
the Lord should smother up the business presently, as soon as ever he sends the
word to a man presently convert a man and pardon him, and give him true and
saving faith, justice would not be s(...), and therefore the Lord first
tramples upon a man's neck, and shows ^m his sil^hiness, and casts him out of
the Camp; as the Lord said concerning M^rian, she is unclean, carry her out of
the Camp; so the Lord flings a person ^orth like a cursed damned creature, as
if he would take him by the heels, and fl^^g him down to hell, and never look
upon him, and then he takes him in; thus the Lord tells his people, Isa. 45.
21. There is none but me, a just God and a Savior: first, he makes them see
that he is a just God, and then he makes them see that he is their Savior and
Redeemer; and notwithstanding his justice and severity against sin and
iniquity, yet he ^ill give his grace and mercy to them that repent, and humble
themselves under his hand.

Secondly, The Lord does this, because he would sweeten his mercy to the I. To
sweeten mercy.
soul, as you may see how he dealt with the Prophets widow; he let her
creditors arrest her first, and seize upon her two sons for bondmen, and then
he wrought a wonder for her, 2 King. 4. 1. now this mercy was sweet, and came
in due season, I was in misery, and the Lord helped me, says David; as who
should say, it came in a time when I had need of it: The Lord deals, as it is
reported King. James did at the beginning of his reign, when some of his Nobles
had been offenders, he let the law proceed against them, till they were brought
to the scaffold, and their heads laid upon the block, and then sent a pardon,
and now a pardon was acceptable indeed. So the Lord deals with his people, he
lets the law loose upon the soul, yea, and the devil too, many times, and he
rends them, and tears them as a Lion, and lets them look when they shall
perish, and lays their heads upon the block, and then sends hope of a pardon,
and forgiveness of sins: what a sweet staying of Abraham's hand was that, when
the knife was just ready to be stuck in Isaacks throat? so when the knife of
Justice is ready to be stuck into a man's throat, and he is ready to perish for
ever; now mercy will be sweet mercy, now it will be mercy indeed, This is the
time of love, says God, Ezekiel. 16. 8. When God had laid his people a bleeding
in their goare blood, now he passes by, and says, This is a time of love; he
laid them in their blood and silthinesse, he laid them vile and miserable in
themselves, and now says he is the time of love. Now the mountains drop with
sweet wine, as the Prophet speaks, what is the reason that people do not taste
any sweetness in the Gospel, and Sacraments, and Ordinances of Christ? Alas,
they were never sensible of their sins, therefore the Lord does thus to make
his mercy sweet to his people, that they may prize it, and esteem it, and make
good account of it from day to day.

Thirdly, the Lord does this, that he may fetch his people home to the Lord 3.
That he may bring men home to Christ.
Jesus Christ; for before they will not come to God, they will not come at him,
as the Prophet speaks, but when they are in the Margent of Hell ready to
perish, and have no hope to hold to, nothing to trust to, they are quite and
clean at a loss, and know not whither to go; now this makes them come home: as
it is said of Abs^lom, he sent once to Joab, but he would not come to him; yea,
twice and he would not come; but when he set his Barley field on fire, then he
came. So the Lord sets his peoples hearts on fire, he fires their consciences,
and their very bowels, and makes their souls ache within them, for want of
mercy, and grace, and favor, for want of power against their sins, for want
of Gods helping and assisting of them from day to day, and this makes them glad
to come home to him. You know how long it was before the woman in the Gospel
would come to Christ, she was sick twelve years and had spent all her living
upon the Physicians and could have no help, now she came to Christ when she was
quite spent, and her patience was come to the utmost, she was a dead woman if
she came not to Christ, all the Physicians could not help her, now she comes
home to Christ; As it was with Agur when he saw his brutishness, this drove
him to Ithiel and V^al, Prove. 30. 1, 2. that is, to the Lord Jesus Christ, as
it is with a Coney when she is persued by a Dog, then she runs to her
borough; When Naomi was bereft of Husband, Children, Means, and Maintenance,
and hears there is plenty in Israel, she returns presently; she might have
gone long before but she wanted a scourge and whip to send her home, but when
she had lost all, and was ready to sink, and heard good tidings from Bethlehem,
now she makes speed thither presently: as the Lord speaks, H^s. 2. 6. I will
hedge her ways with thorns; how does the Lord make the poor Church here come
home to him, that was her husband and beloved, from whom she was gone a
whoring? God takes this course, he hedgeth her ways with thorns, she would
have rests, and friends, and comforts, and something to hang upon, but God
knocks her off from all, and now she will return to her husband again; so the
Lord to make his people stoop to his yoke, he shows them their misery, and
worries them, and wearies them, that they can hold out no longer, and then down
go their bucklers, and now, speak Lord, thy servants hear, now they are willing
to hear him.

Fourthly, God does it that he may weane his people from sin, and take off
their hearts from their own ways: for a man is mavelous eager of sin 4. To
wean men from sin.
by nature, and will not let it go, and will not part with it by no means, his
heart is set upon his lusts, and he will have them, though he has hell and
damnation with them; when the Lord calls upon them to walk in his ways, they
say they will not walk therein, Jer. 6. 16. People will not be diligent in
prayer and h^ld close to God, they will not be strict in their ways as the
preciseness of the Gospel teaches them, now the Lord breaks in upon them in
this fashion, and makes them willing As a man deals with a young horse or
colt, when a man would tame a colt that is lustly, and headstrong, and
violent, he carries him out may be, and makes him apprehend in his fancy, that
he will ride him against stone-walls, and carries him, may be, into Quagmires,
and Muds, and rotten Fennes, and there he makes him go, and spurs him, and
beats him, and raines him, and snafles him, and thus he breaks his stomach,
and at last he will bear the saddle, and carry a man quietly; so the Lord
Jesus does with a poor creature he casts off the bonds of Christ, and though
the truth begins to work upon his conscience, he throws out the arrow again,
and heales himself with vain healings; now the Lord breaks a man's heart, and
opens a peep hole into hell, as though he would throw him in quick thither, and
shows him his misery to the life, and to the quick, and so makes them come off;
as the Lord dealt with Moses when he would make him circumcise his son, he
was loath to displease his wi^e, she was against it, being a Midianitish woman,
and he was loath to have her ill will, and therefore deserred it, now what
course took God with him, the Lord met him, and would have slain him; the Lord
made as though he were his enemy, and would slay him; and now he was willing to
do it; so the Lord deals with a stubborn soul if it belongs to him, he will
overcome his heart, and make him let fall his sins, he will make as though he
would slay him; he will make him a weary of keeping his lusts, before he has
done with him: The Lord deals in this case as he dealt with the Philistines,
they would not send home the Arc, what course did he take to make them send it
home, and send it home in pomp, and great respect: God did fling down Dagon
which was their chief Idol, and the Lord smote them with Emerods. And now they
think with themselves, let us send home the Ark of the Lord, and how shall we
send it home? Let us provide golden Mi^^ and Emerods, they sent it home with
cost and offerings; So the Lord deals with those that belong to him, he tires
them in their own ways, and makes them willing to come out at last.

Lastly, the Lord does it to knock his people quite and clean off from all; 5.
To knock us off from any thing else.
every man naturally hangs upon something, and above all hangs upon his good
works, and good prayers, and performances; and this keeps his heart from seeing
what a miserable creature he is, this keeps him from mourning, and zeal, and
fervency, and all this while that he hangs upon these, his heart is hard^ned,
he will never stoop and yield to God; now, when the Lord means to do a man
good, he knocks him quite off, and plucks out of his hands all his works, and
makes him let all go; not that he cease to work, but as the Apostle speaks,
Rom 4. 14. He makes him as a man that works not, not as though he works
not, for there is no carnal man works more then this poor soul in this estate,
he keeps a great deal of stir to find out mercy and obtain grace from God;
there is none that mournes and laments more, and goes to Sermons more, but yet
he is no worker now, he is feign to go to his father, to him that justifies the
ungodly, all his ways are loathsome and abominable, he sees nothing to trust
upon, but is driven to him that justifies the ungodly, he sees he is a vile
wretched creature, he sees no worth, no reason why God should look upon him, he
is now pennilesse, and worthless, and miserable in himself, the Lord makes him
a very bankrout, he thought he was a rich Merchant, but now he makes him a very
bankrout, and makes him appear to be naked.

First, here all Dawbers are to be reproved that preach nothing but mercy, Use.
1. To reprove Dawbers.
and the promises of the Gospel, many love alife to be upon such theames, O say
they, the promises are best to humble a man, and bring him out of his sins,
whom shall we believe, God or man? This not the way, Ezekiel. 13. 22. the text
says, Ye have strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not turn
from his wicked ways, by promising him life: When a man preaches the promise
of God before wicked and ungodly men, this hardens their hearts, and
strengthens them that they will not return from their wicked ways, because
the promises are propounded to them, and the Minister makes no distinction
between the precious and the vile, this strengthens them in their sins, and
makes them think they are not so vile, but they hope they are in a good case
for all this, therefore Saint Austine calls such men desolatores, not
consolatores; such work desolation in their hearers, and no sound consolation;
such Ministers as make their Sermons to be pillowes under peoples elbowes, they
make themselves guilty of the peoples blood, and their souls shall be required
at their hands, they are the cause of peoples miscarriage, when a Minister
thinks to do people good, by crying peace, peace; when the Prophet says there
is no peace to the wicked, this rather drives people further off from God; may
be it may make them seem outward professors, but it will never make them sound
in the faith; rebuke them sharply, says the Apostle, that they may be stand in
the faith, Tit. 1. 13. sharp rebuking the powerful delivering of the Law and
Gospel is the means to ma^e men sound in the faith, the more humble a man is
made to be, the more faith he comes to have; our Savior says of the
Centurion, he had not found the like faith in Israel, how came this? the text
shows plainly, that we shall hardly hear of a man so humble in an age as he
was, he did even grudge to think that Christ should come into his house, he
thought he was unworthy that Christ should come under his roof, though he were
in the days of his humiliation, in the form of a servant, his heart was
employed and brought low, he had no hope in himself, all the worth he saw was
in Christ; this helps a man to the more faith, the more a man is emplyed, the
more may be poured in. Wherefore serve all those texts in Scripture? The wrath
of God is revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness, tribulation, and
anguish shall be upon the soul of every one that does evil, flesh and blood
can never enter into the Kingdom of God, that which is borne of the flesh is
flesh, and such a one can never please God while the world stands: Wherefore
serve all these texts of Scripture when Gods s^ings balls of fire upon men that
live in their wicked ways? Why do we not open them and press them upon men's
consciences? Why do we not apply them to those to whom they belong, are they
not in the Bible? were the Prophets fools? were the Holy Penmen of the
Scripture mistaken in putting such texts into the Bible? If they be there, they
ought to be uttered and applied; and if they be to be applied to whom, but to
those to whom they belong? Then such persons had need to look to themselves,
and we that are Ministers, woe unto us if we do not preach terror to whom
terror belongs, as well as mercy to whom mercy belongs: but you will say, are
not we Ministers of the Gospel? it is true, and so was Christ, yet mark what he
says, repent and then believe, first he discovers their miserable conditions,
and breaks their hearts, and then bids them lay hold upon the Gospel of peace,
this is the Method that we that are the Ministers of God should take, first
wound, and then heal; first lance, and then bind up; first detect m^ns sins,
and show them their miseries; and then show them a remedy: first let them see
what they are, and then see how they may be better.

Then you must be content to let us go up upon Mount Eball and pronounce Use.
2. Be content to hear the curses of the Law preached.
the curses of God upon those that go on in their sins, you must be content
to have your estates and conditions ripped up, be not ready to be snappish and
murmuring against the revelation of the Law, and the opening of the hellish
sink of sin that is in your hearts, be you willing to hear it and let us do it;
it is true, we must be ready to pour in Oil into every bruised spirit; but
first we must come with the hammer of the Law to break and then bind up, let
me tell you, as many as go on in your sins, and are yet without Christ, let me
tell you what your condition is, be it known from the Lord whatsoever you may
think, you are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, hell is
moved for your coming, and the pit is dug for such as you are; you are under
the wrath of heaven, and though God be gracious and full of mercy yet he will
never save those that disobey him and stand out against his Holy and Heavenly
Word; though Christ died for sinners, yet he is a stumbling block and a rock of
offense to those that are disobedient* and stumble at the Word, 1 Pet. 2* 8*
Whatsoever you may think of your selves and do not think of these things* but
suffer the world and your pleasures to take up your minds, think of it, what a
woeful case you are in, know that the great God of Heaven and Earth has
bitter things against you, and you shall hear it with both ears when it is
too late; there is no mercy* but for them that repent and forsake their sins,
there is no Kingdom of Heaven for you, you have no hope, the Devils and you
have one hope. What turned so many Angels of Heaven into Hell? was it not sin?
you have that very sin* upon you, you do not see your misery, but if your eyes
were open and would but hear what God says, you would loath* your selves in
dust and ashes, and your knees would knock together for* anguish of heart. What
no conversion yet, no new creatures yet? then no Christ, no Heaven, no
Happiness: what a woeful thing is this* I beseech you think of it, and apply it,
and tell your souls, either sin must down, or else no Heaven to be looked for;
either I must be an holy man, either God will give me grace and holiness here,
or else I shall ^ever see his face with comfort hereafter; either I must have
my life changed, and my conversation made spiritual and godly by Jesus Christ,
or else I do but deceive my own soul to think of any happiness; this is
certain, therefore do not think lightly of any sin, there is no sin so small
but is able to damn thy soul unless thou embrace the Gospel and the Kingdom
of God* If it were possible* that thou never had sinned but one sin, that one
sin will damn thee, unless thou be a new creature, and by Faith embrace the
Son of God, thou can not ^e saved; there is no sin so small, but the wrath of
God from Heaven is revealed against it; if people did but see their sins like
so many Devils, if they did but once see these Cockatrices stings, if people
were but affected with their estates and conditions, something might be said,
but unless men's sins be laid before their eyes, and charged upon their souls,
what hope have we to do them any good?

Thirdly, this is for comfort to those that are humbled, such as have had Use.
3. To comfort those that have had this work of the Law on them.
the Law come unto them, and has knocked them off, that they have nothing to
trust to, and they see what miserable creatures they are; look up and hear what
the Gospel says, the Gospel of God shows mercy freely to be had, and
delivers promises freely to be apprehended, and does proffer eternal life
without money or moneys worth, though a man be never so vile and wretched; if
you see your misery, you have David's own argument, go and use it, Psalm. 25. 16.
Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am desolate and afflicted; all the Saints of
God have no other argument but this, in begging of mercy, as who should say, I
am a miserable creature, no grounds whereupon to expect any mercy, I am a
desolate, afflicted, undone man in my self, all my hope is in thee; go to God,
and lie at his gate, and plead this argument, submitting to the Gospel, Have
mercy on me O Lord, for I am desolate and afflicted: and here now comes in
effectual calling, when the Law has showed a man his wretched estate* and his
blindness, and nakedness, and captivity, if the Lord do mean any mercy to a
man, here comes in his effectual calling.

2 THESE. 2. 14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel to the obtaining of the
glory of the Lord Jesus Christ.
I Have spoken already of the prepatory work that goes before Effectual
Calling, the next thing I am to speak of, is the parts of Effectual Calling,
and they are Two parts of effectual calling. 1. Offering of Christ.
two.

First, the offering of Christ and his merits, the objective propounding of
Christ and his benefits; when Christ comes and offers himself to a man in the
Gospel, he came to his own, John 1. 11. but his own received him not, he came
and offered himself to them, I am the way, the truth and the light, I am the
Messiah, and the Savior of the* world, and I have eternal life, and here I am,
take me, and all with me; this is the first thing in Effectual Calling, the
objective propounding of Christ to a man.

The second thing is the receiving of Christ, not only the offering of Christ
2. The receiving of Christ.
to a man, for so he offers himself to those that are not of God, even to all,
but in Effectual Calling, as there is an offer on Gods side, so there is a
reflection on Gods side; as many as received him, etc. John 1. 12. they
received him, these two now make up Effectual Calling, the offering of Christ
and the receiving of him, when Christ calls a man to him, and he answers to his
call; thus you see the parts of Effectual Calling.

First to speak of the first, the objective propounding of Christ and all the
things of Christ to a man, and this has two degrees like the morning light
that has two parts, the dawning of the day, and the Suns arising; so there
Two parts o^ degrees of offering Christ* 1. General.
are two parts in this objective propounding of Christ to the soul; the first
is that general propounding of him to every creature; now the soul thinks what
to every creature, then it is propounded to me as well as to any body else; but
the effectualness of this call is, that it breeds the seeds of grace in a man,
it breeds saving desires, and saving longings, and saving, and kindly mournings
for the want of this sweet good; when it sees such an excellent good, and a
possibility of it, and that it is propounded to every creature, then the soul
thinks I may be one as well as any body else, and* so the soul longs after it.

The second thing is the personal propounding of this to those that have these
2. Personal.
seeds of Grace; the first was general, to one as well as to another, but now
this is to this man's person rather then to any body else; and now the soul
begins to think seriously this proposition is to me, this tender is to me; I
hunger, and thirst, and long, and therefore this belongs to me, and the
effectualnesse of this call is to make the soul come to Christ, and cast
himself upon him by faith; these are the parts of propounding of Christ, and
both these are twofold; 2. Both, 1. External. 2. Internal.
the first is the external part of it by the Word, the other the internal part
of it by the Spirit. Now we are to speak of the first of these, how the Word
works this general call, and for this I have chosen this text, Whereunto he
has called you by our Gospel, etc. For the coherence of these words in the
former verses, the Apostle had told the Thessalonians of a woeful falling away
that should he among all visible Churches in the whole world almost, that there
should be a general defection, unless of Gods Elect, and they should have
fearful declinings, and he shows that the power of the Devil and ^^s
instruments should be the cause of this falling away, he should come with
strong delusions, and then the just cause why God does suffer the Devil and his
imps to bring this about, that all they might be damned that had phas(...) in
unrighteousness; the Lord would have them damned, and this made the Lord
suffer the Devil to work Apostasy, and declining to them. Now this is a fearful
thing, and therefore in the next place he comes to comfort the Th^s^^lonians,
for they for their part, the godly amongst them need not to be dismayed for
fear of falling away, as if they should not hold out, but he would have them
encouraged that they shall stand out for ever, and he comforts them by two
Arguments: First, by Gods predestination of them to life from all eternity, God
has chosen you to Salvation from the beginning; and then ^e lays down the
means God had appointed for the attaining this salvation, and that was through
Sanctification in the Spirit, as who should say, it is true, there shall be such
a falling away, but you that are godly need not be dejected, for God has
chosen you from all eternity, and therefore will sanctify you, and keep you
through his mighty power unto salvation, that you shall not fall away. The
second Argument is their Effectual Calling, that is in the text, Whereunto he
has called you by our Gospel, etc. as who should say* the Lord has given you
a pledge that you shall never fall away finally, for it is plain that God has
chosen you, and he has given a pledge of hi^ Election, for he has called you,
therefore be of good cheer. Well then in the words of the text you may
consider these four things.

First, Effectual Calling, he called you.

Secondly, the means whereby he has wrought this in you, namely, the Gospel.

Thirdly, the term whereunto he called them, noted in this word hereunto,
which if you look into the former verse was unto (...)tion.

Fourthly, what this salvation is, it is a most admirable incomparable thing,
no tongue is able to speak it; Oh says he, It is to the attaining of the glory
of the Lord Jesus Christ, the very same glory that the Lord Jesus Christ was
advanced to, you have part and communion therein. Now three of these points I
lay aside, the point that serves our turn is the second, he called you by our
Gospel.

That the thing that calls Gods people home, it is the General tender of Doct.
The Gospel or general tender of grace, is that by which God calls men home.
grace, indifferently to any man without exception, whosoever will have it,
that is, the Gospel. When Christ should call Nicodemus, after he had convinced
him of his blindness, and cursed estate, and made him see he was a fool in all
the things of God; now he gives him a call, and how does he call him* it was
even this general tender, John 3. 14, 15. As Moses lifted up the Serpent i^ the
Wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in
him, should not perish, but have eternal life: As who should say, I bring an
indifferent doctrine, I propound it to all creatures, and thou may have a
part in it as well as any other; Whosoever believes shall not perish, if thou
have a heart to believe and come unto me, thou shall not perish, but have
salvation. So when our Savior sent his Disciples to call his Elect throughout
the world, mark what directions he gave them, he calls people with a general
call, Whosoever will, let him take of the water life; whosoever has a mind to
be saved, to know God, and have Communion with him, and be united to him;
whosoever has a mind to these things, tell him I am for him, he proclaims it
over the whole world, tell every creature in the whole world, He that
believes, and is baptized shall be saved; here is no exception put in, but
preach the Gospel to every creature; tell every creature what I have done for
the sins of the world; and how I have opened the Kingdom to whomsoever will
enter; thus God calls his people, his Ministers go up and down and tell them
they may have pardon* and grace, and righteousness for nothing, come and buy
without money, though you cannot give a farthing token for it, but be poor, and
miserable, and cursed creatures; Come, here it is, wine, and milk, and bread,
and all without money, you shall have it for taking and carrying away, so Rev.
22. 7. Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely; it is a
quicunquae vult, thereis none exempted, if any man will he may be saved, if he
have a will, a mind, a heart to it, he may have salvation.

Now here be three things I would show unto you; first, what this general
tender is, whereby God effectually calls his people. Secondly, why it is by a
general tender. Thirdly, the uses.

First, what is this general tender of Christ and grace to every creature that
What is this general tender of Christ.
has a mind to it? and it is this, that Christ is the only alsufficient
means to make a man happy; that whereas he is out with his Maker, he alone can
set him in again; though he be under a thousand miseries in this life, and
under a thousand eternal miseries in the life to come; there is in Christ an
alsufficiency to make a man happy, God is the fountain of all goodness, and
till his goodness is opened in Christ Jesus, this is that same general thing,
as Paul says, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. We preach Christ crucified unto th^se that are
called the power and wisdom of God; as who should say, this is the thing we go
up and down every where preaching, that Christ was crucified for the sins of
the world, and has power to save any man that comes to him; it was the wisdom
of God, he found out this means; it was an impossibility in the wisdom of men
and Angels, how man should be saved, the Wisdom of God has found out the Lord
Jesus Christ to be the means, and he is the power of God to save any man that
believes, and wheresoever we come we preach this Doctrine. So again you may
see, Heb. 7. 24, 25. This man has an unch^ngable Priesthood, for he is able to
save to the utmost all those that come unto him, etc. As who should say, he is
a public Savior, he is not only able to save these and these, but all that
come unto him, he is able to save them to the utmost; whosoever you are, though
you be never so wretched, and reprobate to every good work, though never so
foul, and all the nitre in the world cannot cleanse you, never so stubborn
and all the means and Ordinances you have enjoyed have not tamed you: why, yet
here is a Savior for you, he is able to save you to the utmost, though you be
never so out with God; and though God be never so much displeased with your
sinful courses, and all the Angels and all the world cannot take away Gods
wrath from you, yet he is able to save you to the utmost if you will come unto
him; This is the tender of the Gospel delivered to every man. Now in the next
place I will show you the reasons why God calls people home by a general tender
in this fashion.

First, because this is the surest ground of faith; suppose a soul that is
effectually Reas. 1. This the surest ground of faith
called shall afterward fear and question, and by what warrant do I hope to
be saved by Christ? and by what warrant do I look to be heard for Christ's sake?
and how is it that I ^ay hold upon such promises, and cast my self upon such
things in the Gospel? upon what acquaintance do I presume that the Lord Jesus
will see you assisted in all my ways, and helped in all estates and
conditions, and save my soul when I die? Why? says he, I have a good warrant,
for I see in Scripture that Christ is tendered to all, and wh^so^ver believes
shall no^ perish but have everlasting life, and whosoever will have him, may* I
could not tell indeed I was elected before I heard the Sermon, but I heard that
any man might have Christ that would, and I am sure I would have him, and I
find in Scripture that he came to save that which is lost, and I am sure I am
a lost creature, and if he came to save that which is lost, I have warrant to
believe. This is that which grounded Saint Paul, this general offer, This
(says he) is a faithful saying, worthy to be received of all men, that Christ
died for sinners, whereof I am chief, 1 Timothy 1. 15. As who should say, here is
the thing, this is that which comforts me, and stays my soul; I see that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, and I see it is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all men to be received, all men whosoever have a heart may
receive it, and I am sure then he came to save me, and this is my hold, I have
no other hold but this. But now if a man were called by any other call but
this, a man could have no ground for his calling; if the Scripture should say
they only are called that are elected, he would have no ground for his call.

Secondly, because this is the best answer to Satan, many times a man will be
2. This is the best answer to Satan.
put to heavy straits, and will have much ado to answer Satan; sometimes a man
will be under uncertainty, sometimes under want of feeling and sense, sometimes
under horror of conscience; and a man's sins may come to a man's view, and fears
may step up in the soul; then Satan comes, how look you to be saved? you are a
wretch, you have a stiff faith indeed! What believe, and no sense and feeling?
such a horrible wretch, and such a guilty conscience, and you believe? What
have you to show? Is any one promise in the Bible to such a one as you that are
so foul and filthy, and cannot pray, nor do any thing? you see God casts you
off, where is any promise for you to hang upon? Yes, I can believe for all
this, because the Gospel is not tendered to sense, and feeling, and such and
such things, but to every one that would have Christ, and I would have Christ,
and so much the more eager is my heart to have him, the more I am troubled and
cast down, the more I would have Christ and grace; here is my hold, this is the
thing, the sure Word of Faith, it is called the Word of Faith, Romans 10. 8. Now
you know the Word of God is true, whether a man believe or no; and now when
faith comes in, it lays hold upon that general Word; the thing is true, so
that if any man comes and believes, though I never found it before, I believed
it, yet now I may hang upon it; and there is nothing in the world will put off
Satan more then this, he will say, you have Christ; how can you have him? you
are proud, aye but I would be humbled; you are dead, it is true, but that is my
grief and mourning; I would be quickened, and therefore would have Christ that
I may be so, and so; here he hangs upon the general tender of Christ.

Thirdly, because this is that same simple Scripture that is simply true in it
3. Because this is that which is true before all acts of man.
self before all acts in man; a man cannot be effectually called by any truth,
but that which is true in it self before all acts in man; now what truth can
effectually call a man before any act of grace in man, but only the general
tenders of the Gospel? these are the truths that are simply true in themselves.
Before any thing is done upon man, it may be true that God has elected me, but
it is not a Scripture truth before something be done in me, the Scripture does
not say simply in it self that I am elected before some grace be put forth in
me; if I have grace put forth already in me, then I may say, that God did
specially intend it to me, and did elect me in Christ before all worlds; but
now these truths cannot call a man, because before effectual calling nothing is
done in a man, therefore those truths that suppose any thing in a man, cannot
be calling truths; the first truths that a man is effectually called unto, a
man has no more to show for it, then any man else in the world; therefore it
must be merely the truths of the Gospel in themselves, what Christ did, and so
forth.

As for example, these be the calling truths, Behold, the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1. 29. God so loved the world, that
whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have eternal life, John 3. 16.
and Mat. 18. 11. The Son of man came to save that which is l^st; but these
truths concerning this man's election, that God does love him, and hear him, and
accept of him; these are not Scripture truths in themselves, but when a man is
called then they come in; now a man may see that he is elected, and accepted of
God; but these truths can never effectually call a man* because effectual
calling is the first thing that is done in a man, and this work ^inds nothing
in a man more then in any other, and therefore it must needs be a general
tender.

Fourthly, because this is only that which every man is bound to believe it is
4. This only that which every man is bound ^o believe.
that only which a man is called unto; God when he does effectually call his
people, does call them to do nothing, but that which is every man's duty to do;
he calls them to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ which is one man's duy as well
as another; as Christ when he went to preach every where up and down, says he,
Repent and believe the Gospel; as who should say, it is every one of your
duties to repent, and believe the Gospel, it is the very same truth, that
believed, saves Gods people, and not believed, damneth the reprobates, as Mark
16. 16. He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be
damned; as who should say, both is the same truth that is propounded to this
man that is saved, and that man that is damned, therefore they must be the
general truths of the Gospel; particular truths do not bind every man to
believe, it is not every man's duty to believe that he is elected, that he has
intended his Son Christ for him, rather then any other; God binds not every man
to believe this, but he binds every man to believe that God is the eternal good
of a man, and this is to be had by coming unto Christ; when a man can believe
this, and cast himself upon it, this is true and saving faith, when this draws
a man to God, and pulls him out of his sins, and this is the reason that the
Apostle says, 1 John 3. 23. This is the Commandment of God, that ye believe in
his Son Jesus Christ; so that you see this is clear, that it is the general
tender of the Gospel that calls Gods people home to God: whatsoever a man be, an
old sinner, a young sinner, a gross sinner, be he what he will, if his heart
stoop that he would have Christ* and all Christ, he shall not perish, but have
everlasting life.

Obj. But you may say, faith is only of Gods Elect; how then can Ministers
tender such a proffer as this, whereas Christ is only given to the Elect?

I answer, it is true, that the Elect, when all comes to all, they only get it,
yet it is seriously tendered to all; we had never heard of Election and
reprobation, but only because of this, because that when the Gospel is
preached, we see that some receive it, and some receive it not; now thus you
come to see election and reprobation, for when a man comes to receive the call,
we see that that man is elected, because no man takes Christ but by grace,
every man would stand out and refuse Christ; but when we see a man takes
Christ, then we see he is elected; and when we see another man does not take
Christ, we see then that man is left to himself, and has a wretched heart, and
reprobate mind, and God lets him have it still; as he will have his sins, so
God lets him have them still; yet notwithstanding this is very true, that
Christ is propounded to all, and this the reason why our Savior Christ says,
Mat. 20. 16. Many are called, but few are chosen, the meaning is, many are
called, but few there are that do answer this call, there The tender of ^he
G^spel must b^ without ^estr^int to election. 1 O^herwise the ^ect would have
no ground for their faith.
are few that have grace to do it; the most part of the world will rather have
their lusts then Christ, and therefore there are but few, because God has
chosen but few.

Now the reason why the tender of the Gospel must be delivered without any
restraint to election; is,

First* because if there were not such a proffer without exception to any that
will have Christ, then the Elect should have no ground for their faith; a man
cannot see he is elected till after he has faith; no man has faith and
repentance at his first effectual call; now how shall a man have any ground for
his faith when the Gospel is propounded only to the Elect? every man will be
at a stand, I know not whether I be elected or no; I am as fair for hell, as
any for ought I know; I have sins to damn me, but no election, as far as I
know; you preach Sermons all your life time, I can believe none, because you
preach only to the Elect; so the children of God can have no ground for their
faith, because there is no particular place of Scripture that binds a man to
believe his election, therefore it must be a general proffer of the Gospel
propounded to every man; John 6. 35. there says Christ, He that will come unto
me, I will in no wise cast off; there you see it is general, any man that will
come to Christ, whether Elect of God no matter, Ministers should not stand
demurring and questioning, I know not whether these be Elect or no, do you
deliver the Gospel, and afterward it will appea^ who are elected, and who not,
by their receiving or not receiving the Gospel, leave you that to me; preach
you how men may be happy, and what a miserable estate they are in, but if they
will come out of their sins they may receive the pardon of them; tell them,
that whosoever comes to me shall in no wise be cast out, be they what the* will.

Secondly, because though election be first in Gods order, he does first Elect
2. Because in reference to men, calling is before election.
a man before he calls him, yet with the Elect, with Gods own people it is
clean contrary; first, they must be effectually called before they can have any
inkling of their election in the point of knowing of it, therefore 2 Pet. 1.
10. the Apostle says, give all diligence to make your calling and election
sure; first, make your calling sure, else you can have no inkling of your
election; now when this is sure, you may be sure of your election; before the
point of effectual calling there must be no talking of election, either in the
Minister that preaches, or people that hear; this election is a thing in Gods
own bosom, which comes after the receiving or rejecting the Gospel, the one
will reveal election, the other reprobation.

Thirdly, because there is a difference between men and devils, thereis no 3.
Because there is a difference between men and devils.
possibility for devils, though they would never so feign, to be saved, for
Christ took not upon him the nature of Angels, Heb. 2. 16. he did not meddle
with them, therefore now we cannot say to them, if ye believe, you shall be
saved, because there is possibility for them, though they would never so feign;
but there is a possibility for all men to be saved, if they would believe,
there is sufficiency of merits in Christ, and it was intended to the sons of
men, to as many as would have it, though indeed all men would have none of him,
if they were left to themselves; yet notwithstanding the Gospel is offered to
all, every man might have him, but that he will not have him.

But there be two Objections against this doctrine.

1. Because this seems to be the contrary to the doctrine of many godly and
religious Divines heretofore, who seem to say, that the Gospel is only for the
Elects sake; it is the doctrine of many Divines, if I knew who were elected,
and who were not, I would not deliver it to them; this is a dangerous doctrine,
yet the ground of the doctrine is true, that the Gospel is properly bestowed
upon the Elect, To us a child is born, to us a child is given; that is, to the
Elect, but yet this is not contradictory to that which I now deliver; I deny
not that Christ is given intentionally to Gods Elect upon believing, yet he is
tendered to others to, and intended too, upon that condition; God cannot mock
people, and make as though they might have eternal life, and cannot have it
though never so feign; it is not so, but God deals seriously with people, for
every man shall have Christ that has a true and sincere heart; now it is true,
this heart is only given of God, because otherwise a man is stubborn and
stiff-necked, and will not give over his sins, and deny himself, but will
rather have his own courses then Christ, though he may have eternal life by
him, yet the proposition of the Gospel is general to every man that will
believe, and will have Christ; and this is necessary, and this is the very
self-same doctrine that all Divines have preached heretofore, only it is
delivered otherwise, and the reason why there is a necessity of delivering it
thus, is, because this is the form of preaching set down in the Scripture, and
this is the way to fish out Gods Elect, and the best way to settle their
minds, and establish their consciences, and this is the best way to feel and
groap in Congregations who are of God: Will thou have Christ and eternal life,
and be delivered from thy sins? thou may then have the pardon of thy
sins, and the favor of God; now if a man be of God he will hear us, if he be
not, he will not hear us; this is the way Scripture sets down, as you may see,
John 1. 11. He came to his own, and his own received him not; Christ came and
offered himself to his own, he calls all his own people, the very reprobates
are his own in respect of the offer, but in respect of receiving it; so the
Elect only are his own, ver. 12. To as many as received him, he gave power to
be the Sons of God. So Acts 8. 37. The Eunuch would feign have Christ by
baptism; what hinders me but I may be baptized? let me enter into Covenant
with Christ; what should let me? Mark what Philip says, If thou beleevest,
thou may, could he tell whether he were Elect or no? no, but he feels him
with the general tender of the Gospel; what lets me? he says, nothing lets
thee if thou can believe, he could not tell whether he were elected or no;
but says he, if thou can believe with all thy heart, thou may have Christ
and all the benefits of the Covenant of grace, if thou have a heart and mind
unto it, thou may have it, and after he p^ofessed he had, he baptized him.
So Paul dealt with the Jailer, Acts 16. 30, 31. when Paul saw the Jailer ready
to stab himself; how could he tell whether he were el^cted or no? yea, when he
cried out, What shall I do to be saved? he might speak out of horror and
conscience: how did Paul know that he was elected? but he feels him with the
general tender, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ (says he) and thou may be
saved, whatsoever thou art; he does no^ stand upon his election, but believe in
Christ and his Gospel, and believe eternal life is in him, and rest upon him
for it; let this be a means to pull thee out of thy sins, and to seek after
righteousness and communion with him; if thou have faith thou shall be saved.

Obj. The second Objection is this, that this doctrine seems to favor our
adversaries, our adversaries say, that Christ died for one as well as for
another; and the Gospel is to be propounded to one as well as to another; and
it is as much for one as for another; now if we say so too, we shake hands with
them.

Answ. 1. I answer, First there is a great deal of difference between that
which the Pelagians speak concerning this thing, they say that Christ intended
his death no more to one then to another; no more to Abraham then Pharaoh; no
more to Peter then Judas; look what mind God bare to one a part ante, he bare
as good a mind toward the other; now this we peremptorily deny, and it is an
horrible blaspheming of the grace of God toward his people, for he will have
one rather then another, Acts 13. 48. as many as was ordained to eternal life
believed; as who should say, as many as God had chosen, they took Christ and
none else, God did intend Christ to them especially, more then to the rest, he
gave them a heart, and let the rest go on in the stubbornness of their hearts.

Secondly, they say, that Christ came to bring nothing but a possibility of
salvation into the world; now that any man is saved, is through the ability of
a man's will, that one man will be saved, another will not; this man will
believe in Christ, another will not; This we peremptorily deny too, for this is
to blaspheme the Lord Jesus Christ to say so; for it is true, Christ has
wrought a possibility for others, they might have been saved, but would not;
the rebellion of their hearts damned them, their unbelief sent them to hell;
but yet he first brought an actuality of Salvation for some, for he had his
name for this; Mat. 1. 21. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save
his people from their sins; nay, the Father and he did indent one with
another, that he dying upon the cross should see his seed, Esaias 53. 10.

Thirdly, they say that Christ might have died and none have been saved, which
is an horrible impiety for a man once to speak, whereas certainly Christ's death
could never have been frustrated; if Christ did die for his people, ^^ will
save them, the gates of hell shall not prevail against them, he will gather up
all that do belong to his election.

Lastly, the adversaries say, that as there is a generality in the offer, so
there is an universality in the grace; now this we deny too, that there is an
universal grace, God gives more mercy to his own people then to others, to
(...)ven, (says Christ, etc.) Mat. 13. 10, 11. so to you it is given, says
the (...)e, not only to believe in him, but to die for him, Phil. 1. 29. so
that God gives more grace to his people then to others, he gives only common
(...) to the wicked; it is true, God is not wanting to the wicked, God will ever
be aforehand with them, and they shall have more then they make use ^t, now
wicked men the Lord leaves them without excuse, for they stick ^ot at an
impossibility, but at a will, they will not come in that they might ^e (...),
they will not do that which God has put into the power of their hands to do;
God gives them knowledge, and they will not practice it; God shew^ them their
sins, and they will not leave their sins; may be God makes the^^ leave their
sins, and then they return to them again; it may be God makes them that they
never return to their sins again, but then they take up only a kind of form,
and there they stick and go no further, thus they ^^ck at the will, they will
not have the Gospel upon Christ's terms.

The first use of the point is this, it is a great comfort and encourage^^nt
Use 1. For the comfort and encouragement of Believers.
to the faith of all Gods people; what an excellent and sure word is th^s, when
they shall find that they have such an excellent warrant to lay hold upon
Christ, when he is so publicly tendered in the Scripture; there is a common
salvation in Jesus Christ, Jude 3. Christ has made it to be common for any man
that will have it upon the terms thereof, it is as common as Adam was, As in
Adam all died, so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 22. not as
though all men simply shall be made alive, for all men possibly are not alive,
as all men possibly are not dead in Adam, for there might be millions of men
after the world is ended, but only those that are in the loins of Adam; all
men that came out of the loins of Adam shall die, so all they that ever are in
the loins of Christ (as all they are) that will have him, they shall be made
alive; it is as general as Adam, as many as were in the loins of Adam, and
lived and died so, shall die; so all that are in the loins of Christ, and have
a will to come to Christ, shall be saved, for it is the will that carries all
the soul; when a man will do or suffer any thing for Christ, whatsoever sin
Christ will have him leave, he will leave it, whatsoever duty Christ will have
him take up, he will assume it, he will break through all hindrances, and use
all means, he will have it; the righteousness of Christ is for every one that
will have it, I will have it says the soul, therefore it belongs to me; the
Gospel of salvation is tendered to every one that has a mind to it; I have a
mind to it upon the Gospels terms, and therefore it belongs to me.

The second use is of confutation, to confute those that desire faith by the
full assurance of the pardon of a man's sins, and the salvation of his soul;
this is a Use 2. For confutation.
dangerous doctrine, and condemns the half of the generation of God; nay, all
of them at one time or other, you see how the Gospel calls a man to believe,
concerning justification and salvation, it calls to believe in the record of
his Son, that he is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world,
that he is eternal life; that he is the way, the truth, and the light, that he
is the hope of glory; that he is the way of coming to God the Father; now when
a man has this says in a lively manner, and this pulls a man out of the
world, and draws him to Christ; this is the true faith, this is the faith of
the Gospel; faith is not defined by assurance in Scripture but by believing in
Christ, John 3. 18. by trusting upon Christ, Ephesians. 1. 12. by resting upon God,
2 Chr. 14. 11. by relying upon God, 2 Chr. 19. 8. by adhering and cleaving to
God in Christ, Acts 11. 23. this is true faith, when a man relies upon God,
when he believes this same blessed record, and throws himself and casts himself
upon it, and will obey God; I may say to you all that have this faith, as the
Prophet Esaias says to such as you are, Who is there among you that fears the
Lord, and obeys the voice of his servants, though he sit in darkness, and
sees no light, yet let him rest upon the Lord, and stay himself upon the God
of his salvation? Esaias 50. 10. as who should say, though you be in the dark,
and have no light, no assurance, no sense and feeling, no inkling of Gods
mercy; though you be in darkness and know not where you are, yet if you have a
heart to fear God, and obey the voice of his servants, and hearken to the
tender of the Gospel, trust in the Lord your God, rely upon him for all want
of sense and feeling, for all darkness, for all want of light in you, for all
want of comfort, and stay your souls that way, yet trust in the name of the
Lord, rely upon him for all his mercies, though you be at this pass.

Object. But the soul will say, I am afraid I have nothing, I have no interest

Answ. If thou be never so much afraid, mark what David says, Psalm What time
I am afraid, I will trust in thee; as who should say, though I be in the
midst of fears and doubts, and terrors of conscience, what time this fear
comes upon me, I will cast my self upon thee; so that this is that which the
soul is to do that believes the tender of the Gospel, and this draws him, and
works upon him, it is not a dead faith, but an operative faith, it pulls him,
and draws him to Christ; he must have Christ, and he must have righteousness;
is there such a faith? then rely upon God; though thy fears come upon thee,
yet urge thy self to trust in God.

Obj. And again it may be objected, I have hardly any hope that ever I

Answ. Mark how it was with Abraham's faith, when God told him he should

Obj. Again, it may be objected again, if I have any faith, it is such a weak

Answ. I answer, it is not the strength of faith that justifies, but it is
faith that is applied to the soul; now though the hand be never so weak, yet it
will do the deed as well as a stronger; so it was with the Father of the child
that came to Christ, he could hardly see he had any faith; he could not simply
deny he had faith, but Lord, says he, I believe, help my unbelief; he cried
and spoke with tears; he saw such a deal of unbelief, that the tears trickled
down her cheeks, Matthew 9. 24. yet notwithing, that faith got mercy from
Christ: Mark what Christ says, Mat. 18. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one
of these little ones; if Christ will not have his little ones despised of men,
then certainly he will not despise them himself.

Object. But you will say weak faith will save indeed, but I question whether

Answ. I answer, though thou be put to this at any time, do as the Psalm
61. 2. When my heart is overwhelmed, lead me to the rock that is higher then I.
The Prophet David's heart sometimes was overwhelmed, but he now went to the rock
Christ, when I am in this case (says he) lead me to the rock, show me Christ,
guide me to him, set me upon him.

Object. But then it may be objected, I cannot pray; if I could pray, Romans 8.
26. Paul puts himself into the number, We know not what to pray as we ought; we
know not what to speak as we should; but yet God has appointed his Spirit to
help us in such a case, though Hezekiah, Esaias 38. 14. could not speak a word,
but chatter like a Crane or Swallow, and mourn as a dove; yet he had
experience that God heard him at that time. So Psalm 77. 4. The Prophet there
confesses he was in this case, that he could not pray, I am so distressed
says he, that I cannot speak; he means, to God; and it seems he found by
experience, that he could not pray, nor tell how to pour out a request to God,
he was was even stopped and stifled in his prayer, yet in the first verse he
could speak it that God heard him for all this: Well then, here you see is the
ground of the faith of any poor soul, though he have not any assurance, yet if
he has this faith to rely and rest upon God; if the Gospel calls him, and he
comes at this gracious tender; if he casts himself upon this, and this draws
him to Christ; and if he love God, and labor to please him, and obey him, and
throw away all whatsoever displeases him; if this makes him heavenly minded,
and long after the knowledge of God, and the revelation of it, this deads his
heart to worldly things, and makes him spiritual; if it be thus, this is true
and saving faith, and not dead faith.

This is encouragement to those that are without. How many are there Use. 3.
For encouragement to all that are without.
among you, that are yet in your sins, and were never yet brought home to
Christ? Consider what an excellent invitation here for you; the Gospel is sent
to every Creature under Heaven, as you may see, Col. 1. 23. You may have Christ
if you have a will; you may have righteousness, if you have a will to it; you
may have redemption, if you have a will to it; you may be delivered from sin and
Satan, if you have a will to it; you may have the favor of God, if you have a
will to it; you may have Christ, if you will have all Christ; he will come to
you, and will receive you, as you may see an excellent place for this, 1 Cor.
6. 11. The Apostle there says, that drunkards and adulterers, and covetous
persons shall never inherit the Kingdom of God; such were some of you, but you
are justified in the Name of Christ; as who should say, there is no limitation
in the Gospel of God, as none in the tender of it, so none in the execution of
it; for all you were drunkards, and profane, and covetous, yet you have found
mercy with God by entertaining of this; this methinks should envite people, and
draw people to come to Christ: whosoever has a mind not to perish, not to go
in a hard heart, not to be worldly, and without God in the world; here Christ
does envite them all to come, Matthew 22. 9. Go into the highways (says
Christ) and whomsoever you find, bid them to the Marriage; God knows who we
may find here at Church to day; may be some of you are drunkards, some enemies
to God, some hardened in your lusts, some relapsed and fallen back into your
carnal courses after profession of Religion; some mockers and despisers; God
knows whom we find; we are bid to go into the highways, and bid all we
find; therefore in the Name of Christ let me speak to you; come to Christ,
will you let your sins damn you, rather then receive Christ to save you?
think of this, and if you will but follow Christ in all his Ordinances, He has
showed thee O man what the Lord requires of thee, that thou should be
humbled, and see what a wretched creature thou art; that thou should see
what is amiss in thy soul, and use all courses to reform thy self, he has
showed thee how he would have thee pray; what company he would have thee keep;
what kind of carriage he would have thee use, he has showed thee, O man, what
he has required; have thou a heart now to come to Christ? he can help thee to
all this, and though thou have not power to do all this, yet if thou have but a
heart to do it, to walk aright, and live aright, and spend thy days well in
this world: Though thou can do none of all these things, if though have but
an heart to do them, and do believe that eternal life is in Christ, and this
draws thee to Christ; if thou do but believe that in him is acceptance with
God, and he can bring thee to God for pardon and peace, and hope and glory; if
thou do believe this, and the faith of this does draw thee to come unto God;
I tell thee all thy sins shall not damn thee, never a one of thy sins
shall rise up in judgment against thee; whatsoever thy conscience; whatsoever
the devil has against thee; whatsoever fears, terrors, discouragements are
upon thee, they shall never withhold thee from eternal life; do but come to
Christ and lay hold upon him, and here he offers himself unto thee; thou art
not excepted or excluded, unless thou exclude thy self; If thou believe not,
thou shall be damned; but whosoever believes, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life. Use 4. For terror to the obstinate.


Use 4. In the last place, this is for use to those that are obstinate, namely,
to be as hell fire, and the flames of Tophet, in their souls and consciences:
You have heard the tender of Christ, that salvation is in Christ and none
other: What a miserable taking are you then in, that will not have him; if we
should carry the Gospel up and down into any place, would not every one make it
welcome? If we should carry it into Innes and Taverns, and amongst the basest
wretches in the Country, would they not say, we will have Christ? a man would
think so, as God says, Matthew 21. 37. Certainly they will reverence my Son,
not as if God were deceived in his expectation, but he speaks of the
probability of the thing, in all reason one would think, if they may have
eternal life, and Gods good will and pleasure toward them, that they may have
acquittance from all damnation, that they may be happy for ever; certainly they
will receive my Son gladly, they will take him and receive him in all reason,
one would think it were so; but we see it is otherwise, they will not take up
Christ and abandon their own courses, they will be vain, they will be company
keepers, they will be worldly, and will neglect the best things; they will have
their pleasures, and they will have their fopperies and fooleries, they will
not have Christ; there be many things in Christ, that every man would have, the
very devils in hell would have it, namely, to be redeemed from hell; to have
some peace in their consciences, but the Regiment of Christ, the dominion of
Christ to have all Christ, this they will not; this therefore is no comfort to
stubborn sinners, but hell and damnation is the portion of all that refuse
him, Ezechiel 34. 16. See what the Lord there says, I will destroy the fat and
the strong, and feed them with judgment; you that have fat hearts, and strong;
your hearts are strong, and your consciences are strong, and all our Sermons
are not able to make you shake; those that are fat and strong, says the Lord,
I will feed them with judgments, none of the mercies and comforts of the
Gospel belong to such.

And assure your selves, if you care not for Christ, Christ cares as little for
you; as the Prophet speaks, Esaias 49. 5. Though Israel be (...) gathered, I
shall have glory in his eyes; so though you be not called and brought home,
though you be not saved, I shall have glory, says Christ, I shall be known to
all eternity to be a Savior, to be a Prince, to be the glory of the world; I
shall be glorious in heaven and in earth, and in hell to all the world, to all
eternity; Though Israel be not gathered; if you be obstinate and will have your
sins, take them and perish with them, I shall never ^e your absence in
heaven, therefore Christ is at a point; if you will have him, here he is; if
you will not, assure your selves you shall die in your sins; except you
believe in him you shall die in your sins.

COL. 1. 23. If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved
away from the hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached
to every creature under heaven, whereof I Paul am made a Minister.
WE have spoken of a Christians call, by the general indifferent propounding of
the Gospel to every creature without exception; now the effectualnesse of this
call lies here, that the Lord does put in a little hope into the soul; though
the man be one of Gods chosen, he does not presently give him faith, but does
open a little door of hope to the soul. First, the Lord brings his Law to a
man, and lays him dead in Law, utterly undone, past all hope of recovery in
himself; he is a lost creature, a miserable wretched creature, having no hold
to stay upon, but a fearful looking for of vengeance; he sees nothing but
wrath; now when God has a mind to call a man home at the hearing of the
Gospel of peace, the Lord lets in a little hope into the soul, whereby he does
draw the soul to seek out unto him, and makes it look out with hope of
salvation; the soul sees now that there is mercy in Christ, and grace in
Christ, and eternal life in Christ; and he sees this is generally and freely
tendered to all that will have it; and out of these two branches of general
faith spirings this hope: now thinks the soul, I may have it as well as
another, the dole is free, the mercy is free, and why may not I be saved? why
may not I find mercy and forgiveness, and be ingraffed into the Lord Jesus
Christ? before this the soul was groaping for hope, if it could have told where
to have had it* as Acts 2. 37. they were there groaping where to have it, Men
and brethren, say they, what shall we do? they do not say there is nothing to
be done, there is no hope, but what shall we do? as who should say, there is
something to be done, some course to be taken, you that are Ministers of God,
is there no way whereby we may be pardoned? whereby we may be saved? whereby we
may have a new heart, and the favor of God, and be delivered from the wrath to
come? but when the Gospel comes they see now a possibility, and this breeds
this hope, so that this is the next point.

That when God does effectually call a soul by his Gospel, at the hearing Doct.
The general tender of mercy works some hope in the soul.
of this gracious tender of eternal life and grace in Jesus Christ, the Lord
does let in a possibility of mercy, and every grace into the soul, and this
does help the soul with hope, and this does make the soul to trace God in all
his ways, and he has some encouragement that God will be found of him, and
that he may attain salvation; this the first thing; the Lord p^ts in hope
attaining of it; the Lord deals with his people in this kind, as he dealt
with his people in delivering them out of Babylon, Zech. 9. 12. they were
prisoners in Babylon; now when God would deliver them out of Babylon, he did
first put in hope into their souls, he made them prisoners of hope; there was
first a pouring of hope into their souls, and then he opened the prison doors:
So the Lord makes his people prisoners of hope, that though they be in the
captivity of sin and Satan, yet they are prisoners of hope; and the Lord
gives some hope, that the prison doors shall be opened* and this we have here
in the text; for though the Apostle means here by hope, the things hoped for;
yet we call it hope, because as soon as ever they dawn in the soul, they breed
hope, if they be the servants of God; so that this Gospel breeds hope in a man's
bosom. Now here be five things I would show unto you; First, what this hope is.
Secondly, how i^ agrees with that hope that follows justifying faith. Thirdly,
how it disagrees with it. Fourthly, the Reasons of the point. And fifthly, the
Uses.

For the first, what this hope is, and it is an hope that arises out of the 1.
What is this hope?
faith of possibility, when the Lord lets in a possibility of faith, and makes
the soul believe that his sins may be forgiven, and he may attain
everlasting life; and he may come to be a Saint, and one of Gods dear and
faithful children; he lets in such a possibility into the heart, and this hope
slows out of this faith of possibility; and this faith of possibility is
another-gesse thing then people take it for; every drunkard will say he
believes that it is possible to be saved, and to find mercy with God; but you
will find it is a greater matter then so; it is spoken as a great commendation
of Abraham, that he did believe that God was able to raise up his son Isaac,
Heb. 11. 19. so our Savior Christ speaking to the blind man, asks him this
question, do you believe that I am able to do this for you? Mat. 9. 23. it was
a great matter for him to believe that he was able to do this for him. Sarah,
though an excellent woman for faith otherwise, yet she stuck mightily here, and
thought it was impossible for her to have a child; nay, Moses as faithful a
man as he was, he could not believe that all the people could be fed in the
wilderness; it is a greater matter then you think for, for every sinful wretch
thinks it is an easy matter to believe that Christ died for sinners, and that
they may be saved; it is an easy matter for the faith of presumption, but if a
man's eyes be opened, and his conscience awakened, and he comes to have a sight
of his sins; now Cain will say, his sins are greater then can be forgiven;
and J^das is not able to fly unto Christ to believe a possibility of pardon*
but goes and hangs himself, and despairs totally of the business; this faith
of possibility, it comes within the compass of a definition of faith, it is
the evidence of things not seen, it is far above our nature, and flesh and
blood cannot reveal it; that there is salvation in Christ, and that there is
such a thing as a pardon to be had at Gods hands, let a man have his
understanding enlightened to see what a wretch he is, and how fearfully he has
provoked Gods wrath against him* and ^t is not in his power to believe that
there is a possibility for him to find mercy, or any hope of pardon, it cannot
be attained to without the work of God; a weak shelfe is able to hold, when a
man lays but a book upon it, but if a man lay a great weight upon a weak shelf,
it will break under it; so it is with the faith of men, when there is no weight
laid upon it, the burden of the Lord is not laid upon them, then they may
think it is an easy matter to have salvation and their sins pardoned; but if
this weight should be laid upon them, their faith would burst, unless the Lord
should be pleased to put in a better faith then this; it is not in a man's power
to look beyond the power of justice, for a man to believe that there is mercy
in God contrary to the sentence of his own Law, and contrary to the sense and
feeling of a man's own soul; and therefore when the Lord is pleased effectually
to call a man, though he lay a bleeding bleeding before in the sight and sense
of his misery, he opens a door of hope to the soul, he lets in a light of
possibility, that he may yet come to be quickened, and be a new creature, and
obtain mercy at the hands of the Lord; as the Lord dealt with his people, Hos.
2. 14. there says the text, I will give them the valley of Achor for the door
of hope; so when the Lord does cast a man into the valley of Achor, of stoning
and astonishment, then he opens a door of hope that he may look in, and see at
a crevis some hope for him to speed; though yet I have an hard heart, yet such
a thing may be, if I come to Christ; I see God may afford mercy to whom he
will, and has propounded it to every man that will have it, therefore I may
have mercy; the Lord begins to stir and move the heart, and now the soul begins
to have a door of hope; you see then what this hope is, it is such a thing as
flows from the faith of possibility, I do not say that it is a justifying
faith, but it is the forerunner of it, to make way for it.

The second thing is, how this hope agrees with that which proceeds 2. How it
agrees with that which follows justifying faith. 1. Both are of God.
from a justifying faith? I answer, it agrees in five things.

First, both are of God, all the hope a creature has, if it be a true hope, it
is of God, therefore the Apostle says, the God of all hope, etc. Romans 15. 13.
God is the God of all hope; I do not say that all hope absolutely is of God,
for the vain hope of wicked men is of the Devil, and is not of God, but I
speak of a true hope and courage that the soul gets to seek God in his ways,
and fear him.

Secondly, they are both wrought by the Gospel, Romans 15. 4. All things 2. Both
are wrought by the Gospel.
were written for our learning (says the Apostle) that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope; Thus it is with a believer though he
has nothing in present possession, though he be persecuted, and afflicted, and
forsaken in the world, though he has never so many miseries here below; yet
when he looks into the Scriptures, and sees what promises God has made, he
comes to have some hope; it is thus with a man that is not yet a believer, but
is in the way to be a believer, the Lord works with him this way, though he see
himself a miserable and wretched sinner, and undone man, cast off, and there is
no hope in himself; yet when he looks into the Scriptures, and sees what a
gracious tender of mercy there is to any man that will have mercy, it is not
the wretchedness of a man's heart that casts him off, but the not coming to
Christ, and receiving of him that damnes him; for the fountain of mercy is
open for every one that will receive Christ; thus the Scripture gives hope.

Thirdly, both set a man on work; as suppose a man has an hope that proceeds
3. Both set a man on work.
from justifying faith, as he believes in Christ, so this sets him a work, 1
John 3. 3. He that has this hope purifies himself as Christ is pure; it makes
him labor to be humble and meek, and to be made partaker of the Spirit of
Grace; it makes him labor after the things that are above, and to be sitted
and disposed to every good work, and to purge himself, and cleanse his
conscience more and more; and so a man that has not this justifying faith, but
has only this branch of effectual calling begun in him; he that has this hope
I now speak of, it sets him a work to seek after Christ, and to labor hard for
the enjoying of him, and to seek him in all his Ordinances in his manner,
though he cannot pray and perform duties as others do, yet he will do it in
that manner he is able.

Fourthly, both are the anchor of the soul; as it is with a believer, though he
4. Both are the anchor of the soul. Heb. 6. 19.
be a godly believer, and has interest in Christ; yet what with temptations
from hell, and his own heart, he will be tossed to and fro were it not for this
hope which is as an anchor to the soul; so it is with a man that is not come
thus far, but is only under the same first branch, though his tossings be
fierce, and his temptations be violent and his case be doubtful and full of
hazard; yet notwithstanding when this hope comes into the soul, it does
marvelously stay the heart though it see nothing but hell, and damnation, and
misery, and his conscience is not purged, and his life renewed, and his soul
sanctified and wrought upon in Jesus Christ; though he sees there is no way but
hell and damnation, yet when this hope comes into the soul, though he can see
neither starlight, nor Moonlight, nor nothing, it does stay him much, and prop
him up much, and does encourage him to go on without dismay.

Neither of these two hopes shall make a man ashamed, if a man has 5. Neither
of them shall make a man ashamed.
this true hope, he shall never be ashamed, Romans 5. 4. Hope makes not ashamed;
so it is with a man that is truly wrought upon, the Lord never deceives him;
there is a working of grace for grace, before grace it self comes into the
soul, which carries a man beyond a reprobate, and this hope the soul has, will
never let him be in this case, that he shall need to be ashamed.

The third thing is this, how this hope differs from that hope which proceeds
3. How this hope differs from that which follows justification. 1 This arises
out of the seeds of grace, the other out of grace it self.
from justifying faith, and they differ in two things.

The first is, that this hope I now speak of, it arises out of the seeds of
grace, the other out of grace it self; there are the seeds of grace which are
something of grace in the soul, before grace it self comes; and though we have
not any place of Scripture to show this, yet there are abundance of places that
aim at, and include this. As it may be referred to the woeings of Christ, Hos.
2. 14. when the excellency and necessity of Christ woes the soul and the
possibility of having Christ, these things allure a man; here is this work,
when the soul begins to be a neuter, before the soul believes, yet there is a
kind of bending of faith, as the man in the Gospel, when Christ asked him, if
he believed in the Son of God; he says, Lord what is he that I may believe? as
who should say, I am ready to believe if I could, I am ready to resign my self
to believe, do but show me how I may believe?

Secondly, this may be referred to the forming of Christ in the heart, Gal. 4.
19. before the babe is organized, there is seed, so there is a seed of God in
the soul, and he that has this seed cannot sin, because he is borne of God; as
there is a seed of generation, so of regeneration; as the prodigal before he
came home to his Father, he says with himself, I will go home to my Father,
and say, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, etc. Luke 15.
16. What made him do this? they are nothing else but the effects of the seeds
of grace; So the Jailer, Acts 16. 13. that cried out, Sirs, what shall I do to
be saved? what were these but the expressions of the seeds of grace that were
in him? the next news we hear, he did believe; now the Lord sowes seeds of
grace in the soul, and these break forth into hope, and desires, and wa^^ings
for grace, these are the seeds of grace, and from thence comes this hope, but
the other hope comes from grace it self, it is true, that these seeds of grace
are grace in themselves, they are the work of grace for grace, but they are not
grace fully and completely wrought in the soul.

They come from several apprehensions, the hope we now speak of apprehends 2.
They come from several apprehensions.
nothing but a possibility of pardon, that he may be pardoned, and have power
over his sins, he may attain to be a new creature, and to be one of the
redeemed of the Lord; and this is that which sends him after God, and makes him
trace him up and down, till the Lord does it for him, but the other apprehends
that he has it already, or else rests upon God for it, and hopes undoubtedly
for the accomplishment of it; this hope I now speak of was in the King of
Niniveh, Who knows but the Lord may repent, and turn from his fierce anger
that we perish not? I cannot tell, but there is hope it may be, and who knows
but God will do it? And this hope made him humble himself, and seek to God, and
there was a public kind of reformation outwardly. So it is here, the Lord
lets in some hope; who knows but the Lord will yet show mercy? and it is not
only an imaginary hope, such a hope as vanishes and leaves a man in the lurch,
but this hope does stir up a man's soul, and provoke a man to look out to God
for that mercy, whereof he sees a possibility of attaining.

I come now to the reasons of the point, why the Lord does work this hope Reas.
1. To prevent despair.
in the soul, and the first is this; Lest a man should lie all along in
despair, when the Lord shows a man his sins and his misery in regard thereof,
if the Lord should not put in this hope, a man would altogether despair; it is
impossible a man should be able to stand, as Solomon says, A wounded spirit
who can bear? So, when the Lord charge a man's sins and iniquities upon his
conscience, and aggravates all his sinfulness, a man would sink under this
burden, and never be able to hold up his head, were it not for this hope, as
we use to say; were it not for hope, the heart would break; so this is the
reason why God puts in this hope, he does it to stay the soul, that it may not
sink under the hand of God. I will revive the heart of the contrite ones, I
will not contend with them for ever, Isa. 57. 16, 17. Lest their spirits fail
before me; as who should say, if I should let my wrath into their souls, and
should not put in this hope and reviving into their hearts, their very spirits
would fail before me, and sink under me, they would be at their wits end, and
be utterly overwhelmed; therefore God puts in this that he may help their
souls; if God should show a man his sins as they are in his ire, and show him
all the corruption of his nature, and his filthiness from the womb, till now,
and reckon with him for this in his soul, and conscience, and let him see what
a cursed creature he is, his spirit would fail before Almighty God, and the
stoutest creature under Heaven were not able to stand under it, but would
rather take an ha^tar and hang himself then undergo it; now, when the Lord
deals with a man, he puts in this supporting hope to stay him up, otherwise
the soul were not able to hold.

Secondly, if the Lord should not put in this hope it would utterly disable a
2. That a man may not be disabled from looking after heaven.
man from looking after Heaven; when a man conceives no hope, this breaks the
neck of all his endeavors, a man will not toil for nothing, and lay out his
strength and all that is in him, when he conceives he has no hope at all; He
that plowes, plowes in hope, etc. 1 Cor. 9. 10. therefore when a man can hardly
see any hope, this does ever vale a man, it makes a man rather despair; it
makes a man do as commonly people do when they see they must go to hell, they
fill their souls with pleasures and delights, there is little hope for them to
come into the strict way, that they will ever be able to bear it, that they
may have mercy like those wretches, Jer. 2. 25. There is no hope, etc. there is
no hope, ^^ve have loved our ow^ lusts, and after them we will go; When people
have not hope to get through, this makes them desperate, they care not what
they do, and they grow careless and negligent, many a man has said so, I was
of the mind once to be precise, but the further I pried into it, the worse I
was; and these Preachers will make a man mad; when people find humiliation so
hard a thing, they think they are not able to wade through and so leave it,
when they have no hope to go on, they grow remiss, and loose, and careless in
this kind, it makes a man desperate when this hope is gone; therefore when the
Lord has a mind to do good to a man and encourage him to go on in the ways
of holiness, he puts some hope into the soul; and when a man sees some hope,
then he will pray and fast, and humble himself, the Lord lets in this hope, and
so prepares a man for himself.

Thirdly, because he will not do all at once, but work upon a man by degrees,
3. Because God will not do all at once.
the Lord could put faith into the soul at first, but the Lord will first make
a man a probationer of faith, the Lord will first have the seed sown, and then
quicken in the ground, and then have a blade, and then an ear, and then
harvest.

Again, the Lord will so do it, that he may be sought to for every mercy; 4.
That he may be sought to for every mercy.
and therefore first the Lord gives a man natural parts, that he may come to
Church and hear the Word, and then the Lord knocks him down that he may be
abased; and then he shatters him all to pieces, that he may look out for hope;
and then when he has gotten hope, the Lord makes him seek out for faith; and
when he has gotten faith, to seek out for other graces; and when he has them,
to seek for the accomplishment of them; the Lord will be sought to for every
thing, and it is fit we should seek to him; though the parent does not engender
the reasonable soul in the babe, but God does create it immediately, yet none
of us do count marriage superstuous; so though God does give this grace of
faith only, yet we are not to account the using of means in vain, the Lord does
not power in humane wit into stocks and stones, but into a body sitted and
ordered for a reasonable soul; so it is in respect of faith and grace, the
creature shall be first ordered and sitted for grace; there must be preparation
and a foregoing work; it is his manner of working, he will so work as he will
still be sought unto of all his people, though they have not faith, if they
have hope, they shall seek to him for faith; as it is with a Scholar, if he
will be a Scholar or Fellow of a College, he must sit for it; so the Lord will
have a man sit for it, he will have a man sit at the pool of grace, and seek to
him for it before he shall have it.

This shows us the graciousness of our good God, that when he takes us to Use
1. To show the graciousnes of God.
do for our sins, He remembers us when we are in our low estate, for his mercy
endures for ever, Psalm. 136. 53. when we are at the brink of hell, at the very
bottom of destruction, and in the belly of damnation, when we know not which
way to turn our selves; then he remembers us, for his mercy endures for ever;
thus the Lord deals with his people for their good, as he opens the casement,
that his justice may look out upon us, so he sets his mercy in the window that
we may see it through the glass, that we may not be overwhelmed, this is the
goodness of God, and were it not for this, no man should be able to abide his
look, nor bear his displeasure when he breaks out upon a man, this is the
infinite goodness of our gracious God, to deal thus favorably with his people;
therefore you that have gotten this hope, know, that the Lord night have held
you down to this day, and he had justly served you if he had done so; therefore
whosoever of you are in the briars do not repine and grumble, because you are
not refreshed as others are; if you have but the least cranny of hope to hang
upon, make much of it, it is more then God owes you; how easily might the Lord
tear the soul all in pieces, when he comes to deal with a man, when he shows a
man his sins and abominations? he might make them as heavy as rocks and
mountains unto him, and break him all to powder, it were just if he did so;
now when the Lord puts in this hope, what a wonderful mercy is this? When God
told Hezekiah, Behold thou shall die, he presently bade him take a lump of
Figgs and healed the disease; so what a mercy is this, that God says, Th^^
shall die, thou art a damned creature, and bids him presently take a plaiste^,
and so recovers him.

For comfort to all those that are the Lords, though it be a poor faith, a poor
Use 2. Comfort for believers.
hope that flows from possibility only, yet I tell you that even believers may
have need sometimes to have resort unto it, for how often has the Devil been
let loose upon poor souls, even those that are of God? as sometimes he does
tempt them to presumption, that so they may neglect their watch over
themselves; so it is his practice to drive us from one extreme to another and
hurry us to despair, and urge upon us that we have no faith, we have no grace,
and are as sure to be damned as if we were in hell already, David (Psalm. 31.
22.) seems to be out of all hope to be saved, as if he were utterly undone, the
servants of light many of them have found this too too true; how fearfully they
have been perplexed and galled in mind, seeking release, but could find none,
and pronouncing against themselves bitter things, as if they had nothing of God
in them, the devil dazzling their eyes that they cannot see, and putting out of
their minds all the sweet passages of the Gospel, and preaching nothing but the
terrible passages of the Law, he that doubts is damned, and he that wavers is
like a wave of the sea, and he urges them with every vain thought, with every
omission, with every failing, and every sin they have committed; it is strange
to see how some of Gods own people have reasoned against themselves, as if all
the devils logic were in them, and all mercy were gone; thus the devil
sometimes deals with Gods people, that they cannot tell where to hold; they can
see nothing to give any comfort or stay, they are ready to let go all, and give
over all hope; now what an excellent thing is this, if a man have this hope,
that he may be never driven from God, that there is eternal life and
forgiveness in him, and all these things are attainable; I tell you, it is a
great help to a man when he can say with the Church, Joel 2. 13. Who can tell
whether the Lord will turn, and leave a blessing behind him? a man that has
but this hope in him, it will never let him go off from God, and be quite
overcome by Satan; so that though it be but a poor thing, yet it is worth a
Kings ransom in time of trouble.

To show unto us how God does work this hope, and he works it, first, Use 3.
Inform how God woe(...) this hope. 1. By rooting out all vain hopes.
by rooting out of the heart all vain hopes, and bringing in a better hope, as
the Apostle speaks, Heb. 7. 19. The Law made nothing perfect; when God brought
in Christ, he brought in a better hope; when God brings Christ to the soul, he
brings a better hope into the soul; the soul before had a vain hope, he prayed
and came to Church, and was civil and well brought up, and had many good gifts,
and many terrors and affrightments, all these are nothing but legal works; a
man can never have hope in this; but when God brings in a better hope, he
throws out all the other, he shoots his Law like a great Ordnance into the
soul, and strikes him dead, and makes him see there is no hope, all his vain
hopes are nothing, and still the soul will be gathering false hopes, and
returning to them, but the Lord throws them out still, and puts in a better
hope.

By setting a look upon the Gospel, as the Gospel tenders this to every
creature, 2. By setting a look upon the Gospel.
to one as well as to another, so the Lord puts a particular look upon the
Gospel, as Peter said to the lame man, look upon me, and this made him expect
to receive an alms from him, Acts 3. 4, 5. So the Lord makes a man look upon
the Gospel to mind the Gospel, and regard and take notice of it, what it
says, for people let these things slip, but when God works this hope in the
soul, he makes a man to mind the Gospel, and makes as if it looked at him, and
so he comes to have sound hope in the Gospel, as a beggar when a Gentleman puts
his hand into his purse, though he sees nothing, yet he thinks he will give him
something; so the Lord puts his hand into his purse, as it were, he lays his
hand upon mercy, and lets the soul see him tendering of mercy, and this makes
him hope he shall have mercy, he casts a look upon him, and so affects and
draws the soul, and he finds the Lord moving the soul, and inclining the heart,
and weaning the soul from the world, and quickening him to seek after the things
that are above.

By removing of all impossibilities that lie upon the soul, you know there 3.
By removing all impossibilities.
is abundance of impossibilities that appear, as for a man to live in his
sins, a man then has no heart to Christ, no heart to heavenly things, no
mind to pray and to strict courses; it is impossible for a man in this case
ever to attain these things, when he has no heart to them; now the Lord takes
away that impossibility, and makes the soul see it is possible to attain these
things; therefore there is a kind of seed of regeneration going along with
this, 1 Pet. 1. 3. as there is a seed before regeneration it self, before that
hope that proceeds from justifying faith, so these seeds of regeneration are
before this hope I now speak of; the soul has something whereby it sees a
possibility, and the Lord shows him a way of recovery, and sets up a standard
to guide him in the way, and takes away all impediments that hinder him in the
way; and now the soul sees it is possible to attain unto these things.

If we have any such hope as this, let us not labor to diminish it; but Use 4.
Labor not to diminish this hope.
let it grow in us, it is an excellent mercy of God to begin this hope; if we
have the least crevis or cranny of it, let us make much of it, let us tender
it, cherish it, for it will help us to pray and seek God, and let go our
corruptions; it will enable us to do many things, when a man has gotten this
hope once; therefore, if we have it, let us put it on, as the Apostle says, if
you mean to go to heaven, you shall be sure to meet with blows, therefore you
should have your helmet on; the devil will say, have you any hope to go to
heaven, having such a vile cursed heart? you were better give all over, for
your betters have missed it; now we had need of this hope to be nourished and
cherished in us; nay, though a man has never so much faith, he should cherish
this more and more.

But how shall a man cherish it? Quest. How may this hope be cherished. Ans. 1.
Look to the power of God.


I answer; first, look to the power of God; do not say, how shall I be able to
do this and that? how shall I get my lusts to be mortified, and how shall I get
my heart to submit to God? but look unto the power of God, and do not limit the
holy one of Israel; the Lord may pardon thy sins and renew thy heart, therefore
look unto the power of God. When Christ told his Disciples, Mat. 16. 24. that
it is easier for a Camel to go thorough the eye of a needle, then for (...)ich
man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven; they were all astonished, O say they,
who then can be saved? Oh says Christ, look unto God; it is true, with m^n it
is impossibl^* for the heart and affections of a man are so glued to the things
of this world; a^^ ^e has so much pleasure and delight in the things of this
life, that his heart cannot look after mercy with zeal and fervency; it is as
impossible as for a cable to go through a needles eye, but says he, look to
the power of God, he is able to work it; a rich man may be saved for all this,
if a rich man be touched with the sense and feeling of his sins, and have a
heart to come to God, though he meet with never so many difficulties in his
way, let him look unto the power of God, to whom nothing is hard.

Secondly, look to the freeness of Gods promises, the indifferency and
universality 2. Look to the freeness, indifferency and universality of the
promises.
of the tender of them, whosoever thirsts, let him buy wine and milk without
money, Esaias 55. 1. when a doale is tendered to all at the door; Why may not
every beggar hope to receive it? so if mercy be free for every one that comes
to Gods door for it; why may not thou look up with hope? if thou have an
heart, to it thou may; if thou have not an heart, thou art none of Gods; but
if thou have an heart, look up to God, and be not dismayed, but see the
infiniteness of Gods mercy, that as the heavens are (...)her then the earth,
so his mercies are far above our thoughts and apprehensions, and where sin
abounds, grace abounds much more; there are many poor souls that would come to
Christ, but thorough their daily distempers and untowardnesse, and the
temptations of Satan, they are repelled; they would come to God, but know not
how; they have hardly any hope, these things are spoken for such poor creatures.

Thirdly, send often unto God, call upon his Name, as it is said of F^li^, 3.
Send often unto God by prayer.
when he hoped to receive money of Paul, he sent often for him to commune with
him, Acts 24. 26. So send often to God, and be often communing with God, and
calling upon his name; above all duties under heaven, there is no Ordinance
helps a man more with communion with God then frequent prayer does, or that the
heart is more against then that; not pray out of formality, or in a perfunctory
manner, but to pray indeed; of all duties I commend unto thee that, go to God
and pray often, if thou would hope to receive mercy at his hands.

JOHN 6. 45. Every man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father,
comes unto me.
WE come now to the second degree of effectual calling, and that is a personal
call of this or that man by a particular word, when the Lord does particularize
his promises, and tenders them to this or that man; come unto me and here is
free grace and mercy for thee; come and believe, and rest upon me for it: when
the Lord does speak a particular word to the soul, as you may see; Esaias 43. 1.
I have called thee by name, thou art mine; when God effectually calls a man, he
calls him by name, he calls him with a particular word; come unto me, here is
pardon; rely upon me and thou shall have it, here is peace of conscience; rely
upon me and thou shall attain to it; thou art an undone creature in thy self,
here is mercy for thee, not only when there is a general word propounded to the
soul, but when the Lord joins with the word, and follows it to the soul and
conscience; come to me man, when God calls a man by name; so it is said of
Matthew, Christ saw him sitting at the receipt of custom, and said unto him,
follow me, he called him in particular, and directed a particular word to his
heart, and bid him follow him and depend upon him for all good: so it was with
Zach^us, when Christ looked up and saw him in the fig tree, he said Come down
Zach^us; he directed a particular word to him; this is the thing; now I do not
mean the outward word only in the Scripture, either preached or read; But
secondly, when it is inwardly spoken by God himself to the soul* and set on,
when God bids a man believe and come unto him, this is the thing, and this we
have heard in the Text, Every man that has heard and learned of the Father,
comes unto me; for the coherence of these words, you must know, that in the
former verses our Savior Christ had told them, that he was the bread that came
down from heaven, inviting them to come unto him, ver. 41, 42. and you may see
what effect this wrought in their hearts, how they murmured at him, they were
so far from yiedling to his call, that they sell a murmuring at him; And
secondly, see how they allege reasons for their murmuring, v. 42. Is ^^ this
Jesus the Son of J^s^p^, etc. as who should say, if he came from the earth,
how did he come from heaven? therefore you may see what answer Christ makes, v.
43. First, he reproves them, and said, murmur not among your selves; as who
should say, this is no murmuring matter, it is a mourning and lamenting matter;
you should bewail your condition, and turn your murmuring into mourning;
Again he bids them not wonder at it, v. 44. For no man comes unto me* except
the Father draw^th him, as who should say, it is no news to me that you stumble
at my words, and will not hear what I say, for non^ can come to me exc^pt my
Father draw him; you care not for me, but murmur against me, and your hearts
are sto^t against the Lord; you cannot attain unto it, for (...). Thirdly, he
shows that some would come to him for all this, though some would not, yet some
would, even all his Elect, therefore he quotes this saying out of the Prophets,
Every one that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me; the word
shall not only come to the outward ear, but they shall be taught of God, and
then they will come home to me; and then concludes with the words of the Text,
Every man that has heard, etc. as who should say, though you will not, yet I
am sure, every man that has heard my Father speak to his heart, that has
heard him preaching from heaven in his bosom, that man will come to me, so
that God can call those things which are not, as if they were; though a man be
never so rebellious and averse from Christ, yet when he speaks a particular
word to the soul, it comes.

But you will say, what is this particular word which the Lord speaks to the
Quest. What is that particular word which God speaks. Ans. It is contained in
general.
soul? is there any such particular word to be found in all the Scripture,
Th^mas or Richard, do you come to me?

I answer, there is a general word in the Scripture, and this particular word
is in the general, so that though there be not a particular word expressively,
yet there is equivalently; and this I will make appear in three or four
particulars.

First, what particular place of Scripture says, that Thomas, or James, or
such a one is a child of wrath by nature, is here any Scripture says so of
him? I answer, yes, this particular is in the general, we are all the children
of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2. 3. and cursed is every one that continues not i^
all the things written in the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. now though a man's
name be not named, William such a one is accursed by nature, yet
notwithstanding he finds his particular in the general, that he is a cursed
creature.

Again, what place of Scripture says that Robert or John must love God, and is
bound to love God, is there any such place of Scripture? no, why will you say
then, that you are bound to love God and obey him, if there be no such place of
Scripture? yes, for this particular is in the general, Thou shall love the Lard
thy God, etc. That Commandment is delivered to all men in the whole world: So,
Thou shall do no murder, thou shall not commit adultery, etc. this Commandment
lies upon the whole world; therefore if thou be a man, though thou can not
find thy name set down, that the Lord speaks to thee* yet thy particular is in
those generals; so though it cannot be shown in all the Scripture that such a
particular man shall rise again, yet when the Scripture says, that all men
shall rise again, as John 5. 28. Marvel not, for the hour shall come that all
flesh that is in the gr^v^ shall come forth; if all that are dead shall rise
again, then every man shall rise again, though his name be not named in
Scripture; so it is hear, we read in Scripture that Christ says, John 7. 37.
If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink, now the Lord includes a
particular in it, and brings it to the soul, thou thirstest, thou would
feign have Christ, here are the promises, here is all mercy in my Son,
believe in him, come and receive him, take him, and thou shall have them; so if
Christ says, whosoever believes shall be saved, then Saint Paul might safely
conclude a particular word to the Jailer, bel^eve in the Lord Jesus Christ and
thou shall be saved, Acts 16. 31. so that you see here is a particular word,
though not particular directly, yet equivalent to a particular, namely a
particular in the general, and the Spirit of God does speak this to the soul,
and makes the soul hear it, Every man therefore that has heard it, etc.

When God calls the soul home, he makes the soul hear his voice, here a Doct.
When God calls the soul he makes it hear a particular voice.
particular voice and word to him; believe in the Lord, come unto me for
salvation rely upon me for eternal life; the sins that trouble thy soul,
cast thy self upon me for the forgiving of them, the diseases, miseries,
distempers thou art subject unto, lay hold upon me, and rest upon me for the
delivering thee from them; the Lord when he calls a man effectually, he speaks
it, not only the Minister and the Word speaks it, but the Lord speaks it; and
so the soul hearing of the Father comes to Christ; thus you may see the Lord
holds the free promises of the Gospel before the soul, and bids a man rely
upon them; as Peter dealt with his contrite hearers, the Spirit of the Lord
going along with his word, Acts 2. 39. believe, says he, for the promise
belongs to you and to your children, etc. as who should say, when God calls a
man effectually, he holds forth his promises, and propounds them to the soul,
believe this promise, and rest upon me for it; thus the Lord does call a man
home, he sends his promise before him, he sets up hope before him, he sends the
gracious invitation of the Gospel before him, and bids him rely upon it; thus
God dealt with his Elect C^rinths, 1 Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful (says the
Apostle) by whom ye are called to the followship of his Son Jesus Christ, as
who should say, when God called you, he spoke to every one of you in
particular; come and be fellow heirs with my Son; come and have every good
thing with my Son; come and be a son with him; come and be an heir of grace
with him, and have title to eternal life and salvation, God calls you, says
he, to believe that he is faithful: So I might instance in many more, though
there be never so many in the Congregation, yet the Lord does not speak to them
all; they do not all hear his voice; they all hear the Minister, but that makes
them not to come, that does not the deed, but when the Lord calls a man, he
comes, he joins with the Word, and speaks to this or that man, and takes him
alone, and whispers him in the ear, and tells him where mercy is, and bids him
rely upon him, and though sense and seeling be against him, though all fears
and objections be against him, he bids him believe and be of good cheer, he
shall have all these mercies it he will believe in him, as he says Esaias 51.
20. Look unto Abraham your father; for I called him alone and blessed him; mark
it, the Lord took him alone, and spoke to his heart, between him and himself;
so when the Lord speaks to a soul, and calls him by his grace, he calls him
alone, and takes him alone, though all the Congregation hears the same Sermon,
yet he takes him alone, and speaks to his heart, and bids him believe in him,
for I will never fail thee, it is a sure foundation, he may build upon it for
ever and ever.

Because no man could come unto Christ else, for we see daily, though Reas. 1.
El^e no man could come to Christ.
Ministers call all the Congregation and assembly, yet people do not stir, they
are dead in their sins, they cannot hear the Minister, no, it must be a louder
voice, and one that is more powerful and effectual, unless the Lord come and
bid a man believe, he can never do it, therefore, John 5. 26. See what Christ
says, Verily I say unto you, that the hour shall come, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God; here comes an Almighty voice, that speaks
to the raising of a man out of the death of sin to the life of righteousness
and faith, and he shows that there is a voice of Christ that speaks to the
soul, that though the soul be dead, yet it shall hear and live; so Ephesians
5. 14. and were it not for this call no man could believe.

That so they may have a ground for their faith, the soul cannot first believe,
^. That we may have a ground for out faith.
and then come to the promise; but the Lord brings the promise first, and then
makes the soul to believe; he lets in the promise first, and then causes the
soul to lay hold upon it; the soul does not first come, and then look to the
promise; but the soul first looks upon the promise, and then believes as you
may see, Psalm. 119. 49. it is the speech of the Prophet David, Remember thy
Word O Lord, wherein thou have caused thy servant to trust, the Lord lets in a
word of promise into David's heart, then caused him to hope in it, and made him
look upon it as a thing tendered and propounded to him, and so made him relic
upon it; if it were not for this call of God, who were able to believe? for
without this call, the soul when it sees its dullness, and deadness, and
untowardnesse, and unworthiness, it would go away, it would say, I cannot look
to the promise, I cannot do this and that; and I have no faith; and what have I
to do with the promise; therefore the Lord when he effectually calls a man, he
lets in the sight of his promises, he holds forth his free and gracious
promises; so that now the soul can say, the Lord calls me by his grace, and
though I be never so wretched and my heart be stark naught, though I be as
reprobate to every good word and work, as the vilest in the world; yet here is
a free offer, and I will rely upon it, it is tendered unto me* otherwise why
should God propound it so freely? why should he hold it forth so indifferently?
why should he confirm it with the blood of his own Son? why should there be the
Sac(...)s and so many Seal; to establish the truth of it? and why does he
propound it so freely to me? when he looks upon the promise, the promise makes
him believe the freeness of it, the universality of it, the indifferent^y of
it to as many as will have it; the Lord puts power into the promise to affect
the heart, and fire the heart, there is so much truth and goodness in the
promise as is able to make the soul believe when God speaks it to the heart, it
is such a good promise, and such a free promise, and so Yea and Amen in Christ
Jesus to all that do but rest upon it; the Lord holds the promise before a ma^s
eyes, and says here is a promise for thee, believe, here is mercy, here is
favor, here is pardon, here is peace, here is Christ, here is strength, here
is wis(...) thou art a fool, here is wisdom for thee to direct thee; thou art
weak (...) strength for thee to enable thee; do but rely upon me, and thou
s(...) have it; the soul does not first believe the promise, and then take it;
but the Lord first propounds the promise to the soul, and makes the soul look
up to God in his promise, I am a vile sinner, but with the Lord there is mercy,
and I have a cursed spirit within me; but with the Lord there is power to
subdue it: the truth of the promise and the power of God going with it, makes
the soul believe it, and this is the reason when God would renew the says of
his people, he gives them as it were a new call, and holds the promise afresh
before them, as Genesis 17. 1. I am God alsufficient, walk b(...) me and be
upright, as who should say, Abraham, go not away from me, (...) not any where
else; thou may have any thing in me, I am God Alm^g^ty believe in me, keep
by me, go not from me, but walk before me all the days of thy life, and I will
be a God unto thee, and in blessing I will bless thee, therefore Romans 9. 8.
the people of God are called the children (...)ise, because the promise breeds
them, and converts them, and is the ground of all unto them, they are the very
children of the promise; now here be three things I would show unto you. First,
why this act is attributed to the ^^the^, the Father speaks to the soul, the
soul hears it and so comes. Secondly, what speech this is, which the soul hears
and so comes to God by faith. Thirdly, how a man may know whither he has heard
this voice or no.

First, why this act is attributed to the Father, Every man that has heard and
Quest. 1. Why is this act attributed to the Father? 1. Not as though Christ did
not speak
learned of the Father, etc. the Father speaks, and the soul hears from the
Father.

I answer; First, not as though Christ did not speak, but he came to send them
to to the Father, go to him and hear him, that is not the meaning of it, no,
Christ cuts off all such thoughts in the next verse, Every man that has heard
and learned of the Father, etc. not that any man has seen the Father, etc. as
who should say, I do not mean that you should run to the Father, as though I
were not able to teach you, no man can go to the Father; he dwells in light
that is unaproachable, no man can come to the Father but by me. Mat. 11. 27.
All things are delivered to me of my Father, etc. you see here, that is not the
meaning of it, Christ is a sufficient Doctor, he is the great Prophet of his
Church, and is able to instruct his people, therefore that is not the meaning
of it.

Secondly, not as though we should set up a conceited distinction of works 2.
Notes though we should set up a conceited distinction of works in the Trinity.
in the Trinity, as though a man should say, now a man is under the work of the
Father, and then under the work of the Son, and then under the work of the
holy Ghost (as some imagine,) sometimes the soul is under the work of the
Father, as when the soul does not believe the Father draws it and pulls it; and
when it believes, then it is under the work of the Son, and he works upon the
conscience, and justifies, it; and afterward it is under the work of the holy
Ghost, when it is sealed with the Spirit of promise, these things are true, yet
this is not the meaning, neither does our Savior Christ intend any such
construction, neither have we any warrant for any such distinction of works;
for as this act of drawing is here given to the Father, so John 11. it is given
to the Son; When I am listed up I will draw all men unto me, and as we say
the soul hears the Father, so it hears the Son also, John 5. 25. so that these
are but conceits, and as the seal is given to the Spirit, so it is given to the
Father and the Son sometimes, therefore to say that the soul is now under the
work of the Father, and now under the work of the Son, and now under the work
of the holy Ghost, these things are not warrantable in Scripture; but the
meaning is this, our Savior meeting with the stubbornness of the Jews that
would not believe, but murmured and repined at his doctrine; he puts in this,
no man comes unto me, except the Father draws him, he means their utter
inability of coming to him by nature, unless it be given them from above; if
he had spoken of it again, may be would have said no man comes unto me,
except the Spirit draws him; you must know that all the acts of the blessed
Trinity are indevidable; it is true, the Father, as he is first in order of
subsistence, so he is first in order of operation and working, but look what
one works all work, one act flows from them all, as it is said, you are washed
in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Spirit had a hand in the same
work, they all do the same work; for any further meaning of this, I know not
any warrant.

The second thing is, what this voice is that the Father does speak to the 2.
What is this voice? Not distinct from the word pre^ched.
soul, and so the soul is made to come to Christ?

I answer, you must not conceive that here is any voice distinct from the Word,
it is but imaginary and notional, when men dream of any other Relations besides
the Word; it is not a proper, but a metaphorical speech, and it consists in two
things.

First, in opening a man's senses.

Secondly, in removing a man's lamenesse and inability. Consists, 1. In the
opening a a man's senses.


First, in opening a man's senses, in opening a man's understanding, a man's
understanding is quite blinded, and cannot see the things of God; and though a
man literally know all the cripture, yet notwithstanding there is a veil upon
his eyes, and he does not see the excellency and glory of it; now when the
Spirit of God comes and anoints a man's eyes, and takes away the scales that
they fall off from his eyes, the man now begins with open face to see the glory
of God, and the glorious Gospel of God; the natural man saw the Gospel to be a
glorious thing, yet the God of this world blinded his eyes that he could not
see it in this glorious manner; now when the Spirit of the Father comes to call
a man effectually, he does anoint a man's eyes, Esaias 35. 5. The eyes of the
blind shall see, he makes a man to see the wonders of Gods Law, to see his
gracious promises in Jesus Christ, the freeness of them, the indifferency of
them, that they are propounded to every man that has an heart to them, and
hungers and thirsts after them; so that the Lord does as it were say to the
soul, here are the promises, here you see them, believe in me, this is the
speech of the Father, these are the promises, this is the happiness, if you
will embrace it, you may be happy for ever; now the world, and profits, and
pieasures are not such a thing, you may be damned for all them, therefore come
unto me and you shall have eternal happiness; thus the Spirit of the Father
shows the soul the glory of the ways of Jesus Christ, and the glory of the
promises, here they are, believe, that is the first.

Secondly, he opens the sense of hearing, for as the mind of a man is stark
blind, and cannot see the things of God; so the heart of a man is stark dead,
and cannot hearken to God; a man has no ears by nature to hear God speak to
him, till the Lord comes and opens his ears, as the Prophet speaks, Esaias 35. 5.
The ears of the deaf shall hear; when the Lord comes to open the ears of the
deaf, now the soul begins to hear, before it was like the deaf adder, that
could not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely; though he
heard never so many Sermons, he yet heard none, his hearing was to no purpose,
in hearing he heard, but perceived not; but when the Lord comes and takes away
the uncircumcision of the ear, the soul now begins to hear and hearken to
him; now the stone begins to vanish out of the heart, and flesh and feeling
comes in the place thereof; the soul is ready to say as Samuel, Speak Lord, thy
servant hears; now the soul begins to hear a Sermon, to hear a counsel, to
hear a threatening, when the Lord begins to open the ear, this is another thing
whereby the soul is able to hear what the Lord says.

Again, this voice consists in taking away a man's lamnesse, for as a man was 2.
In taking away a man's lameness.
perverted, and this was taken away by opening the ear, yet now a man is lame,
and cannot come to Christ, therefore the Lord takes away his lamenesse, Esaias
35. 5. The feet of the lame shall walk; First, he makes the soul walk, and
afterward run, and at last to fly as an Eagle; First, it walks, you shall
walk in my statutes, and afterward runs and flies as an Eagle; thus you see
what this voice is.

Now there be two reasons why it is called a voice. First, because it is a
Called a voice, 1. Because it is joined to the word.
thing joined with the Word, because it is all one together with the Word, as
Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing, he does not mean their only outward
hearing, for faith will not come by outward hearing, but he means the hearing
of the outward ear, and this hearing of the Father speaking to the heart, and
so faith comes

Secondly, because it has a similitude of a voice, the soul does as it were 2
Because it has a similitude of a voice.
hear a voice speaking to it, not as though the acts you heard of even now can
distinctly be known, he does them not vocally, he does not open the eyes, and
open the ear vocally, but as the blind man said, One thing I know, that whereas
I was blind, now I see; but how he came to see, that he could not tell; so when
the Spirit comes and speaks to his heart, a man can tell no more the way of the
Spirit then he can tell how the wind blows, or the fashioning of the bones in
the womb; what man can express the manner of Gods secret working? could the
Apostles see the breath of Christ breathed upon them, when he said, receive ye
the holy Ghost? no, they could not; the acts of the Spirit upon the soul cannot
be discerned, but as the blind man said, once I was blind, but now I see, so a
man may say, whereas I was deaf, now I can hear the voice of God; and happy is
the man that can say this, but the things cannot be discerned, but at the same
time, when the Lord works these acts; the soul does as it were hear a speech,
mentally and spiritualy in the soul, Esaias 30 22. Thou shall hear a voice behind
thee, saying, this is the way, walk in it, so the Lord speaks to the soul, this
is the way, and this is the promise, and this is the Gospel of peace, and this
is the mercy that I offer unto thee, believe it, the Lord makes the soul as it
were hear a voice, the Lord speaks, and the soul hears, it is done after such
a manner, so effectually, as if the Lord did speak to the heart; I will allure
her into the Wilderness, the Lord does as it were entice a man, thus and thus
it shall be with thee if thou will follow me, it is done after such a manner,
therefore it is called a voice.

The third thing is, how we may know whether the soul has heard this Quest.
How may we know whether that (...) has heard this voice. Answ. 1. There is a
power goes along with this Word.
voice or no?

I answer; first, there is a power goes along with the Word, when this voice
of the Father goes with it; there is a power put into the promises, not only
the Minister speaks them, or the bare letter of the word utters them, but when
the Spirit speaks with them, there is a power goes along with them, as John 6.
44. there is a power to draw the heart; when the Lord calls a man, when he
speaks to a man* he puts a power into the promise, that it draws the heart of a
man, the truth, the goodness, the excellency, freeness, attainableness of it,
the Lord puts a power into these things to draw the heart, so that that man is
drawn to look after heaven, and come to God from day to day, the excellency and
incomparable worth of these things, having the power of God in them, woeth the
heart, and enticeth it, and draws it, and hales it to come to God, and weaneth
it from the world, and he lets them go more and more, not seeing such worth in
them to draw his mind away more and more; hence the Gospel is called the
power of God to salvation, Romans 16. 6. when God calls a man by the Gospel* he
puts a power into all the promises, to draw a man home, to pull a man
effectually and powerfully unto him, he is enamoured of them, and must have
them, and will have them, and casts himself upon God, for the having of them,
when any soul obeys the call of God, what is the reason that it obeys it?
it feels a power in the Word, in the promises of God, when he hears it
preached, as 1 These. 1. 5. Our Gospel came not unto you in Word only, but in
power; the Lord calling of these good, These. By his grace, there was a power
went along with the Word, and made them receive the Word, and that drew their
hearts to take it, though by nature they were averse from it, though by nature
they were stubborn, and rebellious, and would not submit to the Gospel, yet
when the Lord puts this power into the promise to overwoe the soul more then
lusts and sins, and things of the world could do; more then the inclinations
of the soul could do, it came with a stronger power then all these to the soul,
and this made the soul hear this voice.

Secondly, he that hears this voice, hears more then a man, or any creature; 2.
This voice makes one hear more then any creature can speak.
say unto him believe, saying unto him, come unto Christ, cast thy self upon
God, here is mercy, here is a promise; here is peace that thou need, when he
does not only hear the Minister say it, all the Congregation hears him speak
it, and no man stirs, but when a man hears more then a Minister say so, he
feels such a coming of the Word to him, that all the created powers in heaven
and earth could never move him in that manner, then he hears the voice of the
Spirit of God, for when God calls a man effectually; he makes the Gospel a
glass for a man to see the glory of God through, as you may see, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
he means by the glass there, the Gospel; the Lord when he calls a man, he
makes the Gospel a glass to him, that he may behold the glory of God, the
infinite graciousnesse and loveliness of God, the infinite goodness,
happiness, and blessedness of God, and what an infinite fountain of all
goodness he is in his own Son Jesus Christ; he lets him see, not only the
Gospel; every man sees the Gospel, but every man has not this glass, it is
not this glass to him, to let him see the glory of God; when God turns a man
he comes with this glorious light through the Gospel to his soul, there is a
great light shines from heaven about a man, as there did about Saint Paul; the
Gospel it self a light, and every man sees this light, but there is darkness
upon the mind still for all that, but when God calls a man there is a great
light comes into the soul, you are a chosen generation, etc. 1 Pet. 2* 9. mark,
there is a mavelous deal of light the Lord lets into the soul, that the soul
can now see how the devil, and sin, and the world deluded him, and how the
world, and all profits and pleasures are a mere painted thing, and are merely
vexations of Spirit; now he sees how to distinguish between things and things,
there is a glorious and a mavelous light come in, he sees the wiles of his
own heart, and how he was beguiled before, and betwitched by the devil before,
he sees all the folly and the Popery of his own heart; such a deal of light
comes in that it discovers all so far forth, as is necessary to bring him to
God; now he sees that his moaping and blundering upon his sins, and condemning
of himself, it had a form of humility, but it was nothing but pride and
stubbornness of heart, and he would rather have him be without mercy, then
have it upon Gods terms; he beholding the glory of God, sees the wyles and
deceits of his own soul, this light shows him the glory of God, and propounds
to him these things, and makes him believe them.

Thirdly, this same voice of the Father, when the Father speaks to a man, 3. It
is the irrefragable propounding of the promise.
it is the irrefragable propounding of the promise to him, when the promises of
the Gospel are delivered in an irrefragable manner, contrary to all the
objections of the heart of man, all the pleas that can be brought against it,
it comes in an irrefragable manner, and holds itself before him, that he may
believe, not that he may not be tempted to the contrary, but he sees tha^ they
are but temptations; O says the soul, I see I am unwilling to do good duties,
what of that? if thou would be willing, the promise is free; may he, says
the soul, I am full of stubbornness, and rebellion, and unprofitableness; what
of that? that is nothing says the promise, if thou come to me, I can heal thee
of this stubbornness, believe in me this is the way to be rid of thy
stubbornness, and to have a better heart, and more abilities, as long as it is
a burden to thee; believe in me, it comes in an irrefragable manner, so that
the soul can say, I refused comfort all this while, as David says, Ps. 77.
comfort was propounded to me, but I would not have it, I was fullen and peevish
and put it off, and withstood my own comforts, now the soul sees its putting
off of Gods mercy, and the forsaking its own mercies, and the gracious
proffers tendered to it, I say when the Spirit speaks this voice to the soul, it
speaks in a mavelous great and convincing manner, it speaks in a prevailing
manner, it speaks over and above all, it speaks in a ravishing manner, it makes
the soul see a cornucopia of all good, an abundant treasury of all mercy in
the ways of God, and in the promises of the Gospel, it makes a man see that
whatsoever the heart can wish and desire that is good, it is there to be had,
and no where else to be attained, it speaks in an uncontrollable manner to the
soul, that the soul can stand out no longer, but must come off.

JOHN. 6. 35. He that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes
in me shall never thirst.
WE have finished the first part of Effectual Calling, and now we come to the
second; Namely, the answer to this Call; for this is the difference between
effectual calling, and that which is not effectual; the one makes a man come,
and the other does not; now this coming is by faith, and this we have here in
the text, He that comes unto me, etc. Now before I come to handle this point,
I must premise something concerning faith; Namely, that it is not only a bare
assent of the mind that all good things are in Christ, but it is a confidence
for the having of all the good things that are in him, it is not only the first
act of faith: Namely, an assent to the truths of the Gospel, that God has put
all treasures of eternal life in his Son; this I will not speak of, because
all, both Papists and Protestants agree in this, that faith is an assent of the
mind, this is a controversy on neither side, therefore I will omit it But it
is the second part or act of faith, which is the believing that in the Lord
Jesus Christ he shall have eternal life; which is an act of the heart, and this
is that which I will stand upon, it is a confidence in God and Christ for all
good things, when a man does not only believe that all the promises of God are
yea and amen in Christ, but when a man does fiducially and confidencially bear
himself, and rest upon Christ for all these things, he comes to Christ for all
good he looks for, this I will prove to be an act of a justifying faith, and
that I may not be mistaken, I will distinguish; 3. Confidence, in natural man.
1. In the power of God.


There is a confidence in the power of God, a natural man may believe the power
of God, and yet not have a justifying faith, all that had miraculous faith did
believe the power of God, but the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13. 2. If I had all
faith, that is all miraculous faith, even to the removing of mountains without
charity it were nothing.

Secondly, there is an unrooted confidence of the will, which may be in a
natural 2. Unrooted in the will.
man; as a natural man may believe that Christ is the only hope of Glory, the
only way, the Truth and the Life, the only one, for whose sake he shall be
accepted; as he may assent to this so he may have a kind of unrooted
confidence in these things, which may procure a great deal of peace to his
conscience; this is that which Divines call a temporary faith, Mat. 13. for a
time they do believe, etc. A natural man may not only believe Christ, but
believe in Christ in some sense truly he cannot, but in an unrooted manner,
there may be such an act put forth, though it be not rooted in the heart, this
you may see, John 2. 23, 24. Many believed on Christ, says the text* yet he
would not commit himself unto them; he would not trust them with mercy, and
grace, and favor* he would not trust them in regard of his own body and
safety, they were not right for all that; and yet they did not only believe
Christ, but in some sense, and in an unrooted manner they believed on Christ;
therefore there is not only a firm assent to the truth which may be in a
natural man, but also some kind of confidence.

Thirdly, there is a presumptuous confidence in God and Christ for salvation 3.
Presumptuous.
which the workers of iniquity may have; they may not only believe the general
truths of the Gospel, but have some kind of confidence in Christ, though not so
good as the former, for that reformes a man, and makes him follow Christ till
persecution come, and may be in persecution too, till he be weary; but this is
not so good, you shall have a drunkard, a profane person, he has confidence
in Christ that God hears his prayers, accepts his duties, and will provide for
him, our Savior Christ speaks of such, Matthew. 7. 22. He tells us of many that
shall be confident in him, how they have done wonderful works in his Name, and
eat and drank in his presence, and have heard him preach in their streets, and
yet are but workers of iniquity; I do not mean this neither, these are but
false confidences.

Now there are two godly considences, gracious ones such as are only in Gods 2.
Confidence in the godly. 1. Special persuasion of Gods love*
Elect, and not in all Gods Elect neither; but only in such as are effectually
called, and yet come not within this definition of faith: The first is that
full special persuasion of the heart; a man may have true justifying faith
though he never attain to this, for justifying faith is a confidence in Christ
for justification; now this special and full persuasion of the heart, is not
only an affiance in Christ for justification, it does not only apprehend Christ
for justification, but it apprehends justification it self; now this must needs
be after justifying, a man must needs be justified before he can confidently
apprehend justification, he must first be justified before he can say he is
justified, the object must be before the act. Thus it goes, justifying faith
must needs be before justification; and justification must be before the sense
and feeling of justification; before a man can feel and apprehend he is
justified; the cause goes before the effect in order of nature, for a man is
justified by faith; Now if a man know he is justified, then the thing must be
true before he knows it is so; now here they differ, that faith is a confident
apprehending of Christ for justification, and this full special persuasion of
the heart is not only a confident apprehending of Christ for justification, but
an apprehending of justification it self: Now true justifying faith may be
without this, Job. 13. 15. Though he kill me yet I will trust in him; That is,
suppose that I were at an utter loss, that I knew not whether God will slay
me; yet slay me, or not slay me; perish, or not perish; I will trust in him;
Imagine God deliver me up, and will none of me; yet though he kill me, I will
trust in him; I do not say I am at this loss that he will kill me, blessed be
God I am not in this case; but if I were at this loss, that he would kill me
for ought I knew, yet I would trust in him, so that we see this confidence may
be without this full persuasion of heart.

Secondly, there is another good confidence that comes not within this
definition 2. A constant expectation.
of faith, and that is a constant expectation, and this is the daughter of
faith, Ephesians. 3. 12. This confidence whereby the soul hopes in God, differs
from the confidence of faith, for this confidence is an effect of faith* it is
by faith; Now these two differ thus, the confidence of hope is that which a man
has for the future having of those things that for the present a man believes;
now the confidence of faith is the confident apprehending of Christ for the
having of them, John 3. 36. He that believes in Christ has eternal life, he
that believes in Christ has a present possession of that he believes in Christ
for, eternal Confidence in Christ for life and salvation is true justifying
faith. Arg. 1. From the several expressions of faith in Scripture. ^. Trusting
life is his for the present, he has present justification and acceptance with
God, and has a title to all good and all the mercies of the Covenant of grace.

Now we come to prove this, that this confidence is a true justifying faith;
and the Arguments to prove it are these, and the first is taken from the
several expressions of faith in Scripture, Psalm. 78. 22. it is called a
trusting, they believed not in God; Why? They trusted not in his salvation; so
that faith is a trusting in God, when a man has confidence in God, and can
fiducially lean upon God for all good things. As Alexander trusted his
Physician, when his Physician gave him a Potion* before he took it, a friend of
his wrote unto him, do not take the Potion, the man is set to poison you; if
you take it you are a dead man; he read the letter, and then took the Potion,
and then gave the letter to the Physician, and said, I have trusted to your
faithfulness, and cast my self upon you, if you have given me poison you have
killed me; you see by the letter I have witness of it, but I trust you* and
suppose you have not done it. So faith is a trusting upon God, when the soul
resolves to follow God in all ways, and when the world and the flesh come in
and object, if you be so strict and follow these courses, you will undo your
self, and be laughed at, and loose your friends, your very living depends upon
such a course, and you will be a beggar, and will never have any delight, you
are given to pleasure and laughter, but all these must be gone, farewell all
carnal pleasure; Well, but the soul now believes in God, God bids him come to
him for comfort, for friends, for delight, for pleasure, for the satisfaction
of all his desires, and he shall want no manner of good, he trusts upon this,
and he will never leave God, never leave his ways, this is rooted in him, and
now he can go to God and say, the Devil told me I should loose my friends, and
I should never have comfort, never be able to live, my flesh and my own heart
said so, but I have trusted thee, and if friends go, so, farewell friends; if
means go, so, farewell them; I am told so, flesh and blood say so, but I
believe in thee is eternal life, and in thee is all peace, and happiness, and
comfort, and this is that which draws me to thee; and keeps me to thee, and I
rest upon thee for all good; thus you see that faith must be an affiance in
God, because it is a trusting in God.

Secondly, it is called a relying upon God, as Asa, when the Aethiopians and 2.
Relying on God.
Lubims came against him, the Scriptures shows that he believed in God, now
mark how the Scripture expresses his faith, 2 Chro. 16. 8. Because thou did
rely upon the Lord, therefore he delivered them into their hands; May be the
world might tell him, what do you think to overcome these enemies, with
strictness and fasting, and praying.

You had more need make a league with the King of Syria, and take some other
course, but he relied upon God, and if he failed him, he failed him, he would
rely upon him, and therefore faith must needs be an affiance in God.

Thirdly, faith is called a staying upon God, when a man stays himself upon
God, Isa. 50. 10. there faith is expressed by staying a man's self upon 3.
Staying upon God.
God, He that sits in darkness and sees no light, let him trust in the Lord
and stay himself upon his God. It is a similitude taken from a staff, and old
man that dares not trust to his own legs, but thinks I shall fall and get some
mischief, he takes a staff and stays himself upon it, now is this all that
he looks upon, that he conceives the staff is able to bear him? so a man that
has no staff knows that such a staff is able to bear him, that is not the
thing, but this man does not only believe the staff is able to bear him, but
he commits himself unto it, and leanes upon it, and if he falls he is content,
he lays the bulk of his body upon the staff, and dares lean upon it; so it
is with faith, it is not only an assent to this, that God is wise and
omnipotent, and gracious, and an hearer of prayers, and that he comforts them
that mourn for sin, and satisfies them that hunger for righteousness, he
not only believes there is a Christ, and salvation in him he not only assents
to these things, but he stays upon them, and commits himself to them.

Fourthly, it is expressed by a man's rolling himself upon God, Psalm* 37. 5. 4.
Rolling ones ^el^ on God.
We translate the words, Commit thy way unto the Lord; but in the Original, it
signifies to roll a man's way upon God, so Psalm. 22. 8. He trusted God would
deliver him, it is the same word is used here, he rolled himself upon God; this
is a similitude taken from a Cart-wheele, that rolls it self about the
Axeltree, and stays it self upon it, and helps it self in its motion, it could
not move, but for that, and by virtue of that it moves to and fro. So this is
true faith, not only when a man assents to the promises of God, but rolls
himself upon God, moves his soul upon Christ, and commits himself unto Christ
in all his ways.

Fifthly, faith is expressed by adherence and sticking unto God, Psalm. 119. 31.
I have stuck unto thy Commandments, Lord put me not unto confusion; as who 5.
Adhering unto God.
should say; Lord, here I hang, here I hold, here I will stick fast; I will
ever fear thee, I will ever obey thee, here I hang, and hold, and will keep my
hold; Lord put me not to confusion; that is, Lord I hope thou will do as thou
have spoken; Lord let me not be confounded, let me not be scoffed at in the
world; if I be put to shame I am confounded, does this man now only believe the
promises in general? No, but he relieth upon these promises, he dares go and
take this Bear by the tooth, and dares venture upon those harsh duties that are
cross to a man's will, and seem to have no good in them; What, because he
assents to the promises that they are true? No, but because he is confident
that the promises shall be performed. So Deuteronomy. 4. 4. there says Moses to the
Israelites, You that did cleave to the Lord your God, you are all alive at this
day; as who should say, though your brethren went away from God, some to
satisfy their lusts, as in the matter of quails and fleshpots, and others to
humor their fancies, as in the matter of the calf, and others to fulfill their
filthy delights, as in the matter of Baal-Peor, your brethren went away from
God as if they might have comfort, and delight, and good elsewhere, they went
from God, but you cleave to God, and are all alive to this day; that is, as you
did look for good in God you had it; your brethren looked for good elsewhere,
and they are disappointed, where are their profits and pleasures? They went
away from God and are dead, but you followed God, and are alive to this day. So
2 King. 18. 6. it is said of Hezekiah that he clave to God, etc. that is, he
did not only conceive that the chief good was in God, but he did stick to God
in all his ways, he did cleave to God and would not go away.

Lastly, a true justifying faith is expressed in Scripture by believing on God,
6. Believing on God.
or believing in God; a phrase that is not used in any Greek Author, but only
in the Scripture, and those that have been acquainted with the Scripture; now
why does God pick out a new phrase, but to imply a new work? What, is it only
to assent to the truth? Then the old phrase would have served the turn, but
when a man believes on God, or in God, this is the expression of a justifying
faith, as you may see, 1 Pet. 2. 5. So John 3. 16. God so loved the world that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not
p^rish, etc. So Romans 4. 5. and Romans 3. 26. What do all these phrases import,
only a naked consent and belief, that all the things in the Gospel are true?
No, but when a man can believe on these things, when a man can submit to all
the Ordinances of God, and embrace Christ in all his ways, and believe that
all the good things spoken of in the Gospel are to be had in him.

I confess sometimes simple believing Christ, without on, or in, is put for a
justifying faith, as To. 4. 3. it is said that, Abraham believed God, and it
was counted Arg. 2. From the offer of Christ.
to him for righteousness; he does not say he believed in God, but that is the
meaning of it, and if you look into Genesis 15. you shall find through the story
that he believed in God; he did not only believe that God was good, but he
committed himself to God in all his ways, and did rely upon him; that God was
Almighty, and that made him walk before God in uprightness, and that made him
live a different life from all the rest of the Country, this shows that it was
a confidence and affiance in God, that was accounted to him for righteousness.

The second Argument is taken from the offer of Christ, which is the giving
Arg. 2. From the off^r of Christ.
of Christ to be a propitiation for sin, and to be a Mediator between God and
man, to be the only means of eternal life; this is the offer of Jesus Christ in
the Gospel, Christ is given to be a redeemer to them that do believe; now what
can answer this giving? Can only an act of the mind answer this gift? It Is true
indeed, he is the only Mediator, the only Messiah, the only way, the truth and
the life; and he is freely offered and given in the Gospel, I believe this and
assent unto it; is this taking? No, this is only believing he may take him,
therefore true faith must be a taking of Christ; that only answers to the
giving of Christ; giving is a relative which answers to taking, a gift is no
gif^ except it be taken; the nature of the gift returns back again to the giver
if it be not taken; so it is here, God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him should not perish but have
everlasting life; He gave his only begotten Son; that has a relation to
taking of him, he gave him, that whosoever believes on him might not perish;
that is, God gave him that whosoever takes him might not perish but have
eternal life; though a man offer himself to a woman, yet if the woman do not
take him, he is not her husband, the match is made up by taking: so though
Christ be given to the world in the Gospel, yet Christ is not ours but by
taking of him; when you take Christ, then you are in the number of those that
shall not p^rish, but have everlasting life; when you take Christ, that is,
when you take him to be your chief good, when you take his promises to be your
stay and propp, to be the the life and comfort of your hearts, when you take
his Commandments to do them, when you take his ordinances to walk in them,
when you take his people to have society with them, when you take Christ, and
all Christ, now you shall have everlasting life, this is to take Christ, though
the woman assent firmly that the man is a proper man, and a goodly man, and a
godly man, and a rich man, this makes not up the ^atch; but when she takes him
to be her husband, then she has interest in his person, and all that he has;
so when a man takes Christ, then he has title to Christ and all the good
things, that are in him.

It is said of the faithful, that they did not only see the Promises afar off,
but they did embrace them, Heb. 11. 13. the word signifies they hugged them,
they kissed them; many see the Promises afar off, but embrace them not; they
embrace the things of this present world, they hugg them, but never take the
promises of God home to there souls; true faith therefore is such a faith as
takes Christ, and then it follows, that it cannot be an act of the mind, but
an act of the heart in relying and taking the thing to himself, to hang upon
it; and live by it.

The third argument is this, Faith is an act of coming unto Christ, Christ you
Arg. 3. Because faith is a coming to Christ.
know is the righteousness of God, now when a man is come to it, he has it;
now what motion of coming is this? is it only a motion of the mind, a
Contemplation of the mind, when a man sees Christ afar off? I may see a goodly
man, a goodly thing afarr of, my eye sight may go to it, but if my whole man do
not come to it, I am not come to it, this cannot be only the Contemplation of
the mind, when the eye of a man's understanding discovers Christ, for this makes
him the more fool and the more inexcusable, if he comes not to him; no this
motion of coming unto Christ, it is a spiritual motion of all the whole man, a
man's mind goes to Christ and a man's heart, and a man's affections, and all the
strength of a man's soul goes to Christ, this is coming to Christ, Mat. 11.
28, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden; that is believe in me;
he puts it into that phrase, this true faith makes the soul come to Christ, so
1 Pet. 2. 4. to whom coming, as to a chief corner stone: There are two
terms in this coming to Christ, the one from whence a man comes, from all his
own ways, from all his own desires, from all his own ends and aims, and
the other term is, to what a man comes, and that is to Christ, to ^as
promises, to his Commandments, to live and die with him, this is coming unto
Christ, as you may see Acts 26. 18. there both these terms are set down* to
open their eyes says the Text, and to turn them from darkness to light, that
they might receive forgiveness of sins; It is this coming that receives
forgiveness, not only an act of the mind, when that goes to Christ, but an
act of the heart, when that goes to Christ, when a man comes from darkness to
light, from pride to humility, from the world to God, when a man passes from
the one term to the other term, and so comes to this righteousness of God
in Jesus Christ; now he is come to Christ, and now he shall receive
forgiveness of sins, so that you see faith is not only an assent of the
mind, but an a(...) of the heart, both these together make up this coming of
the soul to Christ.

Fourthly, true justifying faith, the proper object of it, is no sentence, no
Arg. 4. Because the object of justifying faith is no proposition, but Christ
himself.
proposition in the Word, I mean the act of a justifying faith, in that act
whereby it justifies the proper object of it, is no sentence or proposition in
the Word, no complext truth in the Word, but it is Christ himself; it is true, a
man must believe that the Word of God is true, and the promies true, and Yea
and Amen; but that act does not justify, it may be in a reprobate, or in a
^^vill, therefore it cannot be an assent of the mind, for that supposes that
the object must be a proposition; neither can it be a sure and certain
persw^^on, that God has elected me, and intended Christ to me, this may be the
(...) an after faith, but not the act that justifies; but Christ himself i^ the
object o^ a justifying faith, I am the way, the truth, and the life, I my self,
it is (...), (...) God by Christ, when a man beleives in Christ, or by Christ
beleives in Go^; this is the object of a justifying faith, it is no proposition
or text of Scripture that is the object of a justifying faith; that is, the
thing that is a justifying faith, as it justifyes, does assent unto; but the
object of a true justifying ^aith, as it justifies, is Christ himself the cause
of forgiveness of sins, the cause of eternal life, the cause of the
derivation of all these blessings to us, it looks for all in Christ's own
person; it is true, the propositions of the Scripture about Christ, are the
ground of a justifying faith, as he that believes in Christ shall be saved;
that is the ground of a justifying faith, but these propositions, though they
must be acknowledged at the time by faith, yet these propositions do not
justify a man, for a wretch may do this, but when a man believes in Christ,
that is propounded and tendered in the Word, when a man has a^^iance in him,
and commits himself to him, faith seeks for all good in Christ's own person;
first, it lays hold on the person of Christ, and taking him, it takes all good
things with him, indeed it takes the propositions of the Word for its ground,
because the Word says thus, and thus, that eternal life is in him, and he
opens the Kingdom of heaven to all believers, and he is a sufficient Savior,
this is the ground of faith; but the object of a justifying faith, is Christ's
own person, so that believing cannot be an act of the mind, but when a man
believes in Christ, and is rooted and built upon him, it is the person of
Christ, I will make this appear to you, you know God does count it Idolatry
for a man to believe in any creature, when a man believes in the Son of man,
God forbids this, as an Idolatrous thing, for a man to believe and put his
confidence and affiance in any creature, now what is the meaning of this? what,
is this Idolatry, to assent to such a creature? to believe that such a man is
his friend and tenders him, and is faithful unto him, this is a truth about a
friend, is this Idolatry? No, but when a man makes a friend his staff, a
creature his staff, when a man makes riches his Idol, is this only to assent
that riches can do much in the world, can buy meat, and clothes, and lands,
and inheritances, is it the knowing these things are so? No, but when a man
makes riches his prop and stay, and believes in them, and that is the stay that
he has; It is not the beleiving these things about riches, for so a man that
believes only in God may know these things about riches and a friend, Jer. 17.
5. Cursed is he that makes flesh his arm, he does not say, cursed is he that
apprehends that a man is his friend and willing to relieve him; but cursed is
he that makes flesh his arm, that l^ans upon this man, that trusts unto him,
that is the thing; so what is the meaning that we must not trust in Chariots
and in horses? does the Scripture mean that we may not assent and affirm these
truths about them, that they are many, and strong, and potent, that they are
admirable horses? is this it? No, but, woe be to them that go down to Egypt for
help, and put their trust in Chari^ts and Horses, Isa. 31. 1. When a man rides
a journey and makes his Horse his stay; when a man goes about a business, and
makes his purse his prop; when a man walks from day to day, and the creature is
the thing he hangs upon; he does not see God, and draw near to God; he does not
set his heart upon God; he does not rely upon him, to have God with him in his
journey, and what he goes about; No, he has an Horse with him, and means, and
maintenance with him; and God shall have a prayer may be now and then, but he
makes not God his arm, and this is idolatry; so our believing, it is not the
believing the propositions about a thing, but when a man believes in the thing
it self, and makes the thing his stay, his buckler, his aid, his help and
comfort.

Lastly, the maine Argument is this; true justifying faith is a faith of union,
it is such a faith as unites a man to God and Christ, and in him to God; the
Arg. 5 Because true faith is a faith of union.
Apostle says, 1 John 5. 20. We know that we are in him that is true; his
meaning is, we are in him by faith, that is, we have such a kind of faith,
whereby we do not only assent to him, that he is the Son of God, and all
things are true that are spoken of him; but we are in him, we are in him that
is true; that is, we are united to him, and 2 Cor. 17. 5. Whosoever is in
Christ is a new creature; and Paul says of Andronicus and Junia, they were in
Christ before him, Romans 16 7. So Christ is said to be in them, Know ye not that
Christ Jesus is in you, except you be reprobates? it is the faith of union, He
that has the Son, has life, 1 John 5. 12. That is, he that believes in the
Son of God; that is, so believes that he has him, and is united to him, that
man has life, and none else; so that it is a faith of union that justifies a
man; not as though faith of it self does this for its own worthiness, as
though it were able to unite a man to Christ, it is only by virtue of Gods
Ordinance that faith unites a man to Christ; God of his infinite mercy and
goodness has appointed faith to be such a thing, that upon putting forth of
that act, he shall presently have relation to Christ, and Communion with him;
by grace are we saved through faith, says the Apostle; we are saved through
faith, but not for any worthiness of faith, but by grace; this is the thing,
the Lord has appointed such a kind of faith shall justify as shall unite a
man to Jesus Christ; Nay, if faith did not do this, faith could not justify,
and sanctify, and purify, and entitle a man to Heaven, for it does all these
by virtue of union; first, it unites a man to Christ, and makes Christ one with
him, and him one with Christ, and so he comes to have right and title to all
the merits, and all the good things that come by Christ; so then, if thou have
not this faith of union, though thou have all faiths besides historical faith,
temporary faith, and if it were possible miraculous faith; Nay, if thou had
ten thousand thousand faiths more, if it were possible; yet if thou have not
such a faith as to be united to Christ, thou art in thy sins, and art under the
law, and under the curse of the law, and under Gods justice; if thou should
pray never so much, and give thy body to be burned, yet if thou do not dwell in
Christ, and Christ in thee; if thou be not one with Christ, and Christ one with
thee, thou art nothing but as ^ounding Brass, and as a tinkling Cymball;
though thou have been a professor these twenty years together, and have been
taken for a godly man through Town and Country; yet if thou art not in Christ,
thou ar^^ still in thy sins, faith does unite a man to Christ through the
Ordinance o^ God; by the Grace of God it does unite a man to Christ, 1 John 4
15 wha^ confession does the Apostle mean there? Only a confession of
histori^^, faith: when a man believes that God is so and so, and confesses
him; No the Apostle expounds himself, 1 John 3. 24. as who should say, it is
such a faith as wholly resignes a man unto God, to be ruled and guided by him
as well as saved by him; it is such a faith as makes a man with mind, and
heart, and will, and all that is in a man, to cast himself upon Christ, so that
all obedience, and all conformity to the Son of God will follow; he that has
this faith to keep his Commandments, dwells in God, and God in him. Now what
kind of faith can this be? can it be only the act of the mind whereby a man
believes all the truths concerning Christ? does this unite a man to Christ? It
were blasphemy to say so, for by this Argument, the union between Christ and a
true believer, were no better then the union between a true believer and the
Devil, because a true believer believes all the truths and assents unto them
that God has spoken concerning the Devil, as well as concerning Christ, this
does not unite a man; there is a kind of union indeed in the mind, but that
union is only notional, and intentional, and rational; as for example, when I
think of an horse, or a tree, there is an union of the tree with my mind, for
the tree is in my mind in the notion of it, but this is a bare intentional and
simple union; the maine union of all is in the heart, when the heart is united
to a thing; an heavenly minded man, he may have an union of his understanding
with the things of this world; he may understand carnal men, understand their
courses and ways; and there is a notional, intentional union with these things
in his understanding, but he is not truly united to those courses except his
heart be set upon those courses, then he takes them up; so until the heart is
set upon Christ, a man is never heavenly, never godly, never a true Christian,
till he is thus united into Christ. Nay, I will tell you more, and I will prove
it, and it is a thing to be considered, that were it possible; Suppose God
should reveal, (he might if he would) to any man; that he is elected before he
is converted; Suppose this, I do not say God does thus to any of his Elect; but
suppose an Elect man that is yet unconverted, and yet out of Christ, he is a
natural man, and yet an elected man; ^uppose I say, God should reveal to this
man, thou art elected to eternal life, I have intended from all eternity to
give my Son to thee, all his merits, and death; and passion; I have intended
them to thee, and I have intended thou shall have fellowship with him; God
reveals this, and the man firmly assents to the authority of the speaker, that
he is elected to eternal life; does this faith justify a man? A man is in his
sins, yet for all this, though he knows, and God has revealed such a thing
to him, that he has intended Christ to him, (as long as he has not revealed
that he is in Christ) this does not put him into Christ, this shows him that
he shall be in Christ; but this act of believing does not put him into Christ;
therefore the children of God that are converted, and are believers, and can
believe that God has elected them, and eternally intended Christ to them, this
act of their faith does not justify them, this only is an act to know that
they are justified already, and converted already.

I will show you an excellent place for this, 2 Timothy 1. 12. For which cause,
says the Apostle, I also suffer these things, for I know in whom I have
believed, and that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him
against that day. Mark here, I know in whom I have believed, there is the act
of faith, I have believed in him, he expounds himself there, he means I have
committed my self to him, all I have, all I am, this was the act of
justification, and intitling him unto him; but now says he, I know this, this
is an act of assurance whereby he reflects upon himself, that God was his God,
and intended to save him; but this was not the thing that justified him: No, I
believe on him, and committed myself unto him; and I know this, this act is but
the knowledge of a ^hans justifying faith, and not the thing it self.

For the use of the point, here, First, we s^e that it is no absurdity to say
that Use 1. Then ^^ab ^^dity to say faith is (...) the heart as well as in the
mind
true justifying faith is in the heart as well as in the mind; many good
Divines (as Master Perkins) say, that faith is only in the mind; and this is
the opinion of the Papists also; the reason why good Divines say so, is because
they do make faith to be the full persuasion of a man that God has intended
Christ to him particularly; but this is not an act of a justifying faith, but
comes after it, it is a consequent of it. The reason why the Papists say so, is
this, because they hold that a justifying faith is nothing else but a fir^e
assent o^ the mind, to the general promises of the Gospel, and in particular
the promise of the forgiveness of sins in and through the Lord Jesus Christ,
generally taken they say, this is a true faith; now, when we say this may be a
read faith; it is true, say they, therefore a man is quickened and enlivened by
charity and good works, so that this faith and good works will justify a man;
but this is Antichristian leaven; but I say that true justifying faith is not
in the mind only, but in the heart also.

Object. But you will say, is it not absurd that one grace should be in two

Answ. 1. I answer, it is but a conceit for ought we know, we can have no
Scaliger and others: But they are two several offices of one and the self-same
soul; the self-same soul able to understand, is called the understanding; and
the self-same soul able to will, is called the will; the self-same soul i^ able
to understand and will.

2. But suppose that the understanding and the will were really different one
from another, yet I say, it is not properly to be said that faith is either in
the understanding or in the will, but it is properly in the soul of a man; the
reason is, because faith is an act of the new nature, a believer is born of
God, (...) Joh. 5. 1. and regeneration or the new nature is not in the
understanding or will only, but the whole soul is regenerate, the very soul
has a new nature; I do not remember that Aquinas speaks of regeneration, but
only in this place, and he says that regeneration is in the soul, and the soul
is regenerated; not is though the substance of the soul were altered; but this
new nature is as deeply rooted in the soul as the understanding and will it
self; as it is with the old nature in a man unconverted, this old nature moves
the understanding to think of worldly things, and savor them, and moves the
will and affections to love worldly things, and go after them; the old nature
moves both mind and will to go this way; the old nature is the inclination of
a man to the world, to the creature, to the things of this life; now, when the
new nature comes in and a man is renewed, this new nature inclines the mind to
mind Jesus Christ, and inclines the will to affect Jesus Christ, and moves all
the soul to go that way, so that the very soul is renewed, and faith is as
deeply ^ooted in the soul as any thing else; Nay, as low as the very faculties
themselves in some sense, for it reaches so far forth as to move them after
Christ; and this faith puts forth the mind to assent to the truths of the
Gospel, and puts forth the will to rely upon Christ.

Thirdly, the Scripture plainly seats faith in the heart as well as in the
mind, Romans 10. 10 With the heart a man believes unto righteousness, neither
may a man say that the heart is put for the whole soul of a man, it is not put
for the will, the text plainly shows he means the will, because the Apostle
puts the believing with the heart, to distinguish this says from all other, to
exclude hypocrisy and all counterfeit faith* for an hypocrite may confess
with his tongue, he may have brain faith, and notional says, so much as to
work upon the outward man; but with the heart a man believes unto
righteousness; if it be a sincere cordial-faith, as he notionally believes
these truths, so his heart runs after them and is set upon them, and this is
unto righteousness; so when the Eunuch had asked Philip for baptism, I am a
believer; and what lets but I may be baptized? says he, if thou belie^^^ with
all thine heart thou may; As who should say, thou sai^st thou art a
believer, but take heed, do not deceive thy soul; may be thou ^^st an
intellectual faith, but is it an heart faith? Nay, thou may have some kind
of cordial faith, a temporary faith; but do thou believe with all thine
heart? Do thou place all thine heart, upon Christ? Do thou place all thy
ends and aims upon Christ? Do thou so reach thy self forth to Christ, that
in all things Christ have the pre-eminence? Do thou wholly resign thy self
up unto Christ, mind, and heart, and all that is in thee? If thou believe
with all thine heart I dare be bold to baptize thee, and seal thee up unto
eternal life; so that the Scripture makes faith to be not only an assent of the
mind, but an affiance of the heart in Christ.

Fourthly, it is no absurdity to say that faith is in the heart, and in
several powers of the soul, because faith is such a thing as must purify the
whole man, Matthew. 13. 33. That leaveneth the whole lump; so faith is such a
thing, that he which hathie purifieth himself, himself is the agent, all
himself is the patient; all himself is set to strive against sin and to please
God, and to draw the whole man to God; his whole self is both the agent and the
patient, faith comes in to justify the whole man, and sanctify the whole man,
and renew the whole man, therefore no wonder it is such an act as the whole man
does put forth, not only the mind by assenting, but the heart by relying, and
the affections by placing themselves upon God.

Fifthly, there be abundance of graces besides faith, that are in all the
powers of the soul, as livelihood is in the whole, and unblameablenesse, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.

Here we see that though faith be sure of salvation and justification in regard
of the event, yet it is not always sure of it in regard of sense and feeling,
Use. 2. A believer may not be sure in regard of sense.
for true faith, is not the apprehending of salvation it self, but the
apprehending of Christ for salvation; when a man places all his affiance in
Christ, and all the good he looks for, spiritual good, temporal good, help,
comfort, means, and maintenance, and particularly the pardon of his sins,
this is justifying faith; though for sense and feeling there is much
uncertainty, faith is certain for the event, the man that believes is
justified, and shall be sanctified, and saved; but in regard of sense and
feeling, it is not always certain, Joh. 3. 15. He does not say, whosoever
believes he shall have eternal life, has it, but whosoever believes in me he
shall have it, though he be afraid he shall not have it, yet if he believes in
me he shall have it certainly, if with heart, and mind, and soul, and all, he
resign up himself to me, to be guided and ruled by me in all his ways, if he
commit^ himself to me he shall have eternal life^ may be he is afraid he shall
not have it; a man has that affiance in Christ, that is confident in Christ
for salvation, and commits himself to Christ for all his comfort, and hope, and
stay, and is ^^lly resolved by the Grace of God never it have him, he is
inwardly purposed never to forsake him, he will ever set himself to please him,
he will eve^ follow his Commandments, and ever striv^ (...) his corruptions;
and whereas he may be tempted to be carried from (...), he has an inward
principle in his soul for a rule which he goes b^, that he must please God,
and not man; there is an inward rule rooted in his (...), that thus i^ is, and
this man commits himself to Christ, for audience in his prayers, for acceptance
in his duties, for the resisting of his corruptions, (...) for the salvation of
his soul when he dies, and for the comfortable resurrection of his body at the
last day; yet notwithstanding this man would give a world to be assured of Gods
favor, though he casts himself upon God for it, and commits himself, and
betrusts himself with Jesus Christ; he does so believe in him that he dares
follow him in all his ways, and he dares cast himself upon him; whatsoever it
will cost me I will follow Christ; may be it may cost me the ill will of my
friends; may be of my husband; may be it may cost me the ill will of all the
Country; yet that way I will walk, thought it cost me (...) and faggot; may be
I shall be persecuted and imprisoned, it is no matter, her^ is eternal life and
no where els^; here I come for it, and here I trust that Christ will give it to
me, it is he only that can help me, he only that can give me audience in
prayer, he only can bring me to acceptance in heaven; here I come to him for
it, and cast my self upon him in all my ways; yet may be this man would give a
world for this favor; that he has committed himself to Christ, for he would
give all the world to the shirt upon his back that he had the sense and feeling
of it, many times between hope and despair, he even staggers and knows not
what to think, yet he will cast himself upon Christ, and trust to him; yet he
has much ado to believe certainly, there is a great deal of fears and
doubtings in his faith; the reason is, when a man has trusted in Christ, and
looks upon his faith, he shall find may be such strength of worldly
allurements, such yieldings to the assents of the flesh, and himself sometimes
foiled with a paultry and petty lust; he shall find such a deal of deadness,
and so much untowardnesse, and such a company of cor^^ptions marching before
him, that he is afraid; it is true, I have cast my self upon Christ, but I doubt
my faith is not of the right stamp; not as though a man can believe in hugger
mugger, and a man knows not what he does, for a man sees it, and knows it, for
the spirit of a man knows what is in him; ask the man? Sir, do you not do thus
and thus? Yes, have you not these and these workings in you? he cannot deny it,
do you not hate your self for every sin you know, and do you not know your
own sins, and do you not grieve to see what a vile creature you are? do you
not labor after more sincerity in your ways, and more quickening in good
duties? He cannot deny but he hungers after these things, and (...) you not
still follow Christ, and cleave still to Christ, and do you not still labor to
deny your self? He cannot but confess it, why then you have faith; it is true,
says he, I go out of my self, but it is I know not how, I am at this pass, if
I perish I perish, here I stick, and here I will ad^^re, but yet I fear I am not
right; the Scripture says true, faith does thus and thus, and thus; but here I
see such a corruption so strong, and such a lust so mighty; I say, true faith
may be without sense and feeling of it, there may be much f^^re and ^rem^^ing
in regard of assurance of salvation, though a man do truly and confidently cast
himself upon Christ; and I will prove this unto you by five Arguments.

First, the event is not the object of a justifying faith, that a man shall be
Arg. 1. The event is not the object of justifying faith.
^ustified^ sanctified, and saved; this is the event of a justifying faith,
that he looks for; Now the object of a justifying faith is not the event, that
it shall fall out thus with him, he commits this to God, he believes in the
general that all that believe shall be saved; and that a reprobate may believe,
but the event that he shall be justified and saved, is the fruit of a
justifying faith; when a man has justifying faith, this is not the object of
it, but he commits himself to Christ for justifycation and salvation, he truly
believes the event shall be, that they which truly believe shall be justified
and saved, and God will help their infimities, and pardon their weaknesses; but
now justifying faith apprehends not the event that comes afterward, but faith
commits it self to Christ for the event, as I will show you by a similitude; a
man resolves to lean upon a staff, what is in this man's mind? is the object
this, that he shall not slip nor fall? no, he finds by experience that he may
fall for all his staff, but he casts himself upon his staff, fall or not
fall, and though he do fall, he will not fling away his staff; No, but he will
look better to himself afterward, he knows the fault was not in his staff,
but in his own managing of it, therefore he commits himself to his staff
still, and resolves to lean upon it; he is not sure he shall not fall, but
though he do fall, he will up again, and help himself with his staff in his
going still; he knows the staff is not in the fault, but himself; may be he
does not lean upon it, or he knows not the right way, but he is still leaning
upon his staff, and venturing upon his staff; so I say true saving faith does
not truly apprehend he is justified, as if a man could not be justified unless
he did believe it; this is the event, justifying faith is the committing
himself to God for the event, Heb. 11. 23. By faith Abraham being called of
God, went out of his own Country, etc. By faith he cast himself upon God; did
he belive now whether he should go? He could not tell, ^e believed in the
general, that God would not fail those that trusted in him; but for his own
particular he knew not whether he should go, but he casts himself upon God,
whethersoever God will have me to go, I will go; he commits himself to God at
all adventures; this is true faith, and yet the event all this while may not be
known, but a man may be much troubled about assurance.

Secondly, the event; that a man shall be justified, and sanctified, and saved,
is conditional until a man has believed; Suppose a natural man, and yet an 2.
The event is conditional till a man believes.
Elect man of God; what, must this man believe? must he believe that he shall
be justified, and sanctified, and saved? No, there is no such thing in the
Scripture; take any natural man in the world, and look from the beginning of
the Bible to the end, there is not one text that says a natural man shall be
saved; but justification and salvation are conditional till a man believes, but
when a man has believed, his justification, sanctification, and salvation is
certain; but he must believe before he can be said to be justified; now, before
a man believes justification is upon condition, if a man believes he shall be
justified and saved, so may Judas and Simon Magus, Romans 10. 9. It Is true, this
is the condition, if thou believe in the Son of God, if thou take up his cross
and follow him, thou shall be saved; this is but the condition but when a man
has believed, he is justified, and shall be saved; it is absolute now, but he
believed first; therefore justifying faith does not believe he shall be saved
and justified, for he must have faith first; it is true, if a man have saving
and justifying faith, there is the truth of the Word for it, that he shall be
saved; therefore justifying faith must be the casting off a man's self upon
Christ for salvation.

Thirdly, the event, that a man shall be justified, and sanctified, and saved;
this cannot be the thing, that a justifying faith in the act of justification
must our selves to cavils, and open the mouths of blasphemers, we must say
then this is faith; you must believe you shall be saved, and that you are in
the favor of God, and then we could not bid every man believe if it were so;
where the Gospel comes we are to bid every man to believe, what, to believe
that every shall be justified, and sanctified, and saved? No, that were a lie,
God commands no man to believe a lie, but he commands every man to believe in
Christ for justification, and for sanctification, and for salvation; Now, there
are two things that God requires of every man where the Gospel comes.

First, he requires that he believes the Word, which says, that whosoever
believes in Christ shall be saved.

Secondly, he commands him to believe in Christ for salvation, and this is
faith; the other comes in afterward; I will make it plain; the Lord said to
Ahez, Isa. 7. 9. Believe and thou shall be established, what must Ahaz here
believe? Does God bid him believe that he should be established? No, for that
was a lie, for when all came to all he was not established, but he must believe
God, and then he should be established; but he not believing in God, could not
be established; so God told Adam, if he believed, he should live; did God now
bid Adam believe he should live for ever? No, for then it had been a lie; but
he bids him believe, that if he obeyed his voice, he should live for ever;
he was not to believe that he should live for ever; so God does not command men
to believe they shall he saved, but to believe in Christ for salvation.

Fourthly, the event is known another way, and not by a justifying faith; Arg.
4. The event is known another way.
it is true, some men know the event that God intends to save them, and that
they shall be glorified for evermore, but this is known by another thing, and
not by an act of faith; the act of faith is the committing of a man's self to
God for this thing. I will set it out by a similitude, suppose I have a great
business to do at London, I am condemned to be put to death, and except I have
a pardon got to morrow, I shall be executed; I cannot go my self, for I am in
hold; but I have a friend at London, and I trust to him to go to the Court to
procure me a pardon; in the mean time the business goes forward against me,
and may be I am going to the place of execution; but still I cast my self upon
my friend that he will get me a pardon; now if my friend send me a letter, and
send me a pardon under the Kings Seal, now I know I have a pardon, but my
trusting my friend was nothing, but my casting my self upon him, and settling my
self upon him, I was confident in him; Now, when he sends down a token, and a
Seal under the Kings Majesty's hand, now I know the event, that I have gotten a
pardon. So it is with a poor creature that is under condemnation, and the
wrath of God is gone out against him, and the justice of God is threatened
against him, which way soever he looks he can see nothing but hell and
damnation, and the Gospel has told him of a friend, the Lord Jesus Christ he
can help him to a pardon, and he trusts to him, the Law may be proceeds against
him, and fears, and terrors, and may be he is upon the ladder ready to be
turned off; yet he hangs upon Christ, a pardon will come, he trusts upon
Christ, he will not go to the world and to carnal company to pacify his
conscience, a pardon will come, he casts himself upon this; and yet he is not
certain it will come, he has affiance in Christ that it will come; now, if it
be so that whereas he believes in Christ for forgiveness, so Christ sends him
a token, there is peace of conscience for thee, and joy in the Holy Ghost for
thee; and as he depends upon him for means and maintenance, so Christ says,
there is something for thee to live upon, or patience to bear poverty; as he
believes he shall be accepted of God, so here is a token, thy prayers are
heard: Now he has a token, now he may know it, Psalm. 22. 4. They trusted in
God and they were delivered; that is, they trusted in thee, and thou did
send them a token; now they knew they were delivered; it is true, a man might
know this though God should send him no token, he might know that he is
justified, and pardoned, and has title to all the mercy in Christ; he might
know it without this, but that for his own weakness, and that by two things.
First, by looking into the Word, there he might find, that he which trusts in
Christ, and commits himself to God, shall be saved; Another thing is, to
reflect upon himself; there he shall find that he truly goes out of himself,
and casts himself upon God; then here he may know it, he that believes in
Christ shall be saved, but I find that I believe in Christ, therefore I shall
be saved, but this is not the act of faith, but the knowing of it.

Fifthly, it is not the truth of faith, but the strength of faith that
apprehends the event; let a man believe in Christ; and cast himself upon him in
all his ways, Arg. 5 Not the truth, but strength of says aprehends the event.
and follow him in all his Commandments, this is faith, be it never so weak,
and this does entitle to justification, and sanctification, and salvation,
though it be never so weak; yet while it is weak it cannot apprehend the event,
it will be much afraid in regard of that; as suppose a man were learning to
swim, he believes that if he could but spread his arms and legs the water
would bear him up; now when he begins to learn, he commits himself to the
water, and spreads his arms and legs, but this is with much fear and
misgiving, and he sometimes sets one leg on the ground, and he has but little
sense and feeling of the waters bearing him, because he commits not himself to
the water; but the more and more he commits himself to the water, the more he
finds the water bears him, and now he can fling away his bladders, and swim
over the river; he did believe before that the water would bear him, but when
he did commit himself to the water he had a great deal of fear, and could not
swim to any purpose, but when he had learned the art; then he committed
himself to the water, and then he could spread his arms, and legs, and
swim; So when a man comes first to believe in Christ, he thinks I should be
the happiest man in the world, I should be in a better estate then Kings and
Princes ^f I could believe; and withal it makes him to believe in Christ, and
to deny himself, and cast himself upon Christ, plucks up both his feet, and
commits himself to the water, and fling out himself upon Christ, sink or swim;
yet at the first this is very weak, and sometimes he does it, and sometimes he
does it not; and sometimes he is feelling for this, sometimes for that; and
sometimes he does not pray well enough, and is not humble enough, this is
nothing but trusting to himself; may be a pleasure comes, he cannot deny it, he
cannot commit himself to Christ, the weakness of this is the reason why he
cannot apprehend the event, for a strong confidence in Christ carries all along
with it, it will reflect upon it self, and gather all these things, and be
assured he will not only have confidence in Christ, but also be confident for
the having of those good things he believes in him for.

HEB. 11. 8* By faith Abraham being called to go out into a place which he
should afterward receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out not
knowing whither he went.
WE have spoken of Effectual Calling, what a great mercy it is, that God should
vouchsafe this unto us, and the abundance of benefits it brings to a man; we
have showed how it is differenced from in-effectual Calling; How a man may know
whether he be effectually called, yea or no; and so we came to show you how a
man answers this call, and he answers it only by faith, and so we made a
digress to speak of faith what it is, that it is an affiance in Christ; not
every affiance, but a rooted affiance in Christ; and now we come to take up the
point again, that it is only faith whereby a man's calling is made effectual;
when a man is first called out of darkness into marvelous light, out of the
Kingdom of sin into the Kingdom of God, it is only faith that answers that
call; and so it is ever after, whatsoever God calls a Christian to do, or to
leave undone, it is faith that makes a man obey this call.

The Apostle in this Chapter does set out many commendations of faith to exhort
the Hebrews, and all Believers, and all persons to the getting of it, and to
labor to have it grow in them, and to make much of it, as being a most
excellent Grace of God; and he commends faith two ways.

First, by the description of it in the first verse, Faith is the substance of
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen; a Believer hopes for great
matters, though he sees not any of them; may be he is yet a poor miserable
contemptible creature in the eyes of the world; yet he hopes for great matters,
he hopes for a glorious resurrection, and for an excellent triumph over sin,
and death, and hell; and to have his body and soul for ever in the Kingdom of
Christ Jesus; you will say he sees none of these things, he hopes that God
will bless him in all his ways, and be with him in sickness, and in health,
in misery and prosperity, and in all estates, and that he will do him good
while he lives, and when he dies he sees none of these things? No, says the
Apostle, Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things
not seen; though many think there is no substance in these things, yet faith
does deliver the substance of them unto him, and it is an evidence that he
shall certainly have them, and it is as it were a Sacrament; therefore the
Fathers call it the Sacrament of faith, and the Sacrament of hopes, and the
Sacrament of repentance, because they are certain and sure tokens and pledges
of those things that a Christian looks for.

Secondly, the Apostle commends faith by a long Catalogue of believers, of Holy
Fathers, and Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Judges, and Worthies from the
beginning of the world, and he shows there was no worth in them, but it did
proceed from faith; and this he does,

First, generally, in the second verse; By it the Elders obtained a good
report; he speaks of them all ingeneral, he calls them Elders, a reverend grave
company, and he amplifies this by giving a general ground and reason why faith
can build upon nothing as it were to see to, and yet is able to gather great
matters, though it see little or nothing, ^^rse 3. You may see this (says he)
by Historical faith; For, through says we understand that the worlds were made
by the Word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which
do appear; though nothing was before a man's eyes, yet through this faith he
might see an whole world out of nothing; so, though the world, and flesh, and
blood see nothing, yet he that believes in God he is able to raise a world out
of nothing, he may look for these things at the hands of God, though for the
present he sees nothing.

Secondly, he does divide these believers into four several ranks.

The first is, the Holy Fathers before the Flood; and he instanceth only in
three for all the rest, as Ab^l, En^ch, N^ah, Verse 4, 5, 6, 7.

Secondly, the Holy Patriarchs from the Flood to the time of Moses, and he
instanceth in five, not as though there were no more, but he contents himself
with these, Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, from ver. 8. to the 22.

And then in the third place, he takes all those Worthies from Moses to the
time of the entrance into the Land of C^naan, and he does instance in Moses's
Parents, and then in Moses, then in the children of Israel, then in Rahab, from
Ver. 23. to 31.

In the fourth place, he reckons up all those Heroes, from that time, to the
time of the Maccabees, and Names Gideon, and Barach, and Samps^n, and Jophtah,
and David, and Samuel; and then he reckons them up only in general, the
Prophets, and Martyrs, and Confessors, under the persecutions of cursed
Anticchus. Now in all this Catalogue, he shows the admirable effects of true
justifying faith, what faith is able to do when a man is a true believer in
God, what great matters he is able to atchieve; it gives a man the testimony of
a good conscience, and makes him able to do the things acceptable to God; it
makes a man believe things incredible to sense and reason; it makes a man
forsake all and follow God; it makes a man do or suffer any thing for Christ;
it makes a man so precious, that the world is not worthy that he should dwell
among them, that there should be any such person in such a base place as the
world is; it is an excellent thing, and it is set out most admirably, what
glorious things faith does enable a man in the strength of God to do; and his
scope in all this is, to exhort them to abound in faith, and they that have it
not, to use all means for the obtaining of it, and come by it, and lie at God,
and to be trading in the means of Grace, and never be at quiet till they have
it, and when they have it, to endeare it, and labor to abound in it, and
persevere in it to their dying day; now among all this grave, and venerable,
and rev^rend society of believers that he here reckons and sums up, he calls
out Abraham in this text to speak of him, and that he speaks of him in this
place is this; that when God called him to leave his Country, and Kindred, and
Fathers house, to leave his inheritance, and all his friends and acquaintance,
by faith he was able to obey this call, By says (says he) Abraham being
called out to go into a place which he should afterward receive for an
inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowing whether he went.

Doct. So that the Doctrine which I observe from hence is this; that Doct. It
is says that makes a man obey the call of God.
it is faith that makes a man obey the call of God, the command of God, whether
it be the first call and command, for the coming out of sin, or all after
commands whatsoever, it is faith that makes a man obey them; if a man have
faith, though he had never so stubborn and perverse an heart before, though he
were never so set upon his lusts, and sinful courses before, faith is that
which will make a man lay it down and disavow it, and oppose himself against
it, and he shall no longer live in it; as soon as ever faith comes into the
soul it makes a man obey God, it brings a man home to God, to do his will and
to walk according to his directions, and to be at his dispose, and to commit,
and commend, and resign himself wholly to God in all his ways; this is the
only thing that heales a man's backslidings, this is the only thing that
draws a man home to God, this is the only instrument whereby a man is tied to
God himself, whereby a man does fetch down all the graces from above, so long
as a man is stubborn and perverse, and walks after the flesh, and goes on in
any evil way; he has no faith, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 78. 32. For all
this they sinned yet still, and believed not his wendrous works; that is, they
were disobedient, therefore certainly they had no faith, for if faith once
looked into their hearts, it would have made them to discard their sins, and
it would have made them obedient to God, it would have pared them from the
flesh, and weaned them from their own desires, and would have made them to
give up themselves to God; therefore seeing they went on in their sins, it is
certain, they did not believe, for faith only makes a man obey God, and
wheresoever it is, a man obeys God.

Reas. 1. Because faith sees an indissolvable couple of attributes in God,
Reas. 1 Because faith sees Gods purity and mercy to be in^eparable attributes.
that cannot be separated and severed; as it sees his grace and mercy to draw
him forward, so it sees his purity, and justice, and holiness, and
righteousness, that it dares not but obey God, as it does discern his grace
and mercy to make him perfectly to trust in God; so it sees another thing in
God, that God is of that nature that he must be served, and worshipped, and
obeyed. Therefore you shall see Noah, though the building of the Ark were an
endless work, and a costly, and chargeable work in the eyes of men, it would
cost him many years to build, and he could not look after his calling, and
after the world, but it would take him up for an hundred and twenty years, and
set all the world a talking of him, and mocking at him for it; yet when God
commanded him to do it, faith made him do it, and how did faith make him do it?
Heb. 11. 7. By faith Noah being forewarned of God of things not seen as yet,
moved by fear, prepared an Ark; fear moved him, faith made him do it; but how
did faith make him do it? It moved him with fear, and so made him do it; it
made him see God was an holy and righteous God that would not be dallied
withal, and this moved him with fear, and he durst not but do it; whatsoever
it put him to, he durst not omit it; faith makes a man that he dares not be
bold with God, it takes away the impudency of the heart, and the venterousnesse
of the soul; as long as a man does not believe, he dares make bold with such
Commandments of God, as he likes not, he will omit them for all him; but when
faith comes it reveals God to the soul, and shows who he is, and what nature
he is of, and that he is such a one as will not be dallied with, but his
Commandments must be done, and his will must be obeyed, or else woe to that
man; it shows to a man the infinite Majesty of God, and sets it before a man's
face, that he dares not go on in any thing contrary to Gods will, but obey God
in whatsoever he commands him, and abstain from whatsoever God forbids, as
Paul says, We dare not make our selves of the number, or compare our selves
with some that commend themselves, 2 Cor. 10. 12. He knew God had forbidden it,
and he durst not but obey. So, 1 Cor. 6. 1. Dare any of you having a matter, go
to Law before unbeleevers? As who should say, you are not believers if you do
it; faith would show you what God is, and what an inglorious, and what a bitter
thing it is for you to do it, how dare you do it?

Secondly, Faith does not only look upon Christ as a Savior, and a Redeemer,
but also as a Lord and King, when Christ comes to a man, 2. Because ^aith looks
on Christ not only as a Savior* but as a Lord
when faith comes into the soul: Christ is called our Lord Jesus Christ, as he
is a Jesus, so he is a Lord; and faith does not only receive him as a Jesus,
but submits to him as to a Sovereigne; Faith takes them both together, faith
will not let a man live Lordlesse, it knows he must take Christ as a Lord as
well as a Redeemer; as faith takes off the guilt of sin, so it puts the yoke
of Christ on; Is Christ divided? says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians 1. 13. So I
may say, is Christ divided? Can he be disjoynted himself from himself? Can
people mangle Christ in pieces, and divide him asunder? May be thou will have
him as a Jesus, but thou will not have him as a Lord, then thou can not have
him at all; as Peter says, Acts 2. 36. Be it known to all, that God has made
the same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ; As he has made him
a Christ by anointing him to be a Savior, to bring men from sin, and to
bring them to Gods Kingdom, and save them from wrath; so he has made him a
Lord, he has set him up as a King upon his Holy Hill of Zion; look as it was
with Jephtah, when the Gileadites would have him to save them from the
Ammonites, shall I be your head then, says he? and he made them to swear
before the Lord that they would make him their Head, or else he would not
deliver them; so if thou will have Christ to deliver thee out of the hands of
thine enemies; sin is an enemy, and the Law is an enemy, and the Devil is an
enemy, and the world, and thine own flesh is an enemy; if thou will have Christ
to deliver thee from these enemies, shall he be thy Head? He has sworn an
Oath, That we being delivered from the hands of our enemies should serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives, Luke 1. 73. He has
sworn with an Oath, that that man whom he delivers from his enemies shall
serve him in holiness and righteousness, and shall not live as he list, he
shall not live Lawless, he shall take Christ's Laws as well as his Merits; as
well Christ's Government as the imputation of his truth and righteousness, he
shall take the one as well as the other; Now, it is an easy thing for a man to
believe by a presumptuous faith that Christ is a Jesus, but here is the
difficulty to take him as a Lord; No man can call Christ a Lord but by the Holy
Ghost, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 3. He does not say no man can say Christ
is a Jesus, the Devil and presumption can make a man say so, and every man
hopes, and bears himself upon this, that Christ is a Jesus, but no man can
truly confess him to be a Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; unless the Holy Ghost
enable him, as our Savior says, David by the Spirit called him Lord; he
speaks of himself, Matthew. 22. 43. It is a great matter to submit to Christ as
a Sovereigne, as well as to take Christ for a Savior; now faith sees both
must be done, it must take Christ under both relations, as he must take him
under the relation of a Redeemer, so under the relation of a Lord as to be
saved by him, so to be guided and swayed by him in all his ways, and to be at
his disposing in all his courses; thus faith sees Christ is propounded in the
Gospel, and thus Christ embraces him, it cannot have him in one respect, but
it must also have him in the other, and so faith brings in obedience.

Thirdly, Faith sees another couple that cannot be disjoynted and severed one
from another, and that is this; as faith tyeth the heart to 3. Because faith
gleweth the heart to the Commandments as well as to the promi^es.
the promises, so it glueth the heart to the Commandments, these go together,
and when faith reaches forth the hand to the one, it reaches forth the hand
to the other, they are tied with bonds of adamant that cannot be severed,
Psalm 119. 56. When faith will go to God in virtue of a promise to do this or
that for him, he reaches forth the hand to the Commandments too. I am the
Lord thy God, thou shall have no other Gods but me; As who should say, if you
will look upon me as your God by faith, then look that you have no other gods
but me, look that you honor me in all my ways, and stoop to me, and obey my
Word, as the Lord propounded the one, so he set before them the other, a man
forgets that God is his God by faith, if he keeps not his Commandments, beware
(says Moses) least thou forget the Lord thy God in not keeping his
Commandments; How can a man believe in God, when he forgets that which he
should believe? When a man forgets to be subject to God, and to give up himself
in all his ways? The Promises and Commandments are tied together with bonds
of adamant, and no man can pull them asunder, as it is with sin and the
threatenings, if a man go on in sin, he shall be sure to have the threatenings
light upon him, they are bound together by bonds of adamant and everlasting
coards; let a man do what he can, if he howl and roar to God to take away his
plagues, to take away Hell fire and damnation; if he go on in sin, it will
never be, they hang together in an everlasting truth, The way of the wicked
shall perish; and if a man sows iniquity he shall reap misery, says the
Wiseman, As a man sows, so he shall reap, do not deceive your selves; We are
marvelous apt to reason as Eve did, to put in perhaps, perhaps you shall dye;
Nay, assuredly we shall dye if we go on in sin, and will not live that life
which God has set before us, the life of faith, the life of God, the life of
Heaven, the life of true Holiness and righteousness; if we will not submit to
this, and give up our selves to be brought under it, we shall assuredly perish,
never did any man live and go on in sin, but he dyed in perdition. Never any
man lived a wicked and ungodly life, but had a wicked, wretched, and damned
death; if a man do go on in sin he shall be sure to have the threatenings of
God light upon him, he cannot avoyde them; so it is on the other side, the
Promises and the Commandments go together; and if a man do observe the
Commandements' of God by a true and lively faith, he shall assuredly have the
promises; and if he reject the Commandments, or be un^ound in the doing of
them, he cannot have the Promises; if he have the one, he must have the other;
he can never make a faithful Plea for Peace, for Pardon, for Heaven, or any
thing that God has promised, that binds not himself over to God to do his
will in every thing; Nay, the strength of Faith puts forth it self in as
strong an act toward the Commandments as toward the Promises, and if there
be any difference, it is on the Promises side, for the Promises are more
supernatural then the Commandments, for they were once written in the heart,
therefore the Commandments are not so supernatural; a man was once acquainted
with them, but the Promises of Mercy, and Pardon, and Redemption are more
supernatural, and we see this in poor weak believers that go on and are
enabled to make good conscience of their ways, and to be very careful of
sinning against God, and walk in very good strictness, diligence, and
circumspection, and yet have much ado to apply the Promises, and appropriate
them to themselves. I say, brokenhearted people that are weak in faith, in
regard of personal confidence, may yet notwithstanding be very strong in the
doing of the Commandments of God; The reason is, because obedience flows from
a direct act of faith, and this bearing a man upon the Promises from a reflect
act of faith, it flows from a consciousnesse of obedience, when a man is
conscious that he is sincere; then, and never before can a man have confidence
that the Promises are sealed to him, this is a reflect act of faith; but it is
a direct act that makes a man obey Gods Commandments, so that faith must needs
work obedience, for if there be this blessed couple propounded to the soul in
the Gospel together with the Commandments, Faith looking on both takes one as
well as the other.

Fourthly, there is another close couple that faith looks upon, and that is, as
upon a Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, so also to a fitness 4. Because faith
looks to a fitness for heaven as well as a title to heaven.
for the Kingdom of Heaven, and one is as needful as the other, as things
without which a man cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; Now, Faith as it
helps a man to a title to Glory, so it helps a man more and more with fitness,
because it sees it cannot be otherwise; When David had committed his two foul
sins of murder and adultery, though he had not lost his title to the
Kingdom of Heaven, yet he could not enter into it, he could not have actual
possession of it; Why? Because he was unfit, Heb. 12. 14. Without holiness a
man cannot see God, though a man has all the titles in the world, though he be
elected to it before all worlds, yet till he is made fit for it, he cannot
enter into it, flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; as the
Apostle Peter speaks, it is an inheritance holy and undefiled, and a man must
be holy, before he can be made partaker of it; Joseph must shave himself before
he come before Pharaoh. Ahasuerus women must be prepared, and purified with
spices and odours, and mirrhe, Hest. 2. 11. And then they came before the King,
when they were prepared and adorned, and made sweet and persumed; So a man must
first be prepared and fitted for the Kingdom of heaven, or else there is no
admission into it, heaven is too fine a place for adulterers, and drunkards,
etc. As soon as ever the Angels of heaven, though glorious creatures, began to
sin against God, God thrust them out of heaven; they left their habitation,
it was too fine for them: and do you think the Lord will admit the Devil into
heaven again in his members? what a thing is it when every drunkard, and
profane person shall think himself meet company for the blessed trinity? it
cannot be, God will never take such foul loathsome creatures into fellowship
and Communion with him, they are too near him already in the world, and
therefore he will fling them out of his presence into Hell; in Heaven is
nothing but beatifical vision, viewing of God, and delighting in God, and not
thinking a thought but of God, and therefore no room for those that are empty
of grace, and not fitted and prepared for it; now faith knows this, and
believes this, and therefore as it lays hold on Christ for title, so it never
leaves till it has gotten fitness from Christ, as the Apostle speaks, Col.
1. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father who has made us meet, etc. God makes all
meet for Heaven that he brings thither, and till they are so they cannot be
admitted thither; if a man will go to heaven he must be a vessel of honor, 2 Timothy 2. 21. Therefore Faith purifies a man's heart, pares off a man's flesh,
weanes a man from the world, and knocks off a man's cursed corruptions more and
more, and pulls down a man before God, makes a man stoop to Gods Covenant, and
to be hol^ and righteous as he is; it knows, unless he be made fit for Gods
Kingdom, he can never come there; we should look to this, and it should make
us fear, and tremble, and look to our selves, for unless we be fit for the
Kingdom of Heaven we shall never have abode there, John 3. 3. Except a man be
borne again, etc. That is, except a man be made meet for the Kingdom of God
he cannot come into it; Except he have Heavens frame and disposition, and
Heavens conversation, except his conversation be in Heaven here, he can never
come there; and this is the reason we are so often called upon to be godly in
Christ Jesus, to walk in pureness and holiness of living, because no unclean
thing shall enter into the heavenly Jerusalem; without are Dogs, the Lord
counts them Dogs that shall never enjoy his presence; this is another reason
why Faith works obedience, because if he will have Title to the Kingdom of
Heaven, he must look to be fitted for the same.

Fifthly, because Faith is eminently all that a man is to do, it is the whole
work of a Christian, John 6. 29. This is the work of 5. Because faith is
eminently all that a man is to do.
God, etc. That is, this is eminently all the works of God. But is there no
work but this? Yes, there are many other works, but this is the work of God
that ye believe, because this is eminently all that God looks for, as the
Apostle speaks, 1 John. 3, 22. This is his Commandment, that ye believe, etc.
Is there no other Commandment but this? is this all we must do, and no more?
No; but this is eminently the Commandment, there are other Commandments, but
all are included in this of believing; so faith is eminently all graces, all
other graces are but the daughters and brood of faith, they grow out of faith
as out of the spring and root, so that do this and do all, do but believe in
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and what will thou not do? it will make thee
give over thy sins, and be humbled and mortified, it will make thee give over
vain company, and delight in all goodness, make thee zealous and servent, and
teach thee how to pray and be thankful to God; it will fill thy mouth with
laughter, and thy tongue with joy, it will make thee do any thing if thou
believe, Acts 16. 31. As who should say, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and
this will make thee do all, there will be nothing left, as Christ says, If
thou believe, all things are possible; So I may say, if thou believe all things
will be done, and thou will stick at nothing, be backward in nothing, but wilt
be brought to obey God in every thing; it is like the turning of the Cock, if
the Cock be turned, the water will flow forth; so if a man's heart be opened by
faith, all the heart runs to God; a Windmill, if the Sails go, the stones
and all go; so if ^aith be once working and operating, all the soul is turning
it self toward God, though never so Heavy, and Carnal, and Vain, and Earthly
before, yet now all is going in the ways of God; As the Mother of Christ said
to the servants of the marriage, Whatsoever he ^ids you do, do it; So faith
says thus to all the soul, look whatsoever Christ John 2.
commands, look you do it, mind those things he bids you mind, affect that he
affects, retain that he bids you remember; it is like Abner, that brought all
Israel to be the servants of David; so faith when it comes into the foul, it
brings all the faculties of the soul of the whole man to be subject to the Lord
Jesus Christ; thus you see that faith works obedience in a man.

The first Use is this, to answer a demand that will arise out of the hearts of
people, when they hear that Faith makes a man to obey.

Quest. How does it make a man obey?

Answ. I answer, by setting before a man the corruptions of his own heart, and
what woeful stubbornenesse is in the same; it makes a man see those innumerable
corruptions in the soul, and how deeply they have eaten into the soul; it makes
a man see what a loathsome creature he is, and what a deal of rebellion there
is in his will, and mind, and thoughts, and affections, and what oppositions
there are against the doing of Gods Holy Will; he sees that if he will obey
God what little help he shall have from himself, from his own will, his own
reason, his own parts, his own nature, though he had never so good a nature;
Nay, how he shall be hindered, and hampered, and opposed by himself; faith lets
him see this, and so pulls him down before God, to abhor himself in dust and
ashes; it was thus in Paul, Romans 7. 24. O miserable man, etc. It made him find
this, that he could not do the good he would; thus faith empties a man of
himself, and makes him to renounce himself, and makes him not to stand upon his
own feeet, never to stand alone, never to go about any thing but with the help
of Christ; it makes a man see what a damned will he has, what a damned reason
he has, what a damned heart and disposition he has: O! says he, here is
Wisdom indeed, here is a disposition indeed, I will never be ruled by this
disposition, and he looks upon himself as an undone creature if he follows his
own desires; here be desires indeed, and thoughts indeed, and here is an
horrible frame, and this makes him renounce himself: and thus faith works
obedience in a man, by driving of him out of himself, and dividing a man's self
from himself, that he will not be led by his own thoughts, nor carried by his
own imaginations, it seeth' Hell in all these, and that he can do nothing
without Christ live in his heart by faith; without faith you can do nothing,
says Christ, and faith tells a man this; it makes him know what a wretched
creature he is, and what a damned nature he carries about with him, and that he
must not follow, and please, and give satisfaction to that at any time. Now, a
natural man may see his insufficiency of himself, and the vileness of his
nature, but conscience only shows him this; but because he has not faith, it
does not humble him, and put him down, but he will follow his own thoughts, and
go after his own reason for all this, he has not true and saving faith, to
reveal these things in power to him, but when faith comes into the soul, it
does it to the purpose; it makes a man not to be a little affected with his
sins, but ^oundly affected, and makes him see that he is undone for ever if
he go on in that course he was wont to do; and thus faith working in this
fashion delivers a man over to Christ, by taking a man off from that which was
his Pilate and guide before, and making him to be guided by Christ.

Secondly, Faith works obedience by carrying a man to God, it 2. By carrying a
man to God.
makes a man seek to God how to obey; Teach me O Lord to do thy will, Psalm.
143. 10. Faith carried him to God; so faith does wheresoever it is, it brings a
man to God, that God would be pleased to strengthen our apprehension, that so
we may look upon his will, and to fortify our understandings that we may
conceive of all his ways, with a Divine and heavenly understanding, and to
fortify our wills, that the feebleness of them toward God may be removed, it
cries to God from day to day, that he may not do as he has done, nor live as
he has done; faith wheresoever it is, drives the soul to God, and to lie at
him from day to day, to guide him, and teach him, and instruct him, and show
him his ways, and reveal unto him his Statutes; as David, Psalm 119. 35, 36.
Incline my heart to thy Testimonies, and not to Covetousness; As who should
say, Lord, here is my heart, will, and whole man, I beseech thee make me walk
in thy ways, I am very loath and untoward, I beseech thee put some strength
into this will of mine; when I go to thy Word, let me hear it with trembling;
when I go to prayer, let me go to it with an heavenly mind; incline my heart
this way, and make it stand bent this way; it is true, when natural men are
convinced that all strength is from God, they pray too, but this is not faith
in prayer, but faith makes the soul that it cannot be quiet, but it must obey
and stoop to him in all his ways.

Thirdly, Faith works obedience by making a man improve all the abilities that
God has given him already, and this is the best way to 3. By making a man
improve all his abilities.
increase them, Matthew. 13. 12. When a man has grace, has a Talent, and makes
use of it, and has it to some purpose, and lays it forth, that man shall
increase his Talent and abound, God will give him more; now as faith works
obedience by showing a man his own wretchedness, that he must not yield to his
own desires, and be carried by his own vain imaginations, that for his part
would conclude such a course is lawful; and why not? Though God says the
contrary, faith makes him consider that, and so drives him to God, and so also
it makes him go and improve those gifts, and parts, and strength that God has
given him already, that he may lay it forth, and use it to the uttermost, as if
a man be haunted and baited by any lust, deadness, security, coldness in
duty, or some other lust; Now, Faith when it would make a man obedient to God,
to crucify these lusts, it makes a man look out to see what power God has
given him, what abilities God has lent, what helps and furtherances God has
reached out unto him, and he takes all to fight against that lust; has he
understanding? that he employes to think of the evil of the sin, to consider
of the danger of the sin, how he may avoyde it, and what course he may take
to overcome it; if God has given him a memory, he lays it forth to remember
and recollect such things as he has heard, and has been told of, he lays
all his Talents forth that ever he can to master that lust, and so works
obedience; as faith drives a man to God for help, so look what help God lends,
and what Talent God puts into his hand, he lays all forth for the working of
obedience, he will not let any one lie idle, but will employ all to help him
forward in obedience.

Fourthly, Faith does work obedience, by making a man to rely upon Christ, it
does look unto an union with Christ, it does make 4. By making a man rely on
Christ.
a man to cast himself upon Christ for power against his sins, it does
extract vigor from Christ against corruption, it does distill and draw down
graces from him, faith is the pipe whereby grace is conveyed from Christ to the
soul, and faith opens the passages of this pipe that it may descend down to the
heart from the Lord Jesus Christ; faith is a marvelous excellent thing, it does
extract efficacy, and validity, and power, from the life and death of the Lord
Jesus Christ, for the crucifying of the flesh, for the mortifying of the deeds
of the body; and thus, it changes the heart, and brings willingness to every
duty by doing thus. I say, faith goes to Christ, and casts it self upon him
for all things it wants, for the performance of all good courses and ways;
Thus David got power against his carnal ^eare, when he was afraid of Saul on
one side, and the Philistines on the other side; how does he fence himself
against this, Psalm 56. 4. I put my trust in God, and therefore need not fear
what man can do unto me; and so faith was able to root out his fears; So it
was with the remnant of Israel, Zeph. 3. 13. They shall do no iniquity; you
will say, how can that be? Can flesh and blood do that? As long as a man is
flesh and blood he will be doing some iniquity or other; how shall a man be
able to do no iniquity, and let no iniquity have dominion over him? it goes
before in the twelfe verse, They trust in God, They trust in God, and so shall
(...) iniquity; When a man does trust in God, and has faith to rely upon him,
and distill down power and strength from Christ, this will help him to do no
iniquity, and help him to oppose himself against all his corruptions, and fight
against the strength of all his lusts, as the Apostle says, Romans 3. 13. let us
therefore cast off the works of darkness. You will say this is very strange,
are we able to do this? can we tame our own hearts, or change our own minds?
are we able to purge out these corruptions? is this possible? how shall a man
do this? Why? put on the Lord Jesus Christ, (in the next words) go to him by a
true and lively faith, and then you may be strong in Christ, and able to do
every good Duty, and subdue every sin, receiving strength from Christ; when a
man is to go through thorns and briars, a man is not able to go through; but
if he put on his Boots and his Gloves, etc. he may; so when a man goes on in
his own ways he cannot avoid sin, pride, and covetousness, and vanity,
how shall he avoid these things? it is true, he cannot avoid them if he go
naked, but if he put on Christ he may; it is a similitude taken from a garment,
and that in two respects.

First, it must be fitted, and then it must be put on; so Christ first takes
measure of all the infirmities, and frailties of his people, and communicates
to them a suitable grace; are they troubled with afflictions, then he measures
out patience to bear them? are they persecuted, then he makes them able to
stand for his Name? are they to pray, to deny themselves, to sight against
Satan, he measures them out a suitable proportion of his grace and Spirit to
him? and now when a man has his Gloves, and all provision on, he may go about
hedging, or ditching, or any business; so when a man has put on Christ, and
is armed with grace and strength from him, what is it but a man may do? In that
very moment wherein a man casts himself upon God in Christ, and does lay hold
upon Christ by a true and lively faith, this grace is made over to him the same
moment, may be the grace of victory he must stay for a while, but there comes a
grace of sincerity from God that very moment that he believes in Christ, though
may be there comes not that power from Christ he would have, yet that power,
that he shall be sincere, and will never let corruption make him a slave; he
shall never walk after the flesh, never be stubborn and worldly, never do as
the wicked do, never depart from God as unbelievers use to do; he shall depend
upon God, and wait upon him, and adhere and cleave unto him, and continue a
faithful Soldier to Christ, fighting against sin and corruption to the
death; a man shall have power from Christ to do this, if he have a true and a
lively faith, By faith, ^aith the text, Hebrews 11. 5 En^ch walked with God;
how is it possible? could he walk with God? what a strange kind of life is
this? How averse is the heart of man from it? People cannot abide such
strictness to have commerce, and society, and communion with God, to keep
close to God, and not go away from him, how could he do this? Why? By faith he
walks with God: So Abraham, God bade him leave his Country and all he had;
you must think a thousand things were objected to him; you must think he had
abundance of reasonings to and ^ro in his mind; I am in years, unfit for
travel, and I shall now travel God knows whither; and I am now where I was
bred and brought up, and I have hear means; and maintenance, and friends, and
know how to live; and for me to go into a strange Country where I know no
body, and I know not what may become of me; and for me to leave certainties for
uncertainties, all the world will count me a fool; how did he do this? By
faith he obeyed, says the text, etc. Faith helped him with power to look up
unto God, and cast himself upon God, that helped him against all difficulties,
that helped him against all the backwardness and dullness of his nature; he
committed himself to God, and would do it, he packt up himself, never once
standing upon the matter, but away he goes; By faith he obeyed, etc. So, By
faith Abel offered up a more acceptable sacrifice then Cain, Hebrews 11. 4.
How is that possible? Was he not made of the same metal Cain was? was he not
borne out of the same womb, dug out of the same pit? As apt and prone to
serve God after an earthly manner as Cain? How was he able to offer up a more
acceptable sacrifice? He had no better sheep then Cain. Why? it was done by
faith, he had faith in God, he renounced himself, and was divided from
himself; he was united to God by faith, and resolved to hang upon him, and so
leaned upon him for every thing he had promised, and so got acceptance with
God. So Rahab, by faith entertained the spies, Hebrews 11. 31. It was a hard
piece of service, a marvelous difficult piece of business; you must think she
thus reasoned with her self, shall I entertain Traitors? Shall I betray my
own Country? The Town will see it, it will come to the Kings ear, and I
shall become a Traitor to my Country and Prince, and a thousand to one but I
shall lose my life if I suffer them to be here; but how did she overcome this?
By faith, by faith she entertained the spies, for all it was so hard, for all
death was at the door, yet by faith she was able to do it; What shall we say
to Gideon, Baruch, etc. Who by faith subdued Kingdoms, etc. Hebrews 11. 37?
Out of weak they were made strong; How, did they work righteousness? They were
as weak as others, but says made them of weak, strong, faith strengthened
their wills to that which was good; faith corroborated their resolutions and
purposes toward the pleasing of God; and resisting corruptions faith made them
strongly resolve that they would not be led by their own wills, they believed
in God, and so were able to do it. What shall I say of Moses, Hebrews 11. 24?
This is a wonderful thing, that he should refuse to be called the son of
Pharoahs daughter; a mean man born, and yet refuse to be called King Pharoahs
Grandchild! who would refuse such excellent hopes of honors and preferments?
may be he might be King afterward? Nay, when he was come to years to do it;
if he had refused it when he was a child, before he had come to years it had
been no such wonder, it might have been attributed to his childishness; Nay,
but he was come to years, and was a learned and understanding man; what man
would have done this? Indeed rare are such persons that are able to renounce
themselves in this fashion, but you see what faith can do.

Quest. Thus you see how faith does work obedience, and now if Quest. How does
^aith fetch power from Christ.
you would know how faith does fetch power from Christ to do these things.

I answer, it is by two ways. Answ. 1. As an instrument.


First, Faith is an instrument whereby God does by the acting and placing of it
aright upon him, let out that power which is in Christ to a poor soul; that
that power which is in Christ is to him, and that goodness which is in Christ
is to him, that he shall have grace for grace, an answerable grace, for every
grace in Christ, Eph^s. 1. 19. The exceeding greatness of his power, to
usward that believe; When we believe the exceeding greatness of his power is
to usward, it is not only a power in God, but it is for us, and we may take
that power and fetch it from God, and obtain of him to put it forth. You know
that Christ has promised to take away the stony heart, etc. He has made such
promises as these, to pull down strong holds, to overcome Satan and all the
enemies of our ^oules, to pour out his Spirit upon his people, as water upon
the thirsty ground; now as soon as ever faith comes into the soul it goes to
these promises, and takes hold of them, Lord here is such a promise, Lord make
me a new heart, make me obey this Commandment, and overcome such a sin, and all
the power that is in God, it is to him-ward.

Secondly, Faith does fetch down power from. Heaven in a moral manner, 2. In a
moral way.
by considering the exceeding greatness of the recompense of reward, as its
said of Moses, Hebrews 1. 25. I say, faith looks unto Christ, looks unto the
favor of God, unto the forgiveness of sins, and Title to Gods Kingdom, it
looks unto eternal life, unto those admirable joys that are at Gods right hand
for evermore, which are promised to them that believe; it sees these things,
and this makes him able to deny any thing, to overcome any thing, to go about
any thing; shall I have Heaven, the favor of God, a Kingdom; shall I be happy
for ever? Shall I have all these things if I will pray and hear the Word? Obey
God, and give over vain company, and join to Gods people, and hate all manner
of evil, if I will labor to cross my own thoughts and desires and approve my
self to God in all my ways, shall I have all these things? this makes him
able to do it; he looks to this, and so goes about it, and when the flesh
shall object hardness, and difficulty, and opposition, and loss of comfort,
and loss of carnal ease and delight; faith goes and sets these admirable
things against them, it sets Heaven; and the Kingdom of Heaven, and Christ,
and the joys of Gods right hand against them, and this makes him do it; it
sets the will of God against his will, the favor of God against the favor of
men, the joys of Heaven against carnal joys, eternal happiness for evermore
against the sufferings here for a moment, weighs one in one scale and the other
in the other, and so works with them.

Here we may see what little faith there is among people, certainly there Use
2. See what little faith is in the world.
is but little faith, because if there were much faith, there would be much
obedience given to God; we should have admirable Towns, gracious
Congregations; we should have never a drunkard, never a profane person, but
all Saints, and holy men, and women, every one would be thinking of God and his
ways, and heavenly minded; if there were much faith, people would have their
lives changed, and their conversations altered; as Christ says, When the Son
of man comes, shall he find faith upon the Earth? So may I say, if the Son
of man should now come among us, should he find faith among us? He should find
it very rare; for this is certain, there are not very many that profess faith;
drunkards, and the greatest company of profane persons are such as have not
the face of holiness and faith; and amongst this little number that profess
it, how few are there that have true faith indeed? You see none have true faith
but those that are obedient unto God; true faith does bend the soul to God, it
makes the soul spiritual, and holy, and humble, and clean another man from
that he was before, that he shall be resigned over to God, to live at his
dispose; this is true faith, therefore faith is hardly to be found upon earth;
it is a pitiful thing to see how little Gods will is regarded up and down; and
though God be our Maker, and his hands have formed us, though we profess we
are his people whom he has redeemed, though we know he has sent Christ into
the world, and the blood of his own Son is cried up and down in the streets,
and calls upon men to believe, and take hold on it; though we do know these
things, yet for all this equity of obedience to God, and notwithstanding the
necessity of obedience, how do people slight the will of God? it is his will
we should be fruitful under the means, heavenly in holy duties, fervent in
calling upon his Name, that we should have the true fear of his Name before
our eyes; it is his will that we should serve him in sincerity all the days of
our lives, that we should stand for him, and glorify him before men; that we
should walk with God and be strangers upon earth, and wean our selves from the
world, and be taken up with him, more then with any thing in this life, that we
should count nothing dear for him, and deny our selves in every thing, it is
his will for us to do these things, but who looks after these things? As if we
were possessed with a legion of Devils, we go slighting, and contemning, and
breaking all bonds of equity, and necessity of obedience, and Gods will is not
obeyed, his worship is not promoted, his name is not feared, few give their
minds to do these things; if God had not thrown millions of devils into hell
for ^^nning against him; if God had not revealed his wrath against sin and
i^quity, and all unrighteousness; if God had not showen how jealous he stands
upon keeping his Laws, and observing his Commandments, and his holy and
heavenly Word; if God had not revealed himself unto us, it had been another
matter, but he has revealed these things, yet how s^^ure are we? He has made
it appear, Romans 2. 9. Tribulation and anguish shall be upon every soul that
does evil, and cursed be the man that obeys (...) w^rds of this Covenant,
Jer. 11. 63. And he will come in ^laming fire to render veng^ance upon all that
obey not the truth, 2 These. 1. 8. These things are spoken and delivered, and we
know these things, and confess them; yet God is not respected for all this;
Nay, such is the impudency of men, that they will acknowledge that God ought to
be obeyed, and served, and it is good to serve him, and it is a dangerous thing
not to serve him, and yet for all this they will not do it, as if it were
nothing to be damned, and as if they would try whether they can bear hell; nay,
such is the impudency of men's faces, that notwithstanding they have heard they
are unconverted and their hearts are not subject to God, yet they hope they
have true faith in God, and their sins are infirmities, whereas you see it
cannot be true faith unless it make a man to be obedient to God in all his
ways, and bind a man in a perpetual bond to God for ever, never to depart
from him.

Thirdly, it may be an Use of examination, to see whether we obey God Use 3 For
examination.
or no, for if our says be the faith we hope it is, it will make us obedient.
Evidences of true obedience.


First, then true obedience is a willing, affectionate, hearty obedience, 1.
Willing and hearty.
Prove. 3. 1. My son, let thy heart keep my Commandments; the Lrod will have
such obedience as proceeds from the bottom of the heart, not when a (...)
heart is dull, and dead, and hangs off; but when the heart pour^s forth it self
in his ways, and performing his gracious pleasures from day to day, this the
Lord requires, that it be done with the affection of the heart, as well as the
thing be done, in the thing done, and the wicked may go as far; nay, further
then the sincere, they may multiply duties as well as the other for the things
done; but here is the thing, a wicked man does duties hear^lesly,
unaffectionately; but a child of God does them sincerely, and willingly, and
lets out his heart and affections upon them all; God lo^^s a cheerful giver, 2
Cor 9. 10. He loves a giver that gives with all his affections; so he loves a
cheerful comer to Church, that is glad to hear a Sermon, and his heart leapes
to hear the Word of God, and he is affected with it, he loves a cheerful
praying, one that in prayer poures out his soul before him; he loves a cheerful
comer to the Sacrament, that delights to show forth the Lords death till he
comes; God does not love a man unless ^e does this with all his affections; as
it is said, it is good to be zealous in a good matter, the worship and
Commandments of God are good matters; now, it is good to be zealous in these
matters; nay, to have the cream, and flower, and chief of our affections set
upon these things; we are acquainted with the ways, and histories of grace,
and we can speak thereof, but it does not sink down into our hearts, it does
not warm us, nor put any heat into our souls, we are not quickened and moved
by these things; we know Gods attribute, his power, and wisdom, and mercy, and
justice, etc. But none sink down into our hearts, they affect us not as they
ought to do, where are our affections in prayer? We pray, and come to Church,
and to the Lords Table, but where are our affections in all these things? The
Lord cares not for these services, that have not affections to spice them and
sweeten them, and beautify them; the Lord loves when a man serves him with all
his heart; when the will hangs off, it is base service, and the Lord regards it
not; as the Lord loves that we that are Ministers should preach with a ready
mind^, 1 Pet. 5. 2. That we should preach with gracious affections, and be
affected in the Pulpit, and desire from the bottom of our souls to do good to
the people, and yearne over the people; the Lord loves these things when we do
them willingly and heartily; so he delights in people when they hear and call
upon his Name with affection; when we go about Gods Commandments as a Bear to
the stake, God abhors it; may be God commands a man to do such a thing, he does
it, but it is hard says he; when money is to be fetched out of his purse for
good duties, it is hard says he; and when he must go against the wicked, and
pull the ill will of the Country upon him, may be he does it, but it is hard;
the Lord distasts this, the Lord loves a cheerful giver, and a cheerful worker,
a cheerful Minister, and cheerful people; now if faith comes into the soul, it
will not only work obedience, but cheerful obedience, and from the bottom of
the heart.

Secondly, true obedience makes a man resign himself to God, it makes a man to
be altogether at Gods dispose; I am thine, says David, he looked 2. Works
resignation to God.
upon himself as if he were altogether at Gods dispose, as if he were his, and
not his own; You are not your own, says the Apostle, you are bought with a
pri^^, 1 Cor. 2 6. So that is true obedience, when a man gives up himself to
God; many will do things that God commands, but they know not how to do them
with resignation, to be altogether at Gods dispose; they love to be called Gods
servants, but they will be only retainers; as many will get to be servants to
some Gentleman, but it is only for their own advantage, to save their purses,
to have the Gentleman's countenance, these will not dwell with the Gentleman,
but in their own houses, and when he has some great strangers at a Feast, or
when he rides abroad in state, then they will attend upon him, but yet they
will live at home, and be their own men; so most people are but the Lords
retainers, this is no obedience at all, it is none of faiths obedience.

Thirdly, true obedience puts forth all a man's strength to God; Thou shall 3.
It puts forth all a man's strength to God.
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all thy soul, and all thy
strengh; Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his Holy
Name, Psalm. 103. True obedience lets forth all that is in a man to Christ, Mat.
4. 20 When Christ called Simon, and Andrew, they flung away their nets and
followed him; it was all the living they had, and yet they flung away all to
follow him; so when he spoke to Matthew a Publican, faith came no sooner into
his soul but he followed him presently, Mat. 9. 9 Though it was a rich office,
he was a Knight by his place, as Cicero speaks, it was worth five hundred
pounds a year of our money; yet as soon as ever Christ called him, he le^t
his place and went after Christ; so when a man will part with purse and
friends, and all he has, and fling all at Gods foot, and give up all to him,
this is true obedience; now if we have not this, we have not faithful obedience.

THE KILLING POWER OF THE LAW.
Romans 7. 9. For I was once alive without the Law, but when the Commandment
came, Sin revived, and I died.
IN these words the Apostle shows Two things; First, The Division of the Text.
What a jolly man he thought himself to be whilst he was a Pharisee, before the
Lord wrought upon him by the Law: Secondly, What a miserable wretched creature
he saw himself to be when the Lord took him in hand, and discovered his sins
unto him: before the Law came home unto him, and convinced his Conscience, he
thought himself to be alive; but when the Commandment came, Sin revived, and he
died.

1. In the former we may observe Two things:

First, The jolliness of the Apostle, he thought himself to be alive; I was
alive without the Law, I was a Pharisee, and thought my self to be alive; I
fasted twice a week, and prayed every day, and made long Prayers each day: when
he considered how he walked thus in all the Ordinances of God, he thought, if
this was not to be alive, he knew not what it was to be alive; I was alive once
without the Law.

Secondly, We have here the cause why he had this good conceit of himself, it
was because he was without the Law, the law of God had not convinced him, it
had not discovered his miserable and wretched estate unto him; though he had
some understanding in the literal sense of the Law, yet the Law was not yet
come home unto him, he was as yet without the Law, and that was the reason of
that good conceit he had of himself, he did esteem himself to be alive.

And then again in the latter part; When the Commandment came, Sin revived, but
I died. There we may also observe Two things.

First, The Law showed him what a wretched estate and condition he was in, for
all his self-conceitednesse, sin revived, and I died: Though I thought before I
was alive, yet when the Commandment came, sin (...), and I died: I saw I was a
dead man, when the Lord took me in hand to deal with me, and let me see how my
case stood before him. Howsoever I thought my self to be in a good case before,
now I saw I was but a dead man; I did not see such evil, and such a mass of
corruption before; but when the Lord discovered my self unto my self, and when
I saw the Spiritualnesse of the Law, then I saw that sin was alive in me, and I
died; when I saw how I ought to behave my self in my affections, and in my
inward man, then sin revived, and I for my part was a dead man, I was sain to
come down from those high conceits, and imaginations I had before.

Secondly, We have here the Cause why he was thus brought down, it was because
of the Commandment of God which came home unto him, the Law of God came home
unto his Conscience, and discovered unto him, how it was with him, and it made
him to shake in the apprehensions of his own estate, that he was but a dead
man, and that he had gone to Hell, and perished everlastingly, if he had
continued in that estate and condition.

I intend at this time to treat of the former part, Without the Law I was once
alive: And here Two things must be opened: First, what does the Apostle mean,
by without the Law. Secondly, What does he mean when he says, I was once alive.

1. For the First, When the Apostle says, he was without the Law, he does not
mean simply, that he did think himself without the Law, that is, without the
binding Authority of the Law, for so no reasonable creature is, yea, indeed no
creature at all is without the Law of God, for there is a Law of Obedience
imposed upon all the Creatures, and the unreasonable Creatures do keep the Law
that is imposed upon them by God; and howsoever reasonable Creatures depart
from this Law and break it, yet they are under the binding power of this Law;
therefore the Apostle does not thus mean that he was without the Law, therefore
we must know, that to be without the Law is taken Four ways:

First, To be without the Law, is meant, to be without the promulgation and
publishing of the Law, and so the Heathen only are said to be without the Law,
as we may see, Romans 2. 12. there the Heathen are said to be without the Law:
that is, without the promulgation of the Law, it was published only to the
Jews upon Mount Sinai, and so Paul was not without the Law.

Secondly, It is taken in regard of the literal knowledge of the Law, and so
ignorant people are said to be without the Law of God; they know not the Law of
God; and in this sense Paul was not without the Law, he was trained up in the
Law, he was learned in the Law, for he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel,
Acts 22. 3. so that he had the logical meaning of the Law, and was able to
speak of the points of Religion, better then a thousand millions of carnal men,
he had the literal knowledge of the Law.

Thirdly, It is taken in regard of the moral Obedience to the Law, and so
wicked men are said to be without the Law, as we may see, 1 Timothy 1. 9. The Law
is not given to a Righteous man; but to the Lawless and Disobedient; wicked men
are lawless, they live as if there were no Law, Drunkards and Profane persons,
as they are said to live without God in the world, so they are said to live
without the Law, as if there were no Law to bind them; they are people that are
not to be held within any compass, they take notice of no command to rule in
their hearts, and rectify their lives; and in this sense Paul was not without
the Law neither, for he lived after the most strict and exact Sect of the
Pharisees, Phil. 3. 4, 5. If any man think he has whereof he may trust in the
flesh, I much more, circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the
tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as touching the Law a Pharisee; He
was one that fasted and curbed himself, yea, he kept two Fasts a week, (as
those Pharisees did, that were of the better rank) he Prayed daily, and
performed the duties of Religion, and there was no outward Ordinance of the Law
which he performed not; he was one that was conformable to the letter of the
Law, according as he understood the Law, he was Morally Obedient to the Law; he
was no extortioner, nor unjust person; no, he did the works of the Law, and
those things contained in the Law; nay, there was no body that could challenge
him with any blame; none that were familiar with him, could say any thing to
tax him withal, when he was in his ignorance, and blindness; therefore in this
sense he was not without the Law.

Fourthly, Therefore in the Fourth place, we are said to be without the Law in
regard of the spiritual sense of the Law, and so Paul was without the Law; he
did not clearly understand the divine and spiritual sense of the law; he did
not see the glory and the beauty of the Law of God, how it did discover all the
breaches of Righteousness, how it reached to all the inward parts, how contrary
the Law of God was to all his nature; thus Paul understood not the spiritual
nature of the Law, he had not the spiritual understanding of the Law, and thus
he was without the Law.

2. Now for the other words, I was alive once.

1. It is meant here spiritually toward God; he does not mean naturally, for
he was alive naturally, both before and after the commandment came; but the
meaning is, he did not think himself to be such a wretched cursed creature as
he was; he thought he had the fear of God in him, and true Obedience in him; he
thought he had a spiritual kind of life, as we may see Romans 6. 11. Ye are dead
(says the Apostle) to sin, but are alive to God in Jesus Christ. And, Romans 7.
13. Give not your members as weapons unto sin, but give your selves unto God,
as those that are alive from the dead, i. e. As those that have the pure and
spiritual life of grace in them: So Luke 15. 24. This my son was dead, and is
alive again; that is, spiritually alive again; he was a dead creature, he was
departed from his Father, which is the fountain of life; he was dead in sins
and trespasses, he was a dead man, but now he is alive again, he has spiritual
life again.

2. To be alive is taken to be conceitedly so, alive in his own conceit, he
has no true life in him, yet he does imagine that he has life in him, he
thinks he has life, and is dead, Rev. 3. 1. I know thy works, thou have a name
thou live, but thou art dead: Here the Church of Sardis did imagine she was
alive, and others conceived so; she seemed to be alive, and yet notwithstanding
was dead, she had no true life in her: she seemed to be alive, not only in the
sight of others, but in her own apprehension; she seemed to be alive, and yet
was dead; now this is the meaning of the words, without the Law I was alive
once; that is, I thought my self to be alive; I apprehended my self to be no
dead man, no damned man: I thought not my self to be under the wrath of God,
and one that should perish evermore, if I continued in that estate wherein I
was; I hoped better things of my self, I saw these signs of Grace and Life in
me, and I thought I was alive indeed, till the Commandment came, till the Law
of God was pressed upon my Conscience, and showed me the contrary; I thought my
self to be a very live man, and one that had some hope of eternal happiness,
and one that might enter into glory, I took my self to be alive; Thus we see
the meaning of the words.

Now the Point I intend at this time to insist upon, is the liveliness of a
Obser.
carnal man's heart, before the Law comes home to him, and is pressed to him,
and shows him his damnable estate, and that he is dead in his sins and
trespasses, he has some color of Righteousness, that he is moral and civil,
and orderly, and he has something that is like Grace and Life, he has some
hope toward God, and has some kind of obedience, he seems to be obedient to
the commandment of God; before he is humbled by the Law of God, he is a live
creature. Here St. Paul shows it by his own example, Without the Law I was once
alive; noting out unto us, how it is with every unhumbled man, with every
unmortified man, that is not yet converted to God, he has many things to say
for himself, but he does not understand the pureness of the Law, the Law has
not yet killed him, it has not yet pulled him flat down before Almighty God: A
man that is unhumbled by the Law of God is a live man, he will not be
persuaded, that he is a dead, damned creature; he does apprehend and hope he
has life: it is so with men, before their Conversion, they will not believe
that they are damned creatures, and they think it uncharitableness in any to
say they are damned creatures, and dead creatures, they will not believe it; so
long as the Law is not charged upon their Consciences, so long as they see not
how it is with them, they do verily apprehend that they have life in them,
their hearts are not killed, their spirits are not dead within them, they are
not pulled down in the apprehension of their own cursed estates before Almighty
God: this is the thing I intend to insist upon.

2. For the Proof of the Point, we may see, 1 Timothy 5. 5. there the Apostle
speaking of Widows that lived in pleasure, says, She that lives (...)
pleasure, is dead while she is alive; that is, dead in pleasure, dead in sin,
dead in the vanity of her own heart, and yet such a VVidow lives, she lives
not only a natural life, but she is alive in her own conceit in regard of a
spiritual life; for if she conceived she were a dead creature, a damned
creature, such thoughts would kill the heart of any creature under heaven, it
would break the neck of all her pleasure; but in that she took her pleasure, it
was a plain token that she was not killed.

Now for the Opening of the Point, I will do these Three things:

First, I will show what this liveliness is, and wherein it consists.

Secondly, I will show what the Effects of it are.

Thirdly, The Uses.

First I will show what this liveliness is, and it consists in these Three
things; I could branch them into Four, but I will reduce them into Three Heads.

1. First, It consists in the nonappearance of a man's dead, and damned estate:
So long as a man's dead and damned estate does not appear unto him, so long a
man thinks he is alive, and that he is not a dead man, he is not a man that
has the sentence of condemnation lying upon him, so long as the Law has not
come, and showed a man his wretched estate, and made his damnable estate appear
in its own colors unto him, why he is alive man, he conceives himself to be
alive because the Law of God has not convinced him of the contrary: if the
Law of God does seize upon a man's heart, and in its own colors appear to a
man's eyes, and hold it self as a glass to a man's understanding, and show him
his wretchedness, and what a cursed estate he is in before God, this will kill
his very heart, and break the liveliness that is in him, and make him burst
out into outcries, Oh! I am a dead man, I am a damned man; so that the
liveliness that is here spoken of, consists in the nonappearance of a man's
dead and damnable estate: As for example, an Adulterer, his damdable estate
does not appear to him, he knows not that he is a dead man, as Prove. 9. 18. He
knows not that the dead are there, and that her guests are in the depth of
hell: When he goes to lie with his Whore, and commit his wickedness, he does
not think that they are dead and damned men that are there, nor that they are
in the pit of Hell. Though his Conscience may tell him, that he is wicked, and
sinful, and wretched, and that he is half dead; yet he is not a dead man, he is
not absolutely a dead man, he does not know this: It may be he will confess
it, Lord, I am a dead man, Lord, I am a damned man; it may be he will confess
this in his Prayer, because he has some light: but yet his heart is not taken
down, the liveliness of his heart is not killed. I will prove it to you: for
let another man, a Minister of God, or a child of God, say he is a dead man, a
damned man, one that lies under the wrath of God, he will deny it, and say he
is uncharitable, and judges hardly, and why may he not be a live man, and a
good Christian? he hopes he is, he does not know that he is a dead man; as the
wiseman speaks, Prove. 14. 12. There is a way that seemetht right to a man, but
the issues thereof are death: that is, there is a way that seems to be a way of
life, and a man seems to be alive that walks in that way; but the truth is, it
is a way of death, and a man that goes in that way is a dead man, and a damned
man; but yet in the mean time, while he walks in that way, it seems to be a way
of life unto him; there is a nonappearance of the deadness, and damnednesse
of a man's estate and condition that walks in that way, and therefore it seems
to him to be a right way, and a way of life, and there is great hope in him
that he shall live for evermore; and many men do walk in that way, and
therefore it seems to him to be a right way, and a way of life; it seems right
to a man, but the end thereof is death: And this is the First thing, wherein
this liveliness consists, The nonappearance of a man's dead and damned estate.

2. Secondly, It consists in Performance; he is able, as he conceives, to do
the duties that God commands; he has wisdom and ability at home to go about
his Affairs; he has understanding and supply at home; he has life, and
sufficiency to go about these and these duties and performances; let the Law
tell him, he must be sober, he has life to avoid the Alehouse, and if he
commit a Drunken Act, he would have you think he has grace to be sorry for it;
and let a man tell him, he is a dead man, he has no grace in him, no life in
him; he will tell you, he does thus and thus, he hears Gods Word, and he Prays
to God, and he Trusts in God, and he Believes in God; your telling of him this,
does not kill his heart, he thinks he is alive for all this; nay, let the Law
of God, come and tell him, He is a dead man for all his doing; this will not
kill him neither, so long as the Lord himself does not open his eyes, and clear
his eyesight, and discover his sins, and convince his Conscience; though the
Law say he is a dead man, and a damned man, this does not kill him, he can wait
upon God and perform these and these duties. Then let the Law of God say, He is
a dead man for all this, he must deny himself: why so he will; I confess,
Lord, I am an unrighteous man, a wretched man, a sinful creature, and all my
righteousness is as menstruous rags; and now he thinks all is well, but the
Law of God, has not yet come home unto him, and showed him his heavy estate,
but he is alive in regard of the performance of the duty, and thinks verily he
has life at home in him; whereas, if the Law of God did come home and charge
his estate upon him, and show him, what obedience the Law requires, what
severity, and truth in the inward parts, it would break a man's heart, and kill
him, notwithstanding all performances: but in the mean time that a man's heart
is not killed, and the Law has not given him his deaths VVound, he thinks he
is alive: Cry aloud, (says God) lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, show my
people their Transgressions, and the house of Israel their sins, Isai. 58. 1.
there the Lord looks upon the people as dead, wretched sinners, and abominable
people, but yet notwithstanding they thought they were alive in performances,
as we may see, verse. 2. Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways,
even as a Nation that did righteously, and had not forsaken the Statutes of
their God: they ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, they draw near to me,
saying, We have fasted, and thou regardest it not. We see here they take
delight in approaching unto God, they take delight in Gods Ordinances, and seek
God early, they can do thus, and thus, and are alive in all performances; but
that man whose spirit the Law has pulled down, and the Lord has convinced him
of his infinite inability to perform the Law, he cannot see any liveliness in
him, unto any performance. Let any duty come, it kill; his heart: I should now
hear the Word of God, but my heart is unprepared, and my ear uncircumcised,
and I cannot hear aright. Let an opportunity be offered to Pray, it kills his
heart; I should now call upon the Name of the Lord, but I have such a cursed
heart I cannot Pray, I cannot spe^k one right word before God. Let an occasion
be offered of holy Conference, it kills his heart; Alas, says he, I want pure
language, my tongue was never touched with a coal from the Altar, my lips have
not ability to drop forth favoury speeches, I am not able to speak one syllable
aright to Gods glory; it kills his heart, he sees no life at all in him,
unless he can have life from without, and ability from without, he is dead,
all is nothing to him, the law has taken away the liveliness that was in him:
But he that is not humbled by the Law, he is alive, he has life in himself, it
is nothing with him to Pray, and go to Church, and hear Gods Word, it is
nothing, but thrusting to do the duty; he has life in him to do duties, and
wait upon God in his Ordinances, but when the Law comes home to him, it plainly
lets him see that he has no life in himself to do any good, he must seek for
life and abibility from without, else he is a dead man, he can do nothing in
this case: David in this case cannot look up: Mine iniquities are gone over my
head, I cannot lo^k up, Psalm. 40. M^ses, he is a man of uncircumcised lips, and
cannot speak unto Ph^raoh; Paul cannot do any thing that is good, In me
dwells no good thing, Romans 7. And so for the rest of Gods people, when the
Law has killed them and laid them dead, in regard of any performance, they
must have life from without, there is no life at home, no grace at home, no
understanding at home, they must go out for all: but a carnal man, he is alive
unto all performances. Many a man is like unsavory Salt, good for nothing, but
to throw upon the dunghill. He never received the Holy Ghost, and yet he will be
inducted into a Living, and take a Pastoral Charge upon him, as if he were able
to perform the Duty of a Minister, and take the Charge of Souls upon him. So
Ananias will be a Husband, and Sapphira a Wife; Athalia will be a Queen, and
Nimred a King; and Abimilech a Judge; they are alive to discharge all these
Duties: thus men are alive, the Law of God has not killed their hearts, and
pulled down their spirits; it has not made it appear unto them, what wretched,
cursed Creatures they are. This is the Second thing, wherein this Liveliness
consists.

Thirdly, This Liveliness consists in a presumptuous hope; he conceives that
he is justified before God, and that God will not damn him, but forgive him his
sins. There is nothing can make a man's heart more full of life, than to think
that he is righteous before God, and that God will not impute his sins unto
him: there is nothing can make a man more alive, then this. If they think they
are justified before God, they have then a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be
God (says the Apostle) even the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again, to a lively hope, by
the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead. So these men have a hope, that makes
them lively, and full of life; as a poor man that has some grounded hope of an
Earthly inheritance, it makes the heart lively: Poverty deads the heart; he
that has nothing to maintain himself, and those that belongs unto him, it
deads his heart; but if he has some hopes of an hundred pound a year, and his
hope is grounded, if he has sure hope of it, and he makes no doubt of it; it
makes his heart full of life: so when a man does believe that he is in a good
case, that he is delivered from death, that he is in the estate of grace, when
he has some probability that God has justified him from sin; this breeds an
hope in him of an eternal Inheritance, and this hope, the consideration of it,
makes the soul full of life; There is nothing can make a man more lively, then
a hope that he is justified before God, and that God will not impute his sins
unto him. Now when a carnal man conceives he is righteous before God, and that
God will forgive him his iniquities, that God will not damn him, nor count him
a dead and a damned man; so long as a man does imagine this, he must needs be a
lively man; he is alive in his own apprehension; nay, all the delights in the
world, cannot make a man so full of life, as this hope. It is not men's
following their pleasure, that makes their hearts so full of life; as to have
hope that the Lord does not account them dead men, that they are justified men,
and righteous men, that they have salvation to show for, Heaven and eternal
happiness to show for, that they shall go to heaven. But if now the Law were
charged upon a man, if he knew that he were a dead man, a damned man, it would
pluck down his spirits, and make his spirits dead, for all his pleasures. It is
the conceit that men are Justified, that makes them so full of life; so long as
the Law does not come home to a man, and point him out in his colors, and make
it appear to him, that he lies under the wrath of Almighty God, that the Lord
does account him an abominable, wretched Creature, so long as he does not
apprehend this; especially if he have any good Gifts, and Parts, and Qualities,
and Moral Obedience to the Law; doing good Duties, and a general laying hold
upon the Promises, and a hope they belong to him; this makes him alive, Phil.
3. 9. Paul when he was a Pharisee, and did Moral Duties, and performed Moral
Obedience to the Law of God, he thought he had Righteousness of his own; he
calls it there, his own Righteousness, he so apprehended of himself; now this
is that which makes men alive, when they conceive, that they have some
Religion, and some Grace. You shall have many men and women that hate the
Servants of God, and yet think they are godly men, and have Grace and Life in
them. We may see it, Acts 13. 50. there it is said that the Jews stirred up
certain devout and honorable women, and raised Persecution against Paul and
Barnabas, and expelled them out of their Coasts: Though they hated Paul and
Barnabas, yet they are said to be devout, and honorable women. They imagined
they were very Devout, they conceived they were Religious; How many men and
women are there, that think they are Righteous, and they will do many Duties,
and take many good Courses; in so much, that it would pity a man to think they
should go to hell? they will be very Zealous, they will be very Earnest against
Drunkenness, and cry out against the abominations of the times; they are
mavelous Devout and Godly, and yet a man that is Devout and Godly in truth
and in deed, they cannot abide him, but hate him. Now if the Law should come
home unto them, and discover how indeed it is with them, it would humble their
souls, and pull down their spirits, and make them dead; so that this
presumptuous hope, that men are in good terms with God, and that God will be
merciful to them, and forgive them their sins; this makes them to be alive.

2. We come now to the Second thing, and that is the Effect of this ^iveliness,
what Effects it works in the heart; And the Effects of this Liveliness are Four.

1. First, It makes them sound and heart-whole, like a Boil unlaunced, it is
yet sound. The true sight of sin, and wrath of God in the soul, is able to
break the heart of any man; it is able to dead his spirit, and kill all the
Liveliness that is in him, and make him have little life to go on as he does.
But so long as the Law of God is not come home to a man, though he have no
Title to Heaven, though Hell be the Portion of his Cup, yet he is as sound as
can be, as heart-whole as may be: Let carnal comfort come, he can take it; let
pleasures come, he is able to delight himself therewith, and go on in his
course as if he ailed nothing, Prove. 18. 14. the Wise man says, The spirit of
a man will sustain his infirmities, but a wounded spirit, who can bear? When
the Lord comes to wound a man's heart with the sight of his sins, and the
fearful condition he is in, what a cursed creature he is, having no Mercy, and
being out of Christ; having no Pardon, no Grace, no Holiness, but lies under
the Curse of God: If the Law this come home, and wounds his Conscience, he is
not able to bear it; this man, let carnal Comforts come, he is not able to take
them; it kills the heart. Look as it is with the Stomach, if it can take meat,
and digest it, it must needs be alive; for if the Stomach be dead, it can
digest nothing. So for the Taste, If a man's Palate, and all the instruments of
the taste be dead, he takes no delight in any meats: So there is a kind of
soundness in the Soul, that is the reason why a man can delight in carnal
pleasures, in Drinking, and Sporting, and in Profit and Gain. There is a kind
of soundness, and ^iveliness in the Heart; the heart is not yet broken: If the
Law come, and take the Hearts life away, this will pull down the Heart, it will
make a man's heart even break, it will pull down his spirit: But a man whom the
Law has not yet humbled, and showed him his damned estate, his heart is yet
whole, and sound. When the Law of God had but a little killed Ahab^ heart, you
might see it in his very gate, he went softly, he could not tread so
confidently upon the ground, as he was wont to do; it tamed his very steps, it
is wonderful how his heart was broken; it appeared in his very going up and
down. When the Law comes home to a man, it is able to kill his heart, and makes
him Soul-sick, and makes him cry out, O the wretchedness of my heart; it makes
a man sick at the heart, it lies like a heavy Plague upon the heart and
conscience, it will make a man at deaths door with his sins; it will make him
say with Paul, When the Commandment came, Sin revived, and I died. But another
man, though he has evident demonstration that he is a dead man, yet the Law of
God has not pulled down his heart; sickness will pull down a man's Stomach: so
when the law of God comes home to a man's conscience, and makes him sick, it
makes him yield, and pulls down his stomach. Many men are crazy, and sickly;
and yet they lie not by it, but walk up and down, and go abroad; but if they
were heart-sick, it would pull them down, and make them lie by it. So many a
carnal man, may have some qualms of sin, but yet their hearts can go abroad
after profits, and pleasures, after vanities, and delights; they can go abroad
for all this. But when the law comes home, it will pull down a man's spirit, and
make him heart-sick. This is the meaning of that place, The whole need not a
Physician, but the sick Mat. 9. 12. Every carnal man, so long as he is not
humbled, and broken under the sight of his sins, his heart is yet whole, his
spirit is yet sound, he is not yet wounded; as the Prophet Isaiah speaks, Isa.
1. 6. From the crown of the h^ad, to the sole of the foot, there is nothing,
but wounds, and swellings, and sores full of corruption; there is no soundness
in him: He is indeed full of wounds, but the skin is yet sound, it is not
broken, he fells it not; the law has not yet discovered his estate unto him.
This is the first effect of this livelynesse; it makes men to be sound, and
heart-whole.

2. The Second effect of this livelynesse, when a man is alive in the
nonappearance of his dead and damned estate; alive in performance, alive in
presumption, and self-justifying, and self-hopes; The effect of it is, that he
is fearlesse; the more lively, the more fearlesse. First, the Object must dead
the heart, before it can make the heart fear; so long as the heart is s^out,
the livelynesse that is in the heart, is able to keep out fear: So the
livelynesse of a sinner, makes the heart fearlesse and secure. A man would
wonder how any creature durst provoke God; it is almost beyond the reach of
true reason, how any creature should dare to provoke God; to consider what
infinite danger he is in, to have the wrath of the God of heaven and earth to
hang over his head, to be under the hand of revenging Justice; to pull down all
the Woes, and Plagues, and Comminations of God upon the Soul; that a man should
do this, and yet be secure, it would make a man wonder at it. But a man that
has this livelynesse, he can provoke God, and yet be secure, as J^b 12. 6.
those that provoke God are secure, the reason is, the law of God has not taken
down their hearts, the law of God has not deaded their spirits; they are alive
in presumption, and imagination, and therefore though they provoke God, they
are ^ecure, and fear nothing. It is the disquietnesse of a man's heart, that
makes him fear; therefore so long as a man's mind is quiet, and is not
disturbed, he is fearlesse: So long as the law has not disquieted a man's mind,
nor broken the rest of a man's Soul, nor disturbed his conscience, but tells
him, go on in quiet; he spends his days in security, he fears nothing;
whereas, fearfulness, and trembling, and horrible dread, would overwhelm him,
if the law of God should come and take away his life: It is fear that deads a
man's heart, as we may see, Mat. 28. 4. when the Angel of the Lord roled away
the stone from Christ's Sepulcher, it is said, For fear of the A^gel, the
Keepers trembled, and became as dead men: There is the effect of fear; if the
law did but open men's eyes, and paint out before them, how it is with them, how
they are liable to Gods wrath, and under the sentence of condemnation: If they
were once thus feared, it would make them seem as dead men: the Drunkards would
be so afraid, that they would become as dead men: All wretched men, all
ungrounded Christians, all that are not truly alive toward God, it would make
them become as dead men; and it is the deadness of the heart that makes men
fear, and such a man cannot be secure. Carelessenesse and fear, are two
contraries, as Ezekiel. 30. 9. In that day shall Messengers go forth from me in
Ships, to make the careless Ethiopian afraid, and great pain shall come upon
them: The Prophet there makes these two contraries; they shall be full of fear,
to rouse them out of security: so the cause why men are careless to get
Repentance, careless to get deliverance from sin, careless of their walking
with God; the reason is, because of this damnable liveliness that is in their
hearts, they are not yet deaded by the Law.

3. Thirdly, Another effect of this liveliness is this, it makes the heart
stiff; what a deal of stiffnesse is in the hearts of carnal men? Let God forbid
sin, they are stiff, and will still continue in their sins, as the Prophet
speaks, the heart of this people is waxed stiff, their hearts are mavelous
stiff; the reason of it is, because the Law of God has not taken away their
livelynesse, it has not humbled their hearts, and pulled down their spirits:
whereas if the Law had past upon them, and the consideration of their estate
were rooted in their minds, it would make their stoutnesse to yield, and their
stiffenesse to come down; infinite is the stiffenesse of a man for want of this
work of the law: Tell a vain gallant of his locks, how s^^^^ly will he reason
for it? Tell a profane person of the lewdness of his course, how stiftly will
he argue for it? This is for want of this killing work of the law.

4. Fourthly, The last effect of this liveliness is this, it makes the heart
peark, and brisk; what a deal of brisknesse, and pearknesse do we see every day
in the hearts of men, because their hearts are not taken down? I will give you
two or three Instances; If a man have a little knowledge more then others, he
is proud, and brisk, and peark; and he will be somebody, he will be talking,
and thinks he has such a deal of knowledge; what is the reason of this, that he
is so peark? It is because the Law has not made it known unto him, that he
knows nothing as he ought to know. 1 Cor. 8. 2. There says the Apostle, If a
man thinks he knows any thing, he knows nothing as he ought to know. If the law
of God did show him he were a beast, and a bruit for all his understanding; if
it did discover unto him, his blockishnesse, and blindness, and ignorance,
that he knows nothing of the Mysteries of Grace and Salvation, this would pull
down his pearknesse; take another man, that has more knowledge, and can speak
better a thousand times, if the law has showed him his estate, and truly
humbled him, all h^ brisknesse is taken away, the law has taught him such a
lesson, that he cannot be peark: Oh! says he, I know nothing, there is no man
more foolish then I, I have not the knowledge of the most High in me; though he
have never so much knowledge, and gifts, and parts, yet the law has discovered
his estate unto him, and pulled down the pearknesse of his spirit. Again,
another man is ready to carp at every word, every little occasion will make him
on the top of the house, his heart is so brisk, that it is up upon every little
occasion, but when the law comes home unto him, this will pull down all his
pearkness; alas, he angry at a word speaking? The law has told him how he has
offended God, and provoked his Spirit from time to time; he is now cooled from
being so peark, to be angry at every word. So take a man that is full of
pleasure and voluptuousness, and is ready to be vain and foolish, every
pleasure puts life into him; but now let the law come, and be charged upon his
conscience, and then all his pearknesse is presently down, he is not able to
look up, he sees so many sins discovered by the law, that he is not able to
look up: Jam. 5. 1. Go to now ye rich men (says the Apostle) weep and ^owl for
the misery that shall come upon you. If the law were charged upon rich men, it
would make them weep and howl; rich men are fullest of pleasure and delight,
and farthest from weeping and howling, but if the Law were charged upon their
consciences, it would make them weep and howl, and have little heart to be so
pleasant.

I come now to the Uses, and the First Use is for Instruction, to show us the
reason, why there are so many men and women among us, that think Cor. 3. 6. The
very letter of the Law is able to kill as many of us as are in this estate and
condition; therefore the cause of this liveliness, and security, is because we
are strangers from the Law of God, our eyes were never open to behold it, the
Law of God never came home unto our hearts.

The Second Use is this, When we find our hearts to be brisk and peark,

Thirdly, This takes away the imputation that is laid upon the Word of J^remy,
thou make the knees feeble: so the Law infeebles the knees, and takes away
the spirits of a man; why here we see that the Law of God will do so, it is the
Property of the Law to do so, wheresoever it comes, it kills the heart, and
pulls down all the pearknesse of it. The Law, it will ever break a man's bones,
as David speaks, Let me hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou
have broken may rejoice, Psalm. 51. The Lord had broken his very backbone by the
Law, and now he could not rejoice, Isai. 57. 15. I the Lord dwell with him that
is of an humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble: When
the Law of God has broken a man's heart, and made him contrite, he is a dead
man, till the Lord comes to revive him, and raise up his spirit.

I come now to the Second part of the Text, When the Commandment came, The
latter part of the Text Opened.
sin revived, and I died.

Here also, as in the former part, are Two things to be expounded:

First, What does the Apostle here mean by reviving? When the Commandment came,
sin revived.

Secondly, What does he mean by dying; I died?

When the Law and Commandment came, and discovered me to my self, and showed me
what a damnable thing sin was, and what a wretched dead creature I was for
committing the same, and how I lay under the guilt thereof, sin revived, and I
died^. Therefore, What does the Apostle mean by sin revived? I Answer, The
Apostle does not mean here, as if sin were indeed dead in him, before the
Commandment came: for sin is alive in every carnal man's heart, before the
Commandment comes, and therefore he cannot mean thus, when the Commandment
came, sin revived, as if it were truly, and really dead before; for his sins
were not dead in him, when he was a Pharisee, his sins were not mortified, when
he was in his unregenerat^d estate and condition sin was not dead in him, that
cannot be the meaning, eas if sin were dead before, and now revived: But he
speaks of the Appearance of the death of sin, though it were not dead before,
yet it did appear to be dead; as a Snake in cold weather, though it be alive,
yet it appears to be dead, the life of it is in a swound; though it has life,
yet the cold benums it, and keeps it from appearing: So before the comm^^^ment
came, sin was in Paul, but it seemed to have no life but when the ^^^mandment
came, and discovered plainly, what a dead creature he was, then the life of sin
came indeed to be manifested.

Now the Law of God does manifest the life of sin Three ways; it manifests
Three life's of Sin: There are three life's of sin that appear to the soul, when
the Law comes.

1. First, There is the life of Aggravation; the Law of God does aggravate and
point out sin to the full life of it, it makes sin appear in the true nature of
it: the true nature of every thing is the life of the thing: the nature of a
man is the life of a man: Now the Law did show him the nature of his sins, it
painted them out to the very life, in their lively colors; this made him see
how his sins were aggravated: what a cursed and damned thing sin was, and what
a person it was committed against, this made sin appear unto him in the very
life of it; therefore in the 13. v^^s. of this Chapter, the Apostle says, ^^n,
that it might appear sin, wrought ^ath in me, that si^ might be out of measure
sinful by the commandment: that is, when the commandment comes, and is
manifested to the soul, it makes the life of sin appear, the life of sin is
then manifested, the Law of God (...) glass, does show the life of the
Commandment and the very nature of all sinning, and transgressing. Now before
the Law came thus home ^^to him, he could not thus see sin; he could say, he
was a sinner, and had committed these, and these sins: But what these sins
were, and the exceeding sinfulness of these sins, he did not see that. He had
a dead kind of picture of his sins before, but the life thereof was not
manifested; but the Law of God did make his sin revive, and made him see his
sins in the life of them.

2. Secondly, There is the life of Irritation, as I may so call it, or of
^ching, and egging a man. This is another life of sin, whereby it is full of
Operation, and Working in the Soul: The Operation of a thing, is the life of a
thing. Now before the Commandment came, sin seemed dead, it wrought indeed many
evils in him, but he did not think his heart had been so full of life, and so
full of activity against Gods Law and commandments. Sin seemed to lie dead
before, but now when the Commandment came, and set upon his heart, and began to
charge him with better Obedience; now his heart grew itching, and mavelous
full of life unto lust. Hereupon sin egged him the more on to lust: It is like
water, when a man goes about to stop it, it runs the more violently. So it is
with sin in the heart, the more the Law of God goes about to stop it, and
hinder it, the more eager it is, and the more full of life and working, as the
Apostle speaks, verse. 8. Without the Law, sin was dead: there was no such
working of sin in my mortal body then: but when the Commandment came, when
the Law was charged upon my heart, then sin took occasion hereby to be the
more violent, and work in me all manner of Concupiscence: before I committed
sin without any check, I had vain thoughts, and foolish courses, and many a
lust in my soul, and I went to it as if it had been a good thing, not as if it
had been evil: But when the Law of God came to show me the slacknesse of my
Obedience, and to control me, and convince me, and to stop the course of sin,
it wrought all manner of Concupiscence in me; it wrought before in Paul, for
it wrought all his security, and all his hardness of heart, and all his vain
thoughts and imaginations: but this was but a dead kind of vvorking, in
comparison of that which it wrought after the commandment came. There are none
that have such active Rebellions against the Law and Commandment of God, as
those to whom the Law comes; it eggs a man forward, and makes him itch unto
Rebellion. If a man had asked Paul before, whether he had such a divelish heart
against God? he saw no such matter, he never meant God any hurt when he went on
in his course, he thought not that he was so stubborn and Rebellious, he did
not feel this stubbornness and rebellion; But when the Law came once, it
showed him the ve^ome, and cursed nature of his sins.

3. The Third life of sin is the worst of all; and that is, the life of
Imputation; for here sin is so full of life, that it is not only able to
discover unto him, that he is a sinful wretch, and an abominable creature; but
to bind him over to wrath and send him to Hell, and everlasting destruction.
Now it is the Law of God that discovers this life of sin: before the Law comes,
a man has many vain hopes, that God is merciful, and Christ died for sinners,
and that God will forgive him his sins, he does not see the imputation of sin:
the imputation of sin lying upon the Soul is not clearly discovered, before the
Law come; for where there is no Law, there is no imputation of sin, Romans 5. 13.
there says the Apostle, Unto the time of the Law was sin in the world; but sin
is not imputed, while there is no Law. Before the Law is charged upon the
heart, the heart never dreams of the imputation of sin, as if he should answer
for sin, and be damned for sin for ever: He thought the contrary before, but
now the Law discovers the life of sin unto him, and sin revives, and appears to
have life to damn him for evermore. Sin now appears to have life to cast him
off from God, and to bind him over to Everlasting vengeance. Thus it was with
Paul, when the Commandment came, sin revived: I saw sin was alive indeed, and I
saw the life of Aggravation, I saw the hellish nature of sin, it was painted
out to the full; I saw the life of Irritation, I saw the infinite egging, and
itching of sin, how it did work in me; I saw the life of imputation, how all my
sins were imputed unto me, and did all lie upon my conscience, and so sin
revived, that is the meaning.

Now for the meaning of the Second word, I dyed; that is, I saw I was a dead
man; I saw plainly, and clearly, that I was but a dead man; I thought I was
alive before, because I did good duties, and walked in the Ordinances of God;
and I thought that I might go for a Christian, and Servant of God, as well as
another. I did not think I was a dead man, I thought I had some goodness in
me, some hope of eternal life in me; I did not conclude that I was a dead man.
But when the Law of God humbled me, and discovered my estate plainly unto me;
then I saw I was a dead man indeed, my heart failed me, and the livelyness that
was in me before, departed from me. I saw I was a dead man, and had not the
Spirit of Christ come and quickened me, I had been a dead man to all eternity; I
now saw that sin began to revive in me, and I began to be a dead man. Thus we
see the meaning of the words.

Now the Theme I propounded to you was this, namely, how the Lord converts the
will; and the first work that prepares a man hereunto, is the work of pulling
down the will, and the pulling down of a man's heart; for the will of a man is
full of obstinacy, full of liveliness against the truth and commandment of
God; full of liveliness in sin, and conceives it self to be in a better estate
and condition, and so the will is obstinate still. Now when it pleases God to
convert a man, first he pulls down the will of a man, and pulls down his
spirit; now here is a Doctrine to make way for this.

Namely, That when the Lord takes a man in hand to pull him down, to pull down
his will, he does show him what a dead Creature he is. The Obser.
Lord by pronouncing a man in his own Bosom, a dead man, a damned man, one that
can no way help himself; he is dead, absolutely dead in his own estate, and in
Gods account, all his hopes are rotten; he is merely, a dead, damned man:
hereby the Lord pulls down his Will. We may see this in Paul, before his
Conversion; his Will was full of Obstinacy and Rebellion against God, he would
go and make havoc of the Church, he would not submit to the Will of God; but
when the Lord came to work upon him, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? It is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks: What will thou that I shall do Lord,
says he, Act. 9. 6? Now his Will is come down: but mark how the Lord puts him
off; Go to such a place (says he) and there it shall be told thee what thou
shall do. The Lord puts him off, and would not give him an Answer presently,
what he should do; as who should say, Thou have as yet an obstinate Will, thou will not do as I command thee: I will not tell thee as yet, what I will have
thee to do, but go to such a place, and I will Arrest thee there, and charge my
Law upon thy Conscience, and show thee thy dead, and damned estate. And now his
Will is come down; he bids him be Baptized, and he was so; he bids him go and
Preach the Gospel, and he did so; now his Will is come down.

So the Prodigal, his Heart was mavelous Obstinate against his Fathers
commandment; he would be gone from his Father, he could not abide to stay in a
house where there were such strict courses, he would have his Goods and
Patrimony in his own hand, (as it is the Property of every carnal man) he would
have his Inheritance in his own hand; he would have Power, and Strength, and
Ability, and these Gifts, and Parts, in his own hand: but when he is humbled by
the Law, he is content to have all in Gods hand, he is content to have all his
Wisdom there, that he may come thither for it; he is content to have all his
Righteousness there, and all his Ability, Strength, and Sufficiency there,
that he may come thither for it; all is there, and he sees himself a beggar, if
he comes not to God, and keeps close to God, and keeps fast to his Covenant, he
is a very beggar. But this man would have all in his own hands, and go and
squander away all upon his Lusts and Pleasures, and he would not stay at home
with his Father. Now when the Law of God came home to him, to show this man to
himself, when he came to himself, as the Text says (his Father did esteem him
a dead man before,) but when he came to himself, and saw he was a dead man for
going away from his Father, the Father of Life: Now his Will is come down, I
will go to my Father, and say, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and
against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy
hired servants, Luke 15. 17. Here his VVi^l is come down: he would be gone
from his Father before, he could not abide to be held in so strictly, he would
fain be gone, and be at liberty; he had no mind to stay in his Fathers house:
But when he came to himself, when the Law shevved him, he was but a dead
man, for going from his Father; and going after his Lusts and Pleasures; now
his Will is brought down, and it submits, and yields; and now he will go to
his Father, and humble himself before his Father, and say, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and against thee, etc. Now I desire here to show you
Three things, as I did in the former Point.

First, Wherein this deadness consists.

Secondly, What be the effects of this deadness, and how it pulls down the
heart. And.

Thirdly, The Uses we are to make of it.

1. For the First, Wherein this deadness consists: and it consists in Three
things.

First, In deadness in being.

Secondly; In deadness in Gods account.

Thirdly, In deadness to all doing.

1. First, It consists in deadness in being. When the law comes, it shows a
man indeed to be a dead man, 2 Cor. 3. 6. the Letter kills, says the
Apostle: the very letter of the law, without the Spirit of life, which Christ
does inform it with, when he comes to work upon his children; The letter alone,
without the Spirit of God, kills a man: now when a man is killed, he is a dead
man; he is then fully dead, he has the very being of a dead man, he is a dead
man; that is his Estate and Condition. So when the law of God comes ^ome to a
man, it shows him indeed that he is a dead man. The property of the law, when
it is let in to work upon the heart, is to slay a man, I have slain them by the
words of my mouth, Hos. 6. 5. The law which proceeds from Gods mouth, is able
to slay a poor sinner, and kill him at the heart, and lay him for dead before
Almighty God, that he can strive no more; the reason is, because the law does
charge the truth of God upon a man. Now the truth is, that every sinner is a
dead man, this is the very truth of it, Rom 8. 6. To be carnally-minded is
death: That man is a dead man; there is the very death of sin, and hell, and
condemnation in that man, that is a carnal-minded man. Now the law of God when
it comes, does charge this Truth upon the Soul, it discovers a man to be in
this estate and condition, wherein in truth he is.

2. Secondly, It consists in deadness in Gods account. For all a man's
presumptions, for all a man's vain hopes that he is justified; for this is the
nature of man, before he is convinced by the law of God, to justify himself,
(you are they that justify your selves,) not that he is indeed Luke 16.
justified; but he falsely applies justification to himself, and he hopes he is
justified before God, he is apt to pronounce this hope unto himself. Let a
Minister tell him of his sins, here is his Salve, God is merciful, and Christ
came to save sinners. Let Sermons beat upon him from day to day, to humble him,
he cannot imagine that he is in a damnable estate: Preachers are too harsh, and
censorious, and the like. But when the Law comes, it shuts up a man that he
cannot get out, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3. 22. The Law has concluded all
under sin: that is the nature of the word of God, to shut up a man, that a man
is not able to get out: before the law is charged, the heart has a thousand
starting-holes. Denounce hell, and damnation against it, it has this
starting-hole, that Christ dyed for sinners: discover plainly that he is a dead
man, he has these starting-holes, he hopes he shall have peace, and he hopes
he is not so vile before Almighty God, and he hopes he has better
righteousness then you would bear him down with; and so he has an evasion to
get out: but when the law comes, and shuts him up, this will tame him. As we
use to tame Lions, and Bears, and such like fierce and cruel creatures, by
shutting of them up, so the Lord tames the heart of a poor creature, when he
would pull him down, he shuts him up, and lays him in the prison, and in the
Jail, and he has no way to get out, he is a dead man, and there is no way to
get out, no evasion to escape; but still he is a dead man, and a damned man, he
cannot open his mouth any more, Ezekiel. 16. 63. That thou may remember, and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, when I am pacified toward thee,
for all that thou have done, says the Lord God. The law indeed works thus in
the Regenerate, though the Lord be pacified toward them, yet they shall never
open their mouths, never cavil against Gods precepts more, never be so brisk
any more. But so long as a man is in his sins, the law does not only convince
him that he is dead in himself, but that he is also dead toward God; that God
accounts him a dead man, that God is not pacified toward him, but he lies
under the wrath of God, and this pulls him down, and stops his mouth. A carnal
man's mouth will not be stopped, but he will have some thing to say, some vain
hope, or confidence, or other, some pleading, or excusing or other. His mouth
will never be stopped, till the law of God comes; and when that comes, that
will stop his mouth, and make it appear, that he is guilty before God, Romans 3.
19. the Apostle says, Now we know, that whatsoever the Law says, it says to
them that are under the Law, that every mouth might be stopped, and all the
world may be culpable before God. But before the law comes, a man's mouth will
not be stopped. Genesis 20. 3. God came to Abimilech by night, and said, Thou art
but a dead man, because of the woman which thou have taken, for she is a man's
Wife: He was a dead man, but he little thought it; he would not believe that he
was a dead man: As the Text there speaks of temporal death. So it is true of
the other, carnal men are indeed dead men, but they will not believe that they
are dead men, and damned men; they hope for mercy, and cry, peace, peace to
their soul^; but when the law comes, that knocks off all men's hopes, and lays
them for dead in Gods account.

3. Thirdly, This deadness I here speak of, it consists in regard of all
manner of doing; when the law of God has charged it self upon the conscience,
and discovered to a man, that he is a dead, and a damned man. It makes it now
appear unto him, that he is utterly unable to do any thing; he is in the depth
of misery, and he is unable to cry mercy aright, he is not able to make a
prayer, no more then a dead man: he sees he can no more keep a Sabbath as he
ought, than a dead man. So for any duty of Religion, he sees he has no more
life to do it, then a dead man has to do the actions of the living: as the
Apostle speaks, Gal. 2. 19. I am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God.
God made Saint Paul alive unto him, but first he charged his law upon his
conscience, and made him seem to be a dead man to the law: That he had no life
or ^^^ty to do any thing pleasing to God: but when the Lord made him aliv^ to
himself, then he could do something; nay, he was able to do all things, through
the Lord Jesus Christ that strengthened him. But in himself, both still, and
before, he was altogether dead to the law of God; so that when the law comes,
and shows a man's estate unto him, it shows him his utter inability to the
performance of any good duty. The Pharisee will to the Temple as well as the
Publican; Saul will Sacrifice as well as Samuel; Profane people will take up
the Ordinances of God, as if they had life to go through them, as well as the
people of God. But when the law comes, it plainly convinces a man; it makes
him feel and understand, that he has no activity, or life to perform any thing
pleasing to Almighty God; a dead man can do nothing, he is cut off from all the
actions of the living; dead men they cannot devise ought, they cannot purpose
ought, they cannot work ought. So when the Law of God is charged upon a man,
and shows him that he is but a dead man; and a damned man, now he sees, he can
as well create a world, as make a prayer: he can as well remove a Mountain, as
do any thing acceptable to God. Such a man will say, I am a dry tree, and
cannot grow; I am lost in the wilderness of sin, and cannot get out again.
Thus we see wherein this deadness consists.

2. Now I come to show you the Effects if this deadness, how it pulls down the
heart: this will pull down the heart of a man marvellously, when the Law
charge this upon him, that he is but a dead man; though the will of man be
infinitely unruly, it is wild, it is like the mad man in the Gospel, that the
Devil was in, no man was able to bind him, no Chains were able to hold him, no
Creature could tame him, Mark. 5. 34. So it is with the will of an unregenerate
man, his will is mavelous wild, he breaks all bonds, and snaps all cords in
pieces, and casts off the yoke from him. Let God bid him do this, he will not
do it; let him be in a good mood, he is presently out of it again; let him be
convinced of his vain hopes, and let him see what a wretched Creature he is, he
will have vain hopes again; his will is infinitely unruly, and desperately
wild, the very Devil in hell has the rule of it; it is full of life against
God and his Commandments, and will never yield while the wo^ld stands, till now
the Lord comes with his Law, and shows a man, that he is a dead man, and a
damned man, and shows him that he is under the wrath of God; the Law is able to
do this, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 4. 15. The Law causes wrath, It makes a
man appear to lie under the wrath of God, under Gods everlasting displeasure,
and in the mouth of hell and damnation; and if God be not merciful to him, and
more merciful then to a world of men, he sees he is a dead man, utterly lost,
and undone for ever; now this will make his spirit yield, and make his heart
begin to come in; as the Psalmist speaks concerning Princes, He shall cut off
the spirit of Princes, he is terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76. 12.
Kings and Princes have stout spirits; now when the Lord sends but a little
terror into their hearts, he is able to snib their spirits, for all their
security, and for all the height of their magnanimity; he is able to cut off
all, by sending his terror into their hearts, so the Law sends terror into
the heart. Can there be a greater terror then to have the Law denounce a man
to be a dead man? and that the wrath of God is gone out against him? and that
he lies in the very mouth of all the Canons of the fury of the most High? This
will break the heart of a man, if his heart were made of brass, this would
break it. Look as it was with the Moabites, 2 Samuel 8. 2. They were stout
against David, and would not yield and submit unto him; but when David smote
them, and measured them with a cord, and cast them down to the ground; when he
measured them with two cords to put them to death, and with one full cord to
keep them alive; then says the Text, the Moabites became David's servants, and
brought him gifts. So it is with a profane creature, whilst God lets him go
on, he is stout, and will not serve God, but his will is altogether cross, and
contrary to Gods will and Commandments; he will not take up those courses that
God commands, he will not submit himself to the precifenesse of the Gospel, his
will is infinitely cross in this kind, and mavelous obstinate. But if the
Lord takes him in hand, and charges his Law upon his conscience, he puts such
terrors into his heart, that he is willing to submit unto God upon any terms.
I confess the Law cannot do this of it self; it cannot thus bring down the
will of a man, and mortify a man's sins: For if the damned in hell were let
loose again, to live here upon earth, they would forget all their former
Plagues, and Torments, and sin would revive again in them. The Law of it self,
can only lay sin in a swound, it will up again if it be loose: the law cannot
do this of it self; but I speak now of the Law, as it is Gods Instrument.
Hereby he pulls down the heart of a man, and pulls down his Spirit; labor will
pull down any man's spirit: when a man is in labor, and pain, and affliction,
it will make a man's stomach come down; as we may see, Psalm. 107. 11, 12.
Because they rebelled, against the words of the Lord; therefore he humbled
their heart with labor and heaviness; then they fell down, but there was no
helper: Before they were stout against the Lord, and would not hearken unto
him, and obey his Commandments; now the Lord brought down their heart. But how
did he bring them down? he pulled them down by laying labors upon them;
labor, and torment, and heavynesse pulled down their hearts. So when the Law
makes the heart labor under the wrath of God, it lies laboring, and quaking,
and shaking, and weltring, and bleeding under the wrath of God; this pulls down
the will* And now I come to speak of the Effects it works, in doing of it.

1. The First Effect is this, It casts the heart into those woeful privations we
read of; there are abundance of comfortable things, which the man which is
alive in his own conceit, thinks himself to have. Now when the Law comes to
deaden him, it knocks him off from all those comfortable things he seemed to
have; whereas he seemed to have some admittance to God in prayer, he could pray
to him before, but now he sees he is an outcast, and dares not lift up his
eyes to heaven: Before he hoped that God would have mercy on him, and that he
had some interest in Christ, and hope of salvation; but now he sees he is
lost: Before he seemed to have liberty, and freedom; he could do this, and
that, and had a thousand evasions; but now he sees himself a mere captive:
before he thought he had some riches, some goodness; but now he sees he is
but a poor beggar: before he had some Fig Leaves to cover him, but now he sees
he is altogether naked: before he was heart-whole, and sound, he had peace, and
comfort, and quietness within him, but now he is altogether broken. This is
the effect of this deadness, it brings all these privations into the soul;
death is a privation it self, and it brings an hundred privations with it; even
a privation of all the privileges of the living: this the Law does when it
comes. All this while the Soul is lost, and captived, and poor, and blind, and
miserable, and naked, and an outcast; it is utterly undone, and altogether
unable to help it self; and this as it does make a man an Object of the Gospel,
one for whom Christ dyed, as it points out such a man; so there is a Finger of
the Gospel in it also, when the soul understands the goodness of the Gospel,
and sees it self to be lost for want thereof; yet notwithstanding the first
stroke is given by the Law, the first stroke that casts the Soul into this
privation is done by the Law, and if the Lord means to convert, there the
Gospel begins, Luke 4. 18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me, that I should preach the Gospel to the poor; he has sent me to
heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering
of sight to the blind, that I should set at liberty them that are bruised. When
the Law has humbled a man, and thus brought down his will, then begins the
work of the Gospel. As we use to say of Natural Philosophy; where Natural
Philosophy ends, there Physic begins; So where the Law ends, the Gospel
begins. Thus we see the first Effect of this deadness.

2. Secondly, When the Law has done this, when the deadness the Law has
wrought, has produced this Effect; then the next Effect is this, the Law holds
the heart there: when a man is dead, the effect of death is to hold a man
there. There is no redress, no return, without the Almighty power of God:
there is no return to his former life. So when the Law has deaded a man, it
holds a man there, though a man would never so fain get out, he cannot; he will
be snatching at a Christ, and looking at the promises, and be presuming that
there is mercy for him; he would fain be brisk again. But if the Law has
killed him, and made him a dead man, he cannot get out. Romans 7. 6. the Apostle
says, We are delivered from the Law, being dead unto that wherein we were
holden* St. Paul could not get out to his livelynesse again, but the Law held
him. So it is with the Law, when the Law of God has humbled a man, and made
him a dead man, it holds him there; let the Devil come with all the comforts he
can, there is no evasion; let his vain neighbors bring what Scriptures they can
to cheer him, there is nothing can lift that soul up: let all profits and
pleasures come, they cannot take off his heart, they cannot make him alive
again, unless it please the Lord to quicken and revive him.

2. The next Effect of this deadness is, that it makes the heart stiff: when
the body is dead, all the members are stiff, the beatings of the pulses cease,
and all are stiff. So when a man is killed by the Law, it makes his head stiff,
it breaks off all his arguing, and reasoning, and disputing against the Law of
God; That is against my profit, and that is against my pleasure, and that is
against my credit; thus the heart is full of life end activity before. But when
the Law comes, and shows him he is a dead man: now he is not able to stir, now
he can say, what if it be against my profit, and pleasure? what if it be
against my credit? what if men make a mock at me? I am a dead man if I live not
in this course. Psalm. 36. 12. There says the Text, They are fallen that work
iniquity, they are cast d^w^ (...) shall not be able to rise. So when the Law
of God comes, and preaches righteousness to a man, and shows him against whom
he has sinned, it makes him a dead man, he cannot stir any more; if the Devil
bids him reason for his lusts, he dares not do it; if his old company persuade
him to his former life and conversation, he dares not do it. Isa^. 41. 21.
Stand to your cause says the Lord, bring forth your strong reasons, says the
God of Jacob. You could be reasoning, and pleading for your lusts, let us now
hear your strong reasons, and arguments. Now this man is a dead man, and a
damned man; he has no reason, no plea to allege, to go on in his former
course, this man is killed now.

4. Fourthly, This deadness makes the ^eart yield; before the Law comes, the
heart is mavelous obstinate, but now when the stiffnesse of it is gone, and
the Law has made him a dead man, now he will yield, 2 Chronicles. 30. 8. As
H^zekiah speaks; Be not now stiff-^ecked as your fath^rs, but give the hand to
the Lord, and come into his Sanctuary. So when the Lord has broken the neck of
a man's stiffnesse, and has broken his backbone, that he cannot stand stiffly
out, and has taken away his livelynesse, which was his whale-bone as it were,
to uphold him in his strength, and courage, and in his sins Now his heart is
made to yield to God, he cannot now but yield to the Lord. Thus it is with a
poor creature, when the law works upon him, he cannot stand out any longer: It
is m^st true, before the Lord converts a man he does take away his stiffnesse,
and make a man a dead man. But you will say, when a man is dead, all his joints
are stiff, his body is cold, and grows stiff; but when a man is alive, his
joints are lithe and lively. I Answer, It is true, the law of God cannot take
away a man's natural stiffnesse, but his voluntary stiffness is taken a way. The
voluntary stiffnesse is taken away when he is dead; when a man was alive, he
could shut his hand, and hold it so; he could stretch out his arm, and hold it
so: but when a man is dead, he cannot do so. So it is in this case, although
the stiffnesse of nature remain still; yet the voluntary stiffnesse is taken
away; the will and heart of a man is out of life; It cannot be stiff toward
God. I confess, the Lord does not take a way all stiffnesse, no not out of his
Saints; but he takes so much stiffnesse out of the heart, as to make it a
patient, he shall not be voluntarily stiff, he shall not be overcomingly
resisting. Divines use to say, that in the first conversion of a sinner, he is
merely a Patient; first the Lord makes him a patient, and then converts him,
Jer. 31. 19. After I was converted, I repented, after I was instructed, I smote
upon the thigh, etc. ^^st God made him a patient, and instructed him, and
afterward converted him.

The Use of the Points is this, Is it so that the law of God does make a man a
dead man? Then here we may observe the wonderful power of the law; a man has
so much liveliness in him, so much ^se and activity, and so many strong
conceits, that it is wonderful hard to make him dead; therefore the word of God
is mighty. It is said of ^p^^^, that he did mightily convince the Jews, Act.
18. 28. for he was mighty in the Scriptures; there had need be might in the
Scriptures to do this. What strong reasons had they in regard of flesh and
blood, that Jesus was not the Christ? What, he the Christ that was born in a
manger, and has none but a beggarly company to his kindred? Are not his
brethren and kinsfolk (...)? None but the tag-rag and refuse of the Country
follow him. What, he that had no form or beauty in him, the Savior of the
world? The Word of God was mavelous powerful, that could convince them of
thi^; so a man that goes on in his sinful estate and condition, it is a
mavelous hard thing to convince him that he is a dead man: he hears the Word
constantly, and goes on in his Calling diligently, and he hopes that Christ ^ed
for him; he is afraid of sin, and his heart trembles to commit sin, and he is
sorry for his sins, he is thus, and thus: he that has so many things to plead
for himself, what, he a dead man? It is impossible Therefore if the law of God
be able to convince a man, and make a man a de a man that is so full of l^fe,
the law must needs be mighty that can do this: to dead this man, and kill this
man, is a mighty work. So that we may say, as the Psalmist says of the Sea and
the Mountains, Psalm. 114. 5, 6. W^a^ ^^ed ^hee, O Sea, that thou fleddest? O
Jordan, why were th^^ turned back? Ye Mountains, why leaped ye as Rams, and ye
Hills as Lambs? So I may say, What ayleth this poor man that he is now driven
from his former courses, and like the ^ea, out of his own Channel? what ayls
those Mountains of lusts and corruptions, that were settled upon his soul, as
a Mountain upon his Base; what ayle these to move, and stir, and fall away?
What ayls the man that was so full of life before, that at one Sermon he is
killed? What ayls the man? he came brisk and peark into the Church, and who but
he? He was immovable from his sinful lusts, and corruptions, and he had this
Plea, and that confidence, and was full of life, but by one hours discourse
(which it may be another heard as well as he, and went away as brisk as before,
but) this man's spirit is deaded, and his heart taken down; what ayls the man
now? why the law of God has done it: See therefore the mavelous power of the
law.

I told you formerly, That when the Law comes home to a man's soul, and is
charged upon his Conscience, it casts the heart into all those woeful priv^tions
we read of in Scripture; a man before he is thus deaded by the law, thinks
himself to be possessed of abundance of comforts, but now he sees himself to
be an outcast, and utterly lost, to be a captive, and poor, and miserable, and
blind, and naked; he lies under all these privations: And as the Philosopher
says, That Privation is one of the Principles of Nature: Every body (says he)
has Three Principles, Matter, Form, and Privation: No natural thing can have
this or that From put into it, but it must be deprived of all other Forms, as
if fire be turned into air; first the form of fire must be taken away, before
it can be turned into air, so it is in Grace, Privation is one of the
Principles of Religion; before the life of Christ can be brought into a man,
there must first be a Privation of all other contrary lives: the life of the
flesh, that cursed liveliness of the flesh, the life of sin, and the life of
the world, whereby a man lives unto the world, and the things of the world. A
man must be deprived of all other lives, of all other forms, he must have a
Privation of all other forms, before the life of Christ can be formed in him.
As for example, Take a man that is worldly wise put him upon civil Affairs, he
is wise enough to order all his business; in eating and drinking, he is wise
enough not to distemper himself, wise enough to keep a good diet: Put him upon
matters of Religion, he is wise there too, he will not be so precise as some
are, that are more nice then wise; he will be moderate, and wise in the Service
of God Tell him, that he is one that does not please God that he walks to
hell-ward, that he has no care of his Salvation; he thinks that he is wiser
then so. Would you make this man a wise man indeed? you can never make him
truly a wise man, till you bring a Privation upon him, till he be first
deprived of all that worldly wisdom that is in him; If any man among you seem
to be wise (says the Apostle) let him become a fool that he may (...) wise. I
Cor. 3. 18 Let him have first a Privation of all the seeming wisdom he has, of
all the wisdom of the flesh and carnal reason; he must first be a fool, or else
true wisdom is not able to enter it to him: So if a man would be high, he must
first be humbled, and brought low, before he can be trul^ high; a man must be
naked, before he can be cloat^ed; a man ^ust be lost, before he can be found;
there are none of you that live in your sins, but you must be stripped of all
the forms that are in you; there must be a Privation come into you, before true
Grace can be formed in you. Privation is one of the Principles of Religion, and
unless you be deprived of all other forms, you cannot have the essential form
of Religion come into you; it is the poor that receive the Gospel: when a man
is deprived of all other forms, then is he fit to receive the form of the
Gospel. When a man is deprived of his own wisdom, he may then receive the
wisdom of the Gospel; when a man is deprived of his own self-confidence, of his
own strength, and sufficiency, then he may receive the strength of the Gospel:
when a man is deprived of all other contrary liveliness and contrary forms
that are opposite to all these, when a man is deprived of all these, he is
capable of the true life of Christ, and the Gospel. I will Instance only in
one thing which I named before, and that is poverty: a man can never receive
Christ, or any impression of the true form of Christianity, till first his
Heart be emptied, and his Will and his Mind be emptied and his Conscience be
emptied, till all other forms be voided out, and he begins to be made poor and
nothing in himself, till every room in the soul be naked, and empty, there is
never a room for the kingdom of God to come into the soul, the kingdom of God
is a great thing, and will take up a great deal of room where it comes,
therefore the Heart, and the Mind, and the Will, and the Affections must be
emptied: the soul must be rid and void of all other things, or else there is no
room for the Kingdom of God. As our Savior says Matthew. 5. 3. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, for they shall receive the Kingdom of God: Then there is room
for the Kingdom of God, when the heart is made poor, and all is voided out, the
world, and the flesh, and all cranal delights, and pleasures, and all
self-conceitednesse, which the heart was full of. When it was full of the
world, there was no room for Gods Kingdom; but when a man is made poor in
spirit, when he has a Privation of those things wherewith his soul was
filled; now there is room for the Kingdom of God; the reason is, because a man
can never be brought to Christ, till he is pinched with these Privations;
before he can never come to Christ, his heart can never be brought to bid so
much, and stake down so much for Christ, as he must do, if ever he come to
attain him; unless his heart be pinched with poverty, unless his heart be
void of all these high imaginations he had of himself, he will never come to
Christ. It is plenty that brings down the market, and scarcity that makes it
rise: plentiful years, will make Corn of no price almost; but if there be
famine, and scarcity, and no bread almost to be had, but men are ready to dye
for hunger, then they will give any thing, they will give ten shillings a
bushel, twenty, nay forty shillings has been given for a bushel of Corn, as I
have read in Chronicles; it is poverty that makes men come to a price. So must
the heart be pinched with Spiritual poverty, else it will not come to Christ;
men will give nothing for the Kingdom of God, they will not part with a single
groat for Christ; the profane Gallant will not part with a look for Christ;
the proud vain fool, will not part with a foolish lace, a foolish fashion for
Christ; the drunkard will not foregoe a pot for Christ, men will not part with
any thing for Christ; they will not part with a paultry lust, or base affection
for Christ; People will not stir, they will not open their purses, they will
not open their hearts to give any thing for Christ; the reason is, their hearts
are full already. People count their profits, and pleasures, and lusts, and
vanities, and delights, their Jewels, a man must be poor, before he will part
with his Jewels; but if a man be thoroughly pinched with poverty, he will part
with his old Gold; and Rings, and Jewels, and all; but he will never part with
his Jewels, till he be forced to it by extremity. So all the lusts of the
heart, all the things of the world, that the mind and affections run upon, men
account them their Jewels, and they will not part with them, till they be
pinched with poverty. Thus it was with the Jailer, Acts 16. 30. when he was
pinched with this poverty, he cries out, Men and brethren, what shall I do to
be saved? when his heart was pinched with this poverty, he was content to part
with any thing, he was willing to do any thing, to hearken to any terms that he
might have mercy: So that it is necessary for a man to have all these
Privations wrought in his heart, and be made poor, else he will never take
Christ upon those terms whereupon he is offered.

Secondly, Suppose a man should conceive worth to be in Christ: suppose he
should put a great price upon him, yet if a man be not under these Privations,
if he be not pinched with poverty, with Spiritual need and want; he will never
use all means for the attaining of the Kingdom of God. He will never betake
himself to all those courses that God has commanded himself to be sought in.
It was need that made Ahab send up and down all Countries, and Soiles for
water; it was need that made the rich Women of Shunem to hazard her life, and
her family, and household in a foreign Country; she would not have gone a mile
of that Journey, but for her poverty, as Divines use to speak. Let two men go
to the market, the one has need, the other has not; he that has need will go
whatsoever the weather be, though the weather be never so foul, he will go;
bread he wants, and bread he must have, and bread he will have; and if he
cannot have it at an easy rate, he will part with any thing; he will pawn his
very clothes from his back for it. Why? Because he, and his Wife, and his
Children want it. But the other he will go according as he likes the weather,
if the weather be answerable to his mind, it may be he will go; and it may be
not; and when he is there, it may be he will buy, and it may be not, according
as the price goes, because he has no need of it. So it is in Grace, let two
men be called upon to seek out for Grace; one does not feel any great need, he
is not pinched with the want of Faith, and Repentance, and Pardon, and Peace of
Conscience: though he want these, yet he is not pinched with the want, his
heart is yet full, he is not yet come to this Spiritual poverty. It may be he
will come to a Sermon, it may be not; it may be he will part with a Lust, and
it may be not; it is according as the bargain pleases him, he will never use
all means, nor take up all courses that are prescribed: But a man that is ready
to starve for want of Christ; as Sisera said, Give me drink or else I perish;
so, give me Christ or else I perish: This man will take any course, use any
means, he must have Christ, and will have him; when he comes to the Word,
Christ he wants, and Christ he will have, and must have; all Sermons, and all
hearing, are but as Oil to the fire, they do but pinch his Soul so much the
more, till Christ comes; he must have Christ in his Ordinances, because he is
sensible of his Spiritual poverty. So that it is he which is lost that will be
found, it is he which is a captive that will be freed, it is he that is blind
that must have his sight, and it is he that is naked that must be clothed; he
that lies under these woeful Privations, he must have the form, he looks after
it, he cannot be without it. Thus we see that Privation is necessary for
Religion, the true life of Religion can never come into a man, till he be laid
under all these woeful Privations we read of in Scripture.

But now here is a Question which will arise, which those that are godly Paul
was alive once before the Law came, but when the Law came, and was charged upon
his Conscience, it deprived him of his livelynesse, and made him a dead man; I
dyed says he. Now the Question is this, Whether is such a man the formal
Object of mercy? When the Law has deprived a man of his conceited riches, and
made him a poor man, and has proclaimed him a bank-rupt, and a beggar, and
made him a captive, that he is not able to stir one foot, he is not able so
much as to think a good thought; but he lies under wrath, and is not able to
get out: Whether is such a man the formal Object of mercy? I mean, whether is
he such a one, as the Gospel has promised deliverance unto? When a man by the
Law is made a dead Creature, and is altogether deprived of life and health; he
has no life actually, and there is no life actually to be had for him, (for so
the law leaves him without any hope of getting any life.) Whether is this man
the formal Object of mercy? whether is he such a one as the Gospel does make
promise to of quickening, and enriching, and gathering, and finding, and saving,
and comforting, and the like? whether is this man the formal Object of mercy?
Every man is the Object of mercy, but whether has this man got those
properties that belong to the actual Object of mercy?

The reason why I propound this Question, is this, Because the Scripture seems
to make such a one the formal Object of mercy, such a one as mercy is promised
to, such a one as the Gospel looks upon, as the proper and actual Object of
mercy; for the Gospel is said to quicken the dead, and to give them life; it is
the Letter that kills, and the Spirit that gives life, 2 Cor. 3. 6. It
gives life to him that was before a dead man, to him that was killed by the
letter. So for poverty; Luke 4. 18. To the poor the Gospel is preached, the
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel to the poor, he has sent me that I should heal the broken hearted, and
preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight to the blind: So
that when the Law has made a man a poor man, and has stripped him of all his
conceited riches, and has made him a beggar, it seems that Christ is anointed
to preach mercy to such a one; it seems that such a one is the formal Object of
the Gospel. See Psalm. 147. 2. He gathers the outcasts of Israel: when the Law
has made a man an outcast, it seems he is the formal Object of mercy: The
Gospel undertakes to gather such people so far lost. The Son of man is come to
save that which is lost, Mat. 18. 11. he is come for that purpose, it is his
Commission, he is sent to save that which is lost; when the Law has made a man
to be a lost man, that he sees he is utterly undone without mercy; Christ is
come to save such people, and to look upon them as the formal Object of mercy.

So for death it self, when a man is made dead by the Law; The hour shall come
says our Savior, and now is, that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God; and they that do hear it shall live, Joh. 5. 25. It seems that the
Scripture makes such as are made dead by the Law; and poor, and blind, and
naked, and wretched, and miserable, by reason of the Law being pressed upon
them, and pulling them down with terror and conviction; it seems such a one is
the formal Object of mercy, such a one to whom mercy is promised. I do not mean
that he is the formal Object of the invitations of the Gospel, that is most
certain, there is no question of that, Come unto me all ye that are weary, and
heavy lad^n, and you shall find rest to your souls. Come unto me, all you that
are poor, and blind, and naked, and dead, and I will give you life; have you a
hard heart, that you cannot free your selves from, come unto me, and I will
free you from it? have you no power to repent and believe? come unto me, and
take mercy upon my terms, and believe in me; whatsoever weakness is in you, I
will strengthen you; whatever discomforts and wants lie upon you, I will
relieve and cheer you. This is certain, the more a man sees himself a dead
man, the more he is the formal Object of the invitation of the Gospel. But the
Question is, Whether he is the formal Object of the promises of the Gospel?

I Answer, No; There is a great deal of difference between legal Privations,
and these Privations as they are Evangelical, as the Gospel makes Joh. 5. The
Son of man quickens wh^m he will; He is free to quicken whom he will, though a
man be made a dead man by the Law, and cry out he is a dead man, and a damned
man, though he has the works of the Law, and be terrified, and gastered, and
humbled by the Law, yet Christ is free from any promise he has made to these
people; there is never a Promise in all the Word, that Christ has bound
himself by to these people to quicken them: they cannot say there is such a
Promise in the Word that Christ shall quicken them. There are plain places in
the Scripture, wherein the Lord invites such people, upon condition they will
come and believe, and submit to the Gospel; there is a conditional invitation
upon these terms: But that these People shall be quickened, and shall have
eternal Life given them, there in no such Promise; the Lord is free, the Lord
has not bound himself to it; but when a man is dead according as the Gospel
makes a man dead before it quickens him, and when a man is poor according as
the Gospel makes him poor, and when a man is blind according as the Gospel
makes him blind, now a man is within the compass of Gods Promises, he is one
that is the formal Object of Mercy, he is one that shall have Mercy, and shall
have Salvation, and Redemption by Jesus Christ; these dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God, and shall live; the tongue of these stammerers shall speak
plain, the eyes of these blind shall see, these outcasts shall be gathered,
these naked shall be clothed, these lost shall be found, these poor shall be
enriched; when a man is dead, so as the Gospel deads a man, before it quickens
a man (for the Lord damns a man before he saves a man, and kills a man before
he quickens him) like a good Surgeon, that cuts before he cures; or like a good
Physician, that kills a man almost with Physic, so the Lord does bring a man
to deaths door before he quickens him; it is the Gospel that truly humbles him,
and works these Privations; and now he is within the compass of the Promise:
now he has a Promise that he shall be quickened, and have supply in regard of
all these Privations; but so long as these Privations are only legal, he has
no Promise that he shall be quickened, for many are humbled and made dead as it
were by the Law, and yet shake it off again, and go to their pro^its, and
pleasures, and delights, and hardness of heart again; many a man has been
gastered by the Law, and cried out of his damned estate and condition, and yet
has got up again, and recovered himself by the world and the things of the
world; and it was ever so of old, as we may see in Cain, the Law had discovered
him to himself to be a dead man, and a damned man: I see my sins are greater
then can be forgiven, or are forgiven, or shall be forgiven: he saw his
punishment was intolerable, his condemnation was more then he was able to bear;
From thy presence am I cast out, and a Vagabond shall I be upon the fac^ of the
earth, Genesis 4. 14. Yet he was not the formal Object of Mercy; the Gospel did
not quicken him, nor convert him: he was not the formal Object of Mercy, for he
shook off these terrors again, as we may see in the very same Chapter, and
went to building of Cities, and inventing of Music, and other Arts and
Sciences; and this quickened, and revived him again: but he never came to true
Life. So it is with many men, though they be terrified, and gastered, and
humbled, and cast down by the Law, yet they get up again, and run after the
world, and after security, and hardness of heart again, so that such a man is
not the formal Object of Mercy.

2. Again, We see many, though they be wrought upon thus by the Law, and their
Eyes be enlightened, and their Consciences awaked, and they see that they are in
a wretched and damned estate; yet they scrape together a company of vain hopes,
and so heal themselves again. When they have been terrified by the Law, they
seek presently for Promises, and how they may get up again, and they would fain
get up; and they lie at catch at every Sermon, and at every Chapter, and at
every Word which a good man speaks, and if they can get any hold, they catch at
it; and so get up again and go on: And when they have got a little comfort, and
think they shall do well, they are as careless, and as stubborn, and as secure
as ever they were; they may go on in the profession of Religion, but yet their
latter end is worse than their beginning: The unclean Devil may be cast out,
but the Devil transforms himself into an angel of light, and enters into them,
and they go on in doing good duties, but they never have the power of Religion.

Again Thirdly, Many that are humbled by the Law, they run away, and never come
to Christ, as Judas when he saw he was condemned, he went and hanged himself,
Matthew. 27. 3, 5. Some expound it of Christ, when he saw Christ was condemned;
but others expound it of himself, when Judas saw himself was condemned, and
that seems to be the meaning of the place; for Christ was not condemned, nor so
much as accused; there came not any witness against him, till Judas had hanged
himself, as we may see if we read that Chapter. But whether that be the meaning
or no, this is true and certain, he saw he was a dead man, he saw he lay under
the guilt of his sins, and he despaired of Mercy, and went and hanged himself.

Again Lastly, If such a man were the Object of Mercy, then all the damned in
Hell were the formal Objects of Mercy; for there is never a man in Hell, but
the Law has its work to the uttermost upon him; it can work a man no lower, it
can sink a man no deeper, it can make a man no more miserable, then those that
are in Hell. Now if a dead man by the Law should be the formal Object of mercy,
then the damned in Hell should be the formal Object of mercy, which cannot be;
for from thence there is no Redemption, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his angels, Matthew. 25. there is no quenching of that
fire. So that we see, the legal killing of the Law, does not make a man the
formal Object of mercy. But yet such a man has a great deal of advantage, he
is before a world of other men, that live secure; if men were in this estate,
they were in a thousand times more likelihood to be saved. If I could hear of
people that were gastered, and cast down by the Law; that saw themselves
without Christ, and without Mercy, in the power of Satan, and in the bond of
iniquity; if they cried out, I am a dead man, and a damned man, if I dye now at
this present I shall go to Hell, if People were in this estate and condition,
there were more hopes of them a thousand times: there is no hope of people that
do live secure in their sins; so long as the Trumpet of the Law has not
sounded in their ears, so long as the Hammer of the Law has not sounded upon
their hearts, there is no hope of mercy for them. Therefore now for the
clearing of this a little more, let me show you,

First, What it is to be dead, according as the Gospel makes a man to be a dead
man.

Secondly, What is the difference between Legal Privation, and Evangelical; and
when these Privations are Evangelical, and put a man under the actual title to
Mercy, under an actual interest in the Promises.

Thirdly, What Use we are to make of it.

For the First, What it is to be Evangelically dead: To be Legally dead, is
not to be half a quarter so much dead, as to be Evangelically dead, so as the
Gospel makes a man dead before it quickens him. When a man is Evangelically
dead, it makes him more dead by a thousand degrees, then all the Law in the
world can make him, it makes him more dead by odds; when a man is Legally dead,
and sees himself to be a damned creature, and whereas he hoped to have mercy,
he sees now he has none; and whereas he hoped to go to Heaven, he now sees
the Gates are shut against him; and whereas he hoped he had some good in him,
now he sees he has nothing in him: a man would think this were a dead man, but
his liveliness is only in a swound, the Law lying upon him, will not let his
liveliness appear; and if the Law should lie upon him for ever, it would never
let his liveliness actually appear; but yet he is not thoroughly dead all this
while: as for example.

1. Self-conceitednesse, it is not deaded when a man is killed by the Law: you
would think his conceitednesse were gone: he was conceited he was a good
Christian; but now he sees no such matter: he was conceited before, that he
would repent, and God would be merciful to him; but now he sees, he is utterly
deprived of mercy, and lies under the wrath of God: you would think now that
all his conceitedness was gone; but it is but only in a swound all this while,
he lies for dead as it were, but he is not dead. So take a man that is in Hell,
all his good conceits of mercy, and of himself, and his profits, and pleasures,
and vanities, and delights, they are all gone now. What does Pride profit me?
What good do Riches do me? What have all my Pleasures and Delights done me
good? All my labor is vanity, and all my delights folly; one would think all
his conceits were clean gone; but they are only in a swound. If a damned man
were out of Hell, if the Lord should take off the lash of his Law from him, he
would have as good a conceit of his Profits, and Pleasures, and Riches again,
as ever he had; and he would have his carnal Reasons against the strictness of
Religion again, as rise as ever he had; they are only laid in a swound, indeed
there they shall lie: a man can never get up again, because the Law lies
continually upon him, he is continually under the lash of the Law; and the Law
holds this picture before his eyes, and shows him his damned estate an^
condition: but upon such a supposition, that he might come out of Hell, his
conceits would rise up again. Prove. 5. 12, 13. Solomon there brings in a man
wrought upon by the Law, the Law discovered him to be a dead man. How have I
hated instruction, and despised correction; and have not obeyed the voice of
them that taught me, nor inclined my ear to them that instructed me? His
carnal Reasons are now all gone, they are in a swound; they were true
Instructions that I have hated, they were true Reports that I have despised,
and they were base and damned Courses which I have followed. How have I lived?
One would think all his foolish conceits now were gone: they are in a swound
indeed, and cannot get up. But the Gospel will give a man his deaths wound; a
man can never have that good conceit of himself he had before; nor of his
lusts, and vanities, and profits, and delights; his self-conceitednesse has
now got his deaths wound.

Secondly, For self-confidence, when the Law has humbled-a man, his
self-confidence is only in a swound; when he lies in Hell under the lash of
the Law, he seems to have no power in himself, no life, or activity to any
duty. He sees that he is poor, and weak, and rotten, and wretched. A poor
creature he is, he sees it plainly, and all his self-confidence seems to he
gone; but yet there is a great deal of self-confidence actually in Hell, for
though they are in Hell, yet they think if they were alive again, what they
would do; I would hear the Word, and call upon God; I would repent, and not
live in sin, and not do as I have done; they think they would do thus, and
thus, as it was with Dives, Luke 16. 30. I have five brethren (says he) if one
should come to them from the dead, they would repent, and not come where I am.
If they knew but as much as I know, they would repent; I am sure if they were
in my case, they would, if they were in hell where I am, if they knew how
certain it is, that they shall come to hell where I am when they die, unless
they do repent at the preaching of the Prophets, and hearken to the voice of
Gods Ministers, and yield and submit to God; they would do it: I would, if it
were my case. This is self-confidence; for self-confidence is only laid asleep
in Hell, and it cannot rise again. It is true, the Law may dead a man, and give
him three deaths wounds. There are Three Wounds that the Law gives a man.

First, It makes it appear that a man is worthy of death; the Law makes him see
his guiltiness.

Secondly, The Law pronounces upon a sinner the sentence of death, as Paul
says of a natural death, I received the sentence of death, 2 Cor. 1. 9. that
is, I was a dead man, I took my self to be a dead man. So the Law does make a
man to be a dead man, it pronounces the sentence of death upon him; it does
not only make it appear that he is worthy of death, (for so it may do, and yet
he may have hope of mercy) but it makes a man receive the sentence of death,
and to be a dead man: If a man be once condemned, if the sentence of death be
passed upon him, then he is without hope that the Judge will save him, because
the sentence of condemnation is passed upon him. A man may see himself worthy
of death, and yet hope for mercy, Romans 1. 31. Therefore the Law does pronounce
the sentence of death upon him, and makes a man in a second degree dead.

Nay, Thirdly, The law makes a man see there is no hope of return; as it is
with a dead man, when a man is truly dead, there is no return from death, there
is no rising again: as the Wiseman speaks of the strange women, Prove. 2. 18,
19. Surely her house tends to death, and her paths unto the dead, they that
go unto her return not again, neither take they hold of the ways of life. Here
the Wiseman sets forth the infinite misery, and damnable estate of such a
creature, and the irrecoverableness of such a person, without the extraordinary
mercy of God. Ordinarily, such persons are seldom, or never brought to
repentance: ordinarily they are irrecoverable. So the Law makes a man see he is
guilty of death, and it passes the sentence of condemnation upon him, and it
makes him see there is no repeal of that sentence; thus the law leaves him. Now
a man would think, Can a man be more dead then thus? How can a man be more
dead? Yet he may be a thousand times more dead; for the livelynesse of a man is
but in a swound all this while: a man cannot be brisk, and peark, and
self-conceited, he is now laid in a swound, but is not stark dead. But when a
man comes to be Evangelically dead, he is more dead a great deal. And I will
show you it in these three things.

1. First, He is most dead that is hardest to recover: Now when a man is
legally dead, it is easy to recover that man; let but the lash of the law be
taken off, let but God let him alone; and the profits and pleasures of the
world, will make him alive again; his friends, and vanities, and delights, will
put life into him again, it is an easy matter to recover this man; but let a
man be evangelically dead, when the Gospel has deaded a man, he is a thousand
times more dead, and a great deal harder to recover, nothing can recover that
man but Christ; let all the profits in the world come, they cannot cheer him
without Christ; if the devil should come and put into his mind all good
conceits, and the good opinion of the world: If the Ministers should tell him
he is in a good estate, they cannot quicken his heart, he is dead still, he is
harder a thousand times to be revived then the other, as the Apostle says,
Col. 3. 2, 3. Set your affections on things that be above, not on things that
are on earth; for ye are dead, and your life is hid in Christ. The Gospel has
made you dead, and you cannot be revived by any thing but Christ, your life is
hid with Christ; do not you set your affections on things that are below, they
can never put life into you, therefore let not them take up your minds and
affections any more, for your life is in Christ alone.

2. Secondly, He is most dead that life it self cannot make alive: When a man
is but legally dead, the law has made him a dead man, and killed him, and
showed him he is a damned creature; this man, let him have but a little life,
or any thought of life come into him, let him have any affections toward God,
any seeming desires, it will make him think I am alive: But if the Gospel once
have made a man a dead man, life it self cannot quicken him, Christ himself
cannot make this man a live man in himself, though life come into him, and
though he has life from God, yet h^ himself is dead. I am dead through the
law, (says Paul) that I might live unto God; thus I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and that life I now live in the flesh, I live by Faith in
the Son of God, Gal. 2. 19, 20. When the Gospel had made him dead (for that is
the meaning of the words) he was not only dead by the law, but by the power of
the Gospel working by the law: Now, says he, though I have life, and Christ be
come into me, and lives in me, yet I do not live: I live, but not I, but it is
Christ that lives in me: I live, yet do not mistake me, I am a dead man, I
have no life, it is Christ that lives in me: when a man is evangelically dead,
it makes a man content, that God should keep life in his hand, and keep the
purse in his hand, and all in his hand, it makes him content to be without
strength and ability, and to have nothing in his own hand, but to have all from
the Lord; and he says, I am a dead man, and if I ever have comfort, I have
none in my self, I must go to Christ for comfort, and life, and strength, and
ability: and so for power and activity, and riches, and means, and maintenance,
and every thing; it is not my parts and gifts that can help me to them, but I
must go to Christ to fetch them: now it is the desire of man's heart to have
life at home, he cannot abide to have life in another hands: and though the
law, and hell it self proclaim a man a dead man, and make a man see himself a
dead man, yet it cannot kill this Principle, a man would have life and strength
in his own hand, and ability, and sufficiency in his own custody; we may see
this Principle in Gods own Children, though this Principle be begun to be
killed, yet it rests partly in Gods children, there is still a secret lust in
their hearts, to have life, and grace, and strength in their own keeping; and
if any child of God be negligent in coming to God, it is because of this
Principle that remains in him.

3. Thirdly, He is most dead that death has most power over: Now when a man is
legally dead, and the law has made him a dead man, though he be a dead man,
yet death has no power over him, his heart is stubborn still, and will not
look toward Christ and the Gospel, he is still as stubborn as ever he was; he
will roar and howl, and hear every Sermon, but still he has a hard heart, the
law has not power to break his heart to powder, and to soften his heart: but
when a man is evangelically dead, when the Gospel has made him dead, as it
does before it quickens a man, it breaks the sturdinesse of a man's heart, and
shatters a man all to pieces; that is the meaning of that place, Psalm. 147. 3.
He heals those that are broken in heart, and binds up their sores: Now he
is thus made a dead man, it makes his heart to burst under the weight of his
sins, and it beats him to powder: but a man that is only legally dead, he is
heart-whole still, and his spirit is as stout against the kind working of the
Gospel asever it was, nay, worse a great deal; there are none more hardened
then those that see themselves dead, damned creatures, by the power of the law,
without the power of the Gospel. But when the Gospel comes, it breaks the heart
to powder, Isa. 57. 15. Thus says the high and lofty one, He that inhabiteth
Eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, and with him
who is of an humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to give life to them that are of a contrite heart. This man is the object
of Mercy that is evangelically dead, he is the formal object of mercy: Why?
because he is dead with such a kind of death as has gotten power over him,
power to break his heart, to make it an humble and contrite heart: now says
the Lord, I will revive such a man. This man is the formal object of mercy, and
into him eternal life will come.

2. The Second thing I promised to show you, is the difference between these
two, between legal and evangelical Privation. Between one that is legally dead,
and one that is dead as the Gospel deads a man before it quickens him.

1. First, He that is legally dead lies all along in his death: but when the
Gospel makes a man a dead man, it makes him stand up that he might have life,
Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee life: He does not mean, stand up from being dead, but stand up
from the dead, and then Christ shall give thee life; he means such a standing
up from the dead, as before Christ gives him life: the Gospel does thus far
awaken a man, though he be more dead a thousand times, then he that is dead by
the law, yet thus far it quickens him, that he stands up from his secure
estate: when the law comes and shows a man that he is a dead man, he still lies
under his sins, he is a dead man, and cannot stand up that Christ may give him
life. That is the First thing.

2. Secondly, He that is legally dead, made dead only by the law, he is deaf to
the Gospel: but when a man is evangelically dead, it boars his ears and makes
him hear the voice of the Word, and not only so, but the voice of Christ in the
Word, Isa. 55. 3. Incline your ears and come unto me, hear and your soul shall
live: He calls those that were evangelically dead, Hear, and your soul shall
live; they are made able to hear: Let their profits, and old courses, and old
companions come and tempt them to walk as they have done, they are deaf of that
ear, they cannot go that way to work, no, now their ears are open heaven-wards,
seek the Lord, and you shall live, Amos 5. 6. They are made to seek the Lord,
thus much life they have: though they are more dead in regard of their own
misery, then one that is dead by the law; yet thus much life they have put into
them, that they will go and seek unto God in the use of the means, and follow
him up and down, and nothing will satisfy the heart but Christ, they leave no
stone unroled, they seek up and down every where.

3. Thirdly, He that is legally dead, it is a kind of death to love; but he
that is evangelically dead, it is a death of love; when the Church in the
Canticles was but sensible of the countenance of Christ, she was presently sick
of love, I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my welbeloved,
tell him that I am sick of love, Cant. 5. There is a great deal of difference
between sickness and death, death is a total privation of life; sickness is
but a partial privation: now when the Gospel has wrought upon a man that he
has some of Christ, and is not deprived of all, that privation makes him sick
of love; but when the Gospel makes a man see he is dead, and altogether
deprived of Christ, now he is dead of love: when a man is legally dead, this is
his death that he is damned, and must go to hell; this is his death that he
has no mercy, not that he has not grace, and holiness, and Christ; but if a
man be evangelically dead, this is his death, that he has not Christ.

The Use is this, If there be any that the law has made dead, rest not Joh.
11. Christ staid four days after Lazarus was dead before he would raise him,
because he would have him irrecoverably dead before he would raise him: Lord,
(says Martha) he stinketh, f^r he has been dead four days, verse. 39. If he
had raised him sooner, his glory had not been so great: so thou must labor to
be dead in deed, and to be buried, and to be loathsome and abominable, and then
Christ will quicken thee: It is certain, that Gods Children have some of this
death wrought in them, before they are quickened at all; for death is before
quickening in order of nature: there must be a corruption of one thing, before
there can be a generation of another; there must be a privation of one form,
before there can be an introduction of another: A child of God must be dead
before he can be quickened. Now then, if he will have more life, he must labor
to be dead more and more: now thou must labor to have this death truly begun
to be wrought in thee, thou must labor to have the love of this world and
self-conceitednesse altogether dead in thee. Hos. 6. 2. After two days will he
revive us, and the third day will he raise us up, and we shall live in his
sight: A man may be alive, though he have been seemingly dead twenty four
hours; therefore it is a good custom among us to keep men near two days before
we bury them, that we may be sure they are thoroughly dead; for there are many
have been buried alive: so after two days he will revive us, and the third day
he will raise us up: when a man is dead indeed, and has his liveliness
thoroughly killed in him, then God will revive him; if he should revive him
before, his glory would not be so great, if he should revive him before he were
quite dead; when Ahab humbled himself, and put on sackcloth, and went softly, a
man would have thought he had been dead; but in the next Chapter 1 King. 2^.
we may see he is alive again. So Ananias and Sapphira, one would have thought
their covetousness had been dead, (whether they were any Acts 5.
of the three thousand that were pricked at Peter's Sermon, I dispute not; but
they were pricked and made sensible of their damned estate, and pretended to
lay down all at the Apostles feet, one would have thought their covetousness
had been dead) but yet it was alive: therefore labor that the Gospel may make
thee thoroughly dead.

THE SPIRITUAL WATCH.
2 Timothy 4. 5. Watch thou in all things.
IN the verses going before we have, 1. The charge that the Apostle gives to
Timothy, ver. 1. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that
shall judge the quick and the dead. There are many duties we are loath to come
unto, and are tempted from; so that we have need of all strong cords to draw us
to them.

2. We have the thing he gives him this charge for; and that is, ver. 2. Preach
the Word in season, and out of season, etc. which duty strongly lies upon the
Ministers of the Gospel, to hold forth the Word of God, to edify and convert
men's souls.

3. Here is the reason why he gives him this charge, and that is in the third
and fourth verses, For the time will come, when they will not endure sound
Doctrine, etc. The more danger there is among people, the more instant should
Ministers be, to preach the Word unto the conscience. Now in the verse I have
read unto you, the Apostle persuades Tim^thy to watchfulness; as who should
say, Though others be careless and negligent, yet I would have thee to be
watchful, consider, thou art a Watchman. Every Christian is to watch over his
own ways, and those that are committed to his charge: but Ministers are
watchmen over their people, therefore here is a double reason to move him to
watchfulness; both in regard of his own soul, and the people he was set over,
Mark. 13. 37. our Savior says, What I say to you, I say to all, Watch. And
what Paul says here to Timothy, I may say to all Christians, Watch in all
things.

For the better handling of this point, I will show you,

First, What it is to watch.

Secondly, The things we must watch.

Thirdly, The reasons of it.

First, What it is to watch. And to watch in Scripture is taken two What it is
to watch.
ways, Literally, and Spiritually.

First, Watching sometimes is taken Literally, and then it signifies a waking,
Literally.
when the time, or nature calls not for sleep; for there is a difference
between watching, and waking: we are all awake at this time, or else ought to
be, but yet we cannot be said to watch; but this is to watch, when time or
nature calls for sleep. When a man awaketh all night, or the greatest part of
the night, as Luke 2. 8. The Shepherds were watching their flocks by night: And
this is two fold, either Ordinary, or Extraordinary.

Ordinary watching is contrary to immoderatenesse in sleeping. As when Ordinary.
a man is sober in eating, and drinking, and other lawful things; so we ought
to be sober in our sleep, for it is a dangerous thing, if we suffer immoderate
sleep to fall upon us.

Now Extraordinary watching is contrary to sleep it self, as ordinary
Extraordinary.
watching is contrary to sleepiness; for it takes away our natural sleep,
which otherwise we are to have. And this is for two reasons:

The first is for a Civil end, when we watch with those that are sick, as a For
a civil end.
duty of Charity; it is fit that those that are well, should break their
natural sleep and rest, to be helpful to those that are sick; this is a Civil
end.

Secondly, There is a Spiritual end of extraordinary watching, and that For a
Spiritual end.
is, when a man is not only moderate in sleeping, but abates himself of that
rest he may lawfully take, for a Spiritual end. As Saint Peter says, Watch
unto prayer. 1 Pet. 4. 7. and the Church, Lament. 2. 19. watched to humble
their souls under Gods hand. For sometimes we have need to break our very
natural rest, for the good of our souls. Though we be never so careful, and
conscionable in the day time, yet it may so fall out, that the day will not be
enough, but we must entrench upon the night also, to seek the Lord
extraordinarily; but this watching is not here meant, though it be sometimes
required. But a Spiritual watching is specially meant, which includes
Spiritually.
Three things in it.

First, It does note a readiness of mind to be drowzy; for as in natural It
implies proneness to be drowzy.
and literal watching, it does note a natural proneness to be drowzy, either
through the darkness of the night, or the heat of the weather, or the like; so
this spiritual watching signifies unto us, that we are naturally subject to be
secure spiritually, and vain, and idle, and negligent, and have need to be
rouzed up: for indeed all Commandments since the Fall, are such as do not agree
with our nature; as when he commands us to seek the Lord while he may be found,
that intimates, that we are by nature apt to put it off, and to be careless of
making our peace with God; and when the Lord says, pray always, it does
imply, how backward we are to that duty, how apt to neglect it, or to shuffle
it over, and to be lukewarm in it: before the Fall when God did bid man do any
thing, the bidding of him did imply, that if he were not careful, he was in a
possibility of breaking the commandments; it did not argue a proneness to break
them: but since the Fall, the commandments of God, whatsoever God has
commanded us to do, either for matter or manner of it, it implies, how
backward to, and untoward we are in doing it.

Secondly, Watchfulness does imply a labor and endeavor in our selves, to
take off this sinful pronenesse to evil that is in us, and to be seriously
stirred Endeavor to stir up our selves.
up, to look after our Duty, whatsoever it is, both toward God, and toward
man, we ought to shake off all untowardnesse of Spirit, whereby we are unfit to
Watch; Watchfulness implies this also, Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that
sleep, and stand up from the dead: as who should say, Shake off thy
drowzinesse, and labor to break off this folly of heart, whereby thou go
dreaming on, and rouse up thy spirit, and stand upon thy guard.

The Third and main thing: This Watchfulness does include some further It is an
intentive Consideration in all Cases.
business or duty to be done that is not yet performed; for watchfulness is an
act to help forward some further act: As for example, We are bound to remember
God in all our ways; the want of this, is the reason we so often sin against
God; now if we did remember God, if we did remember his Holiness, if we did
remember the greatness of his Power, and the strictness of his Justice
against Sin, if we did remember our Death, and what account we are to make
before him, this would be a great help to keep us from sin; now if we would
remember this, a special way to help us, is to watch, as Acts 20. 31. Watch and
remember, says the Apostle; he being desirous that they should remember the
admonitions which he had propounded, he lays down this as a special means to
help them hereunto, to watch: So we are to be watchful, that we may be sober in
eating and drinking, and all lawful things; for how sudduly do distempers break
in upon us, unless a man look to himself? now watchfulness is an excellent
help to Sobriety, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. Let us watch and be sober: We had need to
watch whatsoever we go about, that we may be sober in it; whatsoever wordly
business we go about in our Callings, we had need to have this watchfulness,
that we be not overwhelmed, and over head and ears in the world, that we may
not be intemperate in our eating and drinking, that we may not give our selves
too much liberty and freedom in talking and discoursing of the things here
below; so we are bound to keep our garments, that our nakedness may not be
seen, that the sins that are up and down in the world do not defile them, that
the temptations, and allurements, and occasions we meet withal, and the
examples of the times, and such like, do not take away our righteousness from
us: now watchfulness is an help hereunto, as we may see, Rev. 16. 15. the text
says, Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments: So that
watchfulness is an excellent help for a further act to be done: when a man
has some duty or other to be done, which the Lord requires should be done with
care and diligence, watchfulness is a help thereunto, as Hab. 2. 1. the
Prophet knowing there was some Prophecy to be bestowed upon them, the Prophet
labored to be in a fit case to receive it; and that he might so be, I will
watch says he: in a word, watchfulness, is an intentive consideratenesse of
the heart, when a man does consider how he is to do every thing, lest he be
surprised either by Satan, or the world, or by his own subtle flesh; when a man
is considerative, and takes heed to himself, to his thoughts, and his words,
and all his actions, as our Savior says, Take heed, Watch, and Pray, Mark.
13. 33. When he would describe watchfulness, what it is, he sets another
phrase by it to open it to us, Take heed, watch and pray. There is a kind of
heedlessenesse that is apt to cleave to the heart, whereby the heart is
careless what snares are before it: now watchfulness does take off this, and
makes a man to take more heed in whatsoever he does, so that there can be no
opportunity of doing good, but he takes it; no good motion is suggested, but he
lies at catch to receive it, for this is watchfulness. Prove. 8. 33. Blessed
is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates: here you may see
watchfulness is expressed, when a man comes into the presence of Christ,
waiting to hear whatsoever shall come from Christ, and there is nothing that
drops from the Minister that concerns him, but he is ready to receive it; when
a man waits to be ready to obey whatsoever commandment the Lord delivers, and
to take heed to avoid whatsoever the Lord forbids. This is watchfulness.

Now the second thing is, what we must watch? I Answer, We must watch What we
must watch.
our selves, and all the duties of Religion, and time.

First we must watch over our selves. Ponder thy paths, says the Wise Our
Selves.
man, Prove. 4. 26. as who should say, Look to thy self; take heed to every step
that it be ordered aright: How soon may a man be turned out of the way? How
soon was David carried away into those two great sins of Murder and Adultery?
How soon was Peter put besides his Resolution in the high Priests Hall, for
want of watchfulness? If he had watched and remembered our Saviors item, he had
never denied his Master: A man is mavelous ready to be carried away,
therefore we must watch our selves.

First, And in particular we must watch our own thoughts: naturally all our
thoughts are idle and unprofitable, our minds are apt to spend themselves Our
thoughts.
upon that which will do us no good: we had need therefore to watch over our
thoughts, Deuteronomy. 15. 9. Beware (says the text) that there be not an evil
thought in thy heart: Take heed that vain thoughts come not into thy mind, idle
thoughts, or wordly thoughts will dead us, and dull us to the service of God,
and poison the heart, and no good thing can dwell in us, if we do not look unto
our thoughts: the eyes of the Lord are upon our thoughts, therefore watch over
thy thoughts.

Secondly, We should watch over the Heart it self: The heart is the Heart.
very spring, there be the very issues of Life and Death, the actions flow from
thence; therefore, Prove. 4. 23. the wise man says, Keep thy heart with all
keeping: as who should say, Thy heart is deceitful and desperate, it will make
thee believe thou art going to heaven, when it leads thee to hell; if thou be
never so well affected for a time, this heart will fly off, it is naturally so
naught and reprobate to what is good; Therefore keep thy heart with all
diligence.

Thirdly, Watch over thy Words: Psalm. 141. 3. Set a watch, O Lord, before Words.
the door of my lips. We must watch our lips, and have a care that our words be
agreeable to Gods Word, and seasoned with salt, and that we shun all manner of
communication, that does not minister grace to the hearers; we must take heed
lest idle words proceed out of our mouths, for which we must give an account at
the day of Judgment; how many times do such words proceed out of our mouths
that we would give a world to recall again, only because we do not watch over
your words, that they may be such as may tend to edifying, and express the
grace that is within?

Fourthly, Again, we should watch over our Senses, we should make a covenant
with our eyes, as Job speaks chap. 31. 1. not to look upon a maid; Senses, Eyes.
when our eyes are looking up and down, though they be not caught with
adultery, or such gross sins, yet there is danger to be caught one way or
other; for when a man looks upon the Objects of the world, as good, and the
like, how ready is his mind to be carried after it? Men are led by their eyes,
they carry the mind and heart with them, therefore we should have a care, that
whatsoever comes to our eyes, we make a good use of.

Fistly, Again, we should set a watch before our Ears we should take heed what
we hear, when we come in company, left we be infected by what Ears.
is spoken; we should have an hedge about our ears, to stop them from unfavoury
things. Does not the ear take words, says Job? We should have tasting ears,
that should be able to taste and relish the good words that are spoken, and
hate the contrary, and distaste them.

Lastly, We should watch our selves, ever the whole man: Only take heed to thy
self, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. As who should say, This is the only thing; have Whole selves.
a care of, watch over thy self, lest thy self undo thy self; there is no
enemy so dangerous unto us as our selves: the Devil in hell cannot do us so
much mischief How many corruptions are there in us, to draw us from God, and
incite us unto sin? There are abundance of corruptions lying in the heart of
man, to make a man unfit for any thing that is good; that is, idleness in the
understanding, it cannot abide to take pains, and exercise it self in Divine
matters. There is in the will and affections, covetousness, and abundance of
corrupt inclinations, that if a man look not to, it will break forth: So that
this is the thing we must watch over, our selves.

Secondly, We are to watch over the duties of Religion; as for example, Duties
of Religion.
we are to watch unto prayer, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 4. 7. we are to
watch to meditating, and reading, and hearing of the Word of God. Otherwise
though we do them for the matter of them, yet we cannot for the right form, and
manner of them: though our hearts be in a pretty good tune for the present, yet
we cannot hold this frame, if we watch not thereunto. Rev. 3. 3. is an
excellent place, If you will not watch, says the Text, and hold fast, I will
come against thee as a chief in the night: As who should say, Stir up thy self
and watch, that thou may hold fast; if thou have got any hatred of sin in thy
heart, hold it fast; if strength against corruption, hold it fast. How shall I
do that? why watch says ^e, of else Christ will come against thee as a thief.
If a book be in a man's hand when he is drowzy, it will fall out, he cannot hold
it fast; So when a m^ns heart is drowzy, and secure, it will let go comfort,
and any thing that God has bestowed for the good of the soul; therefore we
ought ^o watch: if we have any sweet disposition of heart, to go on in the
Service of God, and in the duties of Religion, we may go on if we be watchful.
And now to branch this into particulars.

First, We must watch before the Duty.

Secondly, We must watch in the Duty.

Thirdly, We must watch after the Duty.

First; We must watch before the Duty. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it
holy, Exodus 20. 8. So I may say, remember Prayer, to keep it holy; Before Duty.
remember Meditation, to keep it holy; remember all the duties of Religion, to
keep them holy, and perform them in an holy manner: think of them before you go
about the performance of them; we cannot pray unless we watch unto prayer,
unless we be careful, and have our eyes in our heads, before we go about the
duty.

In the morning as soon as we awake, we should think of prayer; and when
tempted to sin, we should think of prayer. If I sin, how can I pray unto God? I
have ever and anon need to pour out my prayers before God; now if I commit
these and these sins, how can I look up to heaven, when my conscience does
reproach me for sin? So when we hear the word of God, look to thy foot when
thou come into the house of God, Eccles. 5. 1. that is, Before thou go
into the House of God to hear the Word of Salvation, see into thine own heart,
think whose wo^^ it is thou hear; and that thou go to hear the Word, that
shall judge thee at the last day. When thou come into the presence of God,
take heed lest thou hear as fools hear; and take heed lest thou prayest as
fools pray; and come to the Sacrament, as fools use to come; we should watch
before the duty, that all things may be in a readiness, before we come to the
performance of it, that we may prevent all things that may hinder us, and be
^itted with all things that may help forward the duty; that time, place, and
all advantages may meet together for the better doing of it.

Then secondly, We must watch in the duty, as well as before the duty. In Duty
As the Apostle speaks concerning prayer, so I may say concerning all other
duties, Contain in pr^^^^, and watch therein with thanksgiving, Col. 4. 2. As
we are to watch before, that we may have preparation, so we must watch in the
duty, that we may rightly discharge it; for though a man has been watchful
before the duty, and has been prepared in some measure, and sitted, yet you
are not without danger. But when you are in prayer, and when you are at the
Lords Table, or any other duty; for all your former preparation, if you be not
watchful now, you may fail in some kind or other, and so mar the duty;
therefore we should watch in the duty, that our hearts may be waking in it, and
our mind attentive upon it, that our hearts may be fixed upon that we are
about; My (...) fixed, my heart is fixed, says the Prophet David; he was a
joyful man, he repeats it again and again; as if a man should be jocund, and
say, I have got it, I have got it. We should get hearts fixed upon the duty
that so we may not have wavering hearts, half off, and half on the duty; but
that the whole man may be employed about it.

Thirdly, We should be watchful after the duty, that we may not lose the
benefit, and reward of the duty, lest the subtilties of Satan, and the wiles of
our own hearts, do rob us of the fruits of it; though a man hears very
attentively, and pray, and perform all other duties very enlargedly, yet when
he has done all, he may lose the comfort and reward of the duty. Therefore
when we hear the word, we should watch over our hearts, that the fouls of the
air may not pluck it out again, that if we have any quickening, we may not lose
it again; if we have heard any thing that has helped us forward in Grace, we
should take heed that we lose not the ground again; As the Publican, as soon
as he had prayed to God, and performed an Ordinance aright, how careful was he
not to lose the benefit thereof? He went to the Temple to pray, and he was
watchful before the duty; thinking, I am now going to pray, and power out my
soul before God. He was watchful in the duty, for you may see how humbly, and
feelingly, and penitently he did pray; standing a far off, and smiting upon his
breast, and not li^^ng up his eyes to heaven, bewailing the hardness of his own
heart, and rowzing it up, Lord be merciful to me a sinner: and when he had done
this, he was careful afterward, for the Text says, Luke 18. 14. As he had
prayed for mercy, so he was careful to carry it along with him. He prayed that
he might be justified, and as he prayed for it, so he was careful to carry home
justification in his bosom. So when we are at a Sermon, we should watch, that
we may go home quickened, and bettered: and when we are at conference, we should
watch that we may return home with the fruit and benefit of the duty: So for
all other Ordinances, we should be careful and watchful, that we may not lose
the reward, for the Devil is crafty, and our own hearts are ready to betray us,
therefore we had need be watchful; and that is the second thing we should
watch, the duties of Religion.

Thirdly, We should watch times and seasons; God knows what miserable things
are a coming, therefore what time the Lord allots us, we had Time. Present time.
need improve it to the best advantage, that we may redeem the time. How many
hours do run from us, before we are aware? How many days, and months, and
years, have we let slip away, and we are little the better? Our time is a
special thing, and therefore we had need to watch it, that we may improve it to
the best advantage, that we may be no longer fools, but wise in the employing
of it.

Secondly, We should watch all the times of Gods anger and displeasure; it is a
miserable thing when a man passes on like a fool, and Gods Time of Gods wrath.
anger comes forth, and a man is not provided, has not a defense for it. There
be days of anger, and visitation, when God comes to visit people for their
sins; to visit a parish, to visit a family, to visit a person; and what a woeful
thing is it, for a man to be drowzy and negligent, when Gods anger bursts
forth, and so he has no evidence of comfort to his soul; be knows not how to
meet God in the field? But when the wrath of God breaks out in any kind upon
his Goods, or Wife, or Children, or Body, or Friends, or any thing, he is at a
loss, and knows not what to do; he is fain to sink under the hand of God, and
has no refuge to fly unto; therefore we should watch against the day of Gods
anger.

Thirdly, We should watch over the times of Grace: for there be gracious Time
of Grace.
and acceptable times, as the Apostle calls them, 2 Cor. 6. 21. Many times good
motions come in: Now if we do not watch, to keep them, and nourish them in our
hearts, the Lord will pass us by at another time, and we shall not be moved.
Sometimes God affects thy heart at a Sermon, and puts in a good resolution to
forsake sin, and lead a new life; now have a care to keep these resolutions,
and let them not perish in thee, and go out like lightning. The Lord has given
many a blessed season, and opportunity of mercy, the water was moved, if he
would have but stepped in, if he would but have taken hold of the mercy, he
might have had it; but afterward, he may go mourning, and thirsting, and
longing, and never have the mercy offered more; and it is well if he can be
humbled for missing of that mercy, by his neglect, and watch for the future the
times of Grace.

Again we should watch the times of Death; we are all mortal men, Death.
must die, and Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find
him so doing, Mat. 24. 5. If any of us should dye, before we are converted, and
brought home to God, we perish for ever: Whosoever thou art, if thou die in thy
sins with thy dead, hard, unsanctified, unregenerate heart, thou art damned,
thou go to Hell. Therefore watch for the coming of death, that so when it
comes, it may not be the King of Terrors, and an amazement to thy heart.

Again, We must watch for the day of Judgment; as Death leaves us, so Judgment
will find us: Therefore we should consider with our selves seriously, Judgment.
the strictness of the account we are to give at the dreadful day of the Son
of man, when all works shall be brought to a Touchstone, and all secrets shall
be Preached on the House top. It is an excellent thing, when a man does
consider these things before hand; when a man has looked upon his thoughts,
for they shall be Judged; and upon his speeches, and upon all his ways, for
they shall all be brought before the Judgment Seat of God; and according as a
man has done, such reward he shall receive for evermore.

The next thing, is, the Reasons why we are to Watch. Reasons. Our proneness to
be drowzy.


And the First Reason is, Because we are mavelous prone to be Drowzy in
Spiritual things. In temporal things we are watchful enough; for Covetousness,
and Pride, and the like, we are very watchful, but in Spiritual things, how
subject are we to Drowzyness? Paul himself was fain to complain, I know that in
me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing, Romans 7. 18. Is thy heart
better then Saint Paul's? If he were left to himself, he should be as miserable,
and proud, and untoward as another; and have as vile an heart as another: and
therefore that made him watch. Therefore we had need to watch, for how loath
are we to be brought to watch? And how unwilling to take such an hard piece of
service to do? we are mavelous apt to be secure. If Jonah had watched, if he
had had a watch over his heart, he would have gone to Nineveh; but for want of
watchfulness, he ran away. Cant. 5. 2. I sleep, says the Church; it was not
like the sleep of she wicked, and ungodly, for her heart waked; but she was
asleep, she was proud, and mavelous secure, there was a great deal of
untowardnesse of spirit grew upon her: And as we are untoward to that which is
good, so we are prone to that which is evil; we are glued naturally to the
world, and the things of this life, it is an easy thing to draw us away into
evil, therefore we had need to watch. As it is said of the Disciples of Christ
in regard of temporal drowziness, so it is with us, in regard of Spiritual
drowziness, Matthew. 26. 43. He came and found them asleep again, for their eyes
were heavy: Though Christ had awakened them, and jogged them, yet they were
asleep again, for their eyes were heavy; So though the Lord has awakened us,
even now we were awakened by a Cross, by Sickness, by a Sermon, by a Reproof,
something or other God has been pleased to waken us by; but all on the sudden
we fall asleep again, for our hearts are very heavy: as it is with an heavy
brain, what a do he has to keep himself awake? though he pinch himself, and
rowze up himself, yet he has much ado to keep his eyes open; so the heart of
man is so drowzy, that he has much ado^ to keep any Grace alive in himself; we
are so apt to be so secure, that we had need to watch. Zech. 4. 1. the Prophet
complains of the drowziness of his heart, The Angel that talked with me, came
again and waked me, as a man is wakened out of his sleep: when God was talking
with him, he fell into a sleep. So when we are in Prayer, we have much ado to
hold out in the duty, we have such vile natures, and cursed dispositions. How
ought we then to watch over our selves?

Secondly, Another reason why we should be watchful, is, because our life is a
Warfare, and we do not lie like two Armies in a field, removed Christians life
is a Warfare.
one from the other; but we lie in the midst of our enemies round about us, and
so they are ready to surprise us.

The greatest means of doing us mischief, are most commonly those things we
have need of; as our meat, and drink, and affairs, and callings; The world an
Eenemy.
we cannot go to prayer, but worldly thoughts are ready to entangle us; we
cannot go to the House of God, but a man is in danger to be intrapped. There is
danger in every thing we go about, by reason of the worlds powerful
enticements, therefore we had need to stand upon our guard, and be careful, for
else how can we avoid to be suprized, and led away? This is the reason, why so
many sink into Perdition: Many that have given good hopes, many that have
promised excellent things, have come to nothing, but have fallen away as the
fall of a leaf. Whence comes this, but because they have not been careful and
watchful?

The Devil is watchful, to ensnare and entrap us, therefore we should watch The
Devil
to avoid his snares; As the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Be sober and watchful,
for your Adversary, the Devil, goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he
may devour: The Devil is always busy, and therefore we had need watch and
busy our selves, and be careful at all times: when we are secure, and consider
not God, and consider not the good of our Souls, and the peace of our
Consciences; Satan presently has advantage against us: If the Devil had any
thing else to do, it were something, but the Devil has nothing to do, but to
hurt us, and lay Siege against us; All his practice, from the beginning of the
world to this day, is to go roaming and ranging up and down to do mischief, it
is all his employment, from the beginning of the day to the end thereof; If he
get us alone, he will ensnare us there; if not there, he will ensnare us in
company; if he cannot get us there, he will get us in a Sermon, and if any
thing falls against our lusts, he will cause our hearts to rise against it. Now
when we do not watch over our selves, we are led away by Satan; therefore we
had need be careful, for the Devil is always watchful, therefore we should
labor to be always provided to resist him.

Again, we have the flesh that is continually about us, it is an enemy within
us, it is that which does betray us to the World, and the Devil, even our own
hearts do betray us, and therefore we had need be careful; we have enemies from
without, and our own hearts within, and all to undo us. Take a man that is in a
good way, and has all means, and helps to make him Godly, though there be no
temptation from without, yet he may de damned from his own heart, if he be not
delivered from it. Jam. 1. 14. Every man is tempted by his own lusts, and Jam.
4. 5. The Spirit that is within us lusts to envy, and covetousness, and
security, and vanity, and carnal ease, it lusts after these things, and
therefore we had need to watch.

A Third reason is, Because it will do us a great deal of good: for as if we do
not watch we are easily surprised, so if we do watch it is an easy thing to
The certain advantage of Watchfulness.
stand: all our miscarriages in the duties of Religion, lie in security;
whereas if we were watchful, and would walk with eyes in our heads, and would
consider the snares that be laid for us, and consider Gods threatenings, and
Commandments, the duties of Religion would be easy: For if we do not watch,
the Devil, and the World, and the Flesh have advantage against us; but if we do
watch, this is as it were a fence to the hear^, to hedge a man in to keep him
safe. Rev. 3. 2. There is an excellent place, Be watchful* and strengthen the
things that remain; it is the strength of the soul. When a man watches, let a
man have but a little grace, suppose a man be marvellously fallen off, and has
but a little good remaining, a few graces in him; a little faith, a little
hope, a little sanctified desire; he has but a little strength to go on
against sin, if a man does but now watch, if a man do but husband this little,
how strong will he be? A little Faith is able to overcome all the Devils in
Hell, well managed: a little hope is able to keep a man above water from
sinking: a little strength is able to maintain the Combat: a little affection
to goodness, if a man have a careful heart to improve it to the uttermost,
will go a great way; if a man did but watch, it would strengthen the things
that remain. Though a man were never so infeebled, and come to never so low an
ebb, watchfulness is a stay and strength to the heart.

Fourthly, Again if we do not watch, we cannot so much as pray to God to We
cannot else expect help or pardon.
forgive us: our consciences tell us, unless the Lord save us, we cannot be
saved; now how can we expect that God should save us, if we do not pray unto
him? And we cannot pray to him to save us, unless we watch: it is to tempt
God, to pray to him to preserve us from evil, when we do not watch over our
selves: it is to tempt God, to pray to him to quicken us, when we deaden our
selves: to entreat God to give us an holy mind, when we our selves let in
vain thoughts. Therefore see what Christ speaks, Mar. 14. 38. Watch and Pray,
that ye fall not into temptation: As who should say, You cannot Pray that you
may not enter into temptation, you tempt God if you entreat him to do any
thing, if you do not vvatch over your own souls. Though a man has no Activity
to do any good, yet God will have him be vvatchful; if he mean to purify a
man, he will make him purify himself; if he mean to keep him from pride, he
will make his own heart resist pride: therefore watch, that thou enter not
into temptation, if thou mean to pray to God, not to lead thee into temptation.

But you will say, All a man's watching will do no good, except God watches
over him, Psalm. 127. 1. Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchmen watch in
vain.

I answer, It Is true indeed, unless the Lord keeps a man's soul, all a man's

A Fourth Reason is, Because this is the very means prescribed by God to do us
good: It is the very remedy that the Lord of Heaven has appointed Gods
appointment.
unto us to save us from danger, and keep us from falling; the Lord has
sanctified this means to this very end and purpose: therefore when our Savior
Christ would dissuade his people from carking and caring for the things of this
life, Luke 21. 36. see what means he prescribes and lays down to do it, Be
watchful (says he) and pray: the world is ready to get in, therefore watch
(says he) and pray always, that you may be accounted worthy to escape these
things: So that we see this the means prescribed by God himself, to escape the
falling into sin.

Fifthly, Again, We should be so much the more careful in this watch, None can
Watch for us.
because no other can watch for us: in outward things one man may watch, while
another sleeps; as in sailing, when all the rest are asleep, there is one
watches; so in war, when all the Soldiers lie in their tents asleep, it may
be some few are watching, that the rest may take their rest: but it is not so
in regard of our souls, one man cannot watch while another man sleeps, but
every man must watch over his own heart: If we do not watch our own souls, we
shall perish; and if we do not perish everlastingly, we shall have miserable
temptations, and evils, and many inconveniences we shall be exposed unto.

But some may say, Are not Ministers to watch over us? How then is every man to
watch over himself? Ministers are watchmen: Son of man, I have made thee a
watchman over the house of Israel, says the Lord to the Prophet Ezekiel, and
Heb. 13. 17. The Apostle speaking of Ministers, says, They watch for your
souls?

I Answer, The word in the Original is not for your souls, but over your souls;
to watch for a man, is to watch for another that he may not watch; watch for
the people, that the people may not watch; but the Ministers are to watch over
the people, that they may watch: as when a man watches Deer, or Hawks, he
watches them, that they may watch and not sleep, that so he may tame them: as
a man that watches with a man which is sick of the Lethargy, which is such a
Dise^se, that if a man be let sleep, he goes away in his sleep, therefore
their friends stand about them, to watch over them, that they may not sleep,
knowing that if they do sleep, their lives are hazarded; and if they see them
but to slumber, they awaken them, lest in their sleep they die, and go away: So
it is with the Ministers of the Gospel, we ought to watch over your souls, that
you may not sleep: for you are all sick of the Lethargy of sin, and if ye
sleep, you go away, if you be not careful for heaven, and heavenly things; if
you follow vanity and security of heart, and do not take heed to avoid sin,
your souls will die, therefore the Ministers are to watch over you, and keep
you from sleeping, and show you the danger of it, and labor to awaken you, and
keep your eyes waking.

The First Use is, To condemn the infinite security that is grown upon people:
Use. Condemning the general neglect of Watchfulness.
that though it be so excellent a duty for a man to watch, yet where is the man
almost, that is careful of it? They put this duty over to God, as if it did not
belong to them, they will watch over outward things, for plowing, and sowing,
and reaping, and the like; but for the good of their souls, they never acquaint
themselves with this watching; their hearts are like the wilderness, as the
wilderness is open for all wild-beasts, so their hearts are open for all
temptations, that is the reason they have such dead hearts, and cold
affections, that is the reason they look so little after salvation and eternal
life, because people never look after this duty of watchfulness; nay, they are
so far from watching how to be saved, that they watch how the devil may take
them; when a man sins, he wishes the Devil would help him to more sin: a
covetous man is so far from watching over his sin, that he would have more
opportunities, and more occasions of getting; the Devil cannot come fast enough
to fill his heart with these things: So if a man be given to pleasure, he
thinks he cannot have enough, but would have more still. Thus people would have
the Devil put more corn into the hopper: They are so far from watching for
good, that they watch for evil, they devise evil upon their beds, as the
Prophet Micah speaks: They are possessed with the spirit of slumber, they have
eyes and see not, they have ears and hear not, hearts and understand not; they
do not know what watchfulness is, if they do, they are the less excusable,
because they practice it not, they do not watch and wake unto Prayer, that they
may not enter into temptation, but are carried away with the world and sin.

The Second Use is, To them that are Godly in some measure; that we Reproving
the godly's too great neglect.
cannot say they altogether do not watch, yet how negligent are they in this
duty? Many Christians are there among us that have some goodness in them, yet
how does this duty lie unpractised? whence come all the vanities in our minds,
and untowardnesse in the Ordinances of God? Whence comes all unfruitfulnesse in
our meetings, and unsettlednesse in our Consciences? It is because we do not
watch: Whence comes it that we are no more ready to good duties? When we are
called forth on the sudden to pray or do any thing for the good of Gods Church
and People, that we are so unfit to do it, and so backward; it is for want of
watchfulness. Nay, what is the reason that we perform not the Worship of God in
our Families better, but because we do not watch: the very Regenerate
themselves, what a world of mischief do they do to their own souls, for want of
this duty of watchfulness? How do they swell in sin, and are slack in
goodness, and slubber over Gods service? How do they favor themselves too too
much, and suffer the dishonor of God, by the wicked? and suffer their own
hearts to dishonor him too too much?

Thirdly, The next Use shall be to show you the Rules that are to be observed
Directing how to watch.
in watching, and the Rules are these: If you would watch over your selves.

First, Count watchfulness your very life, and think if you let watchfulness
Account watchfulness our life.
go, you let your life go; for if once watchfulness go, how dead are you in
Prayer, and hearing the Word of God? So that the security of the heart, will
be the death of the heart; wherefore if we would go on in watching, let us
labor to keep this Holy disposition; count it your very lives, and think with
your selves, I let Life go, if I let Watchfulness go. We use to say of Sleep,
that it is the brother of Death, and 1 These. 5. 6. we may see the Phrase used
by the Apostle; where waking is put for living, and sleeping, for dying, that
is the meaning of the words. So that as sleep, natural sleep, does lively
represent death; so it is with Spiritual sleep, which is the death of the
soul. Therefore do thou find thy self to be out of frame, and not vvatch over
thy vvayes? then think with thy self that thou art a dead man, and take up thy
vvatch as fast as thou can again.

Secondly, Thou must let thy watch stand Catholically, universally in all
Watching in all things.
duties, and all times; vvatch thereunto, and persevere therein; we must not
only watch, but Persevere. Be careful in the morning how we may begin our
vvatch; in the day, how we may spend it; at night, how we may end it. So
we must vvatch in all duties; when we go to Prayer, we must vvatch in
prayer; when you go about your Callings, vvatch about them; when we are
alone, we should be vvatchful; and when we are in Company, we should be
vvatchful, for the Devil, and our own souls, plot a great deal of mischief
against us, we must vvatch in all places; in our houses, and without doors,
and in the fields; we are still in danger wheresoever we are.

Thirdly, We should proportion our watch, according as the duty is we take
Proportioning it to what we are about.
in hand, so our watching may be; there is one kind of watching for one kind
of duty, another for another. If we be to go about our callings, then our
watching must be against distrustfulnesse, and covetousness, and distracting
cares; that so we may not be over head and ears in the world. If our duty be
prayer, we must have an eye to the promises, and take hold on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and come in his mediation and his only. So whatsoever duty it be, if
it be hearing of the Word of God, there is a watchfulness to be proportionable
to it. A man should think, the word will do me no good, unless the Lord meet
with my lusts: I have an unmortified heart, and unless the Lord work upon
me, I shall never lie down under him. Therefore we should be vvatchful, that
we may practice, and be able to apply whatsoever is spoken to us; we are to
keep a due watchfulness, for that which is due to one thing is not due to
another; that which is sufficient for one, is not for another.

Fourthly, Take heed of all things that may hinder Watchfulness. Avoiding
hindrances. Vaincompany.


And first, Take heed of vain Company. If we will be watchful, we must
exercise our selves with those that are godly. To be with secure Christians,
is the way to be secure; this will hinder a man: A man had better be alone,
then be in bad Company, as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 102. 7. I watch and
am alone as a Sparrow on the house top: he was alone, and yet he was watching.
A man when he is alone may be watching, rather then when he is in such Company:
a man can never look to himself well, unless he prize the Communion of Saints.

Secondly, A man should be sober; Take heed of Spiritual Drunkenness: Spiritual
drunkenness.
Take heed of the cares of this life, and that you be not immoderate in any
lawful thing; we should stand upon our guard, and keep our hearts with all
manner of keeping; if our hearts grow drowzy and idle, and if we neglect
Sobriety, then we are gone, therefore in Scripture these are put together, be
^^ber, and wat^^, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 8. I do not mean Drunkenness with
Wine, for there is a Drunkenness, and not with Wine, as the Prophet speaks, a
man may be drunk with the love of the Creature: if thou love thy ease too
well, or any thing in the world too well, thou art drunk with it, thy heart is
giddy, thou art no more able to Pray, or do any thing that is good, then a
drunken man is.

Fifthly, If thou will Watch, then set the Lord always before thy eyes: Set
the watchman of Israel before thy face, God is called a watcher, Dan. Setting
God before our eyes.
4. 23. Now if thou will watch over thy self, set God before thy face, as David
did, Psalm. 16. 8. I have set God before mine eyes; so always set the Lord
before thine eyes.

Now I come to the last thing, which is an Use of Exhortation; To exhort Use.
Exhorting to watchfulness.
us to be careful of this Duty, and there is great need of it.

First, We all desire to do well. Now how can we do well at last, unless we
watch well all our life time? What is the reason that many are without
Motives. Because otherwise it will be in with us at last.
comfort, not like the Servants of God, full of horror, and fear, and quaking?
It is because they do not watch, as it was with the Five wise Virgins, they
were something wise, not like the foolish, but they slumbred too; Now when the
bridegroom came, there was a cry; they made an outcry, and a skrieking, and an
howling, they were undone, the bridegroom was come: one would have thought,
they should have rejoiced that the bridegroom was come. What godly Christians,
and Religious People, when the bridegroom comes to fall a howling and a crying?
This was because they slumbred, whereas if a man be watchful over his life, and
careful to keep an humble heart, and to honor God, and study how to die
comfortably at last, he may rejoice at the coming of the bridegroom; but
because they were in a slumber, there was a cry, therefore as the Apostle Peter
says, 1 Pet. 4. 7. The end of all things is at hand, therefore be sober, and
watch unto prayer; the Apostle brings this as an Argument: so I may say, the
end of all things is at hand, therefore be sober, and watch; as a Traveller,
when the day is almost spent, and he has a great way to go, he puts spurs to
his Horse, and rides the faster; so the end of all things is at hand, therefore
we had need to be the more diligent and watchful, that we may have all things
ready; the end comes upon us: We have had the Gospel a long time, and God knows
how soon we shall have an end thereof; therefore how ought we to be careful? as
a man that is to write a Letter, may be at first he is something careless, and
writes his lines something broad, but when he comes near to the end, and has a
great deal to write, he writes his lines close, and crowds them together: So
now when we are coming toward an end, we cannot look that God should alvvayes
strive with us, we should now therefore labor to write close, and to make our
Duties thick, and to be enquiring after Grace, wheresoever we come, we think
the time is long, but we may justly fear it is shorter then we imagine; as when
an hourglass is almost out, a man that sits below, will think there is a great
deal to run, but the sand is hollow, and is run out before a man is aware; so
the Lord so carries himself toward people, that they may think there is a
great deal of Patience more, and a great deal of Mercy more to be extended
toward them, but when all comes to all, they shall find it lies hollow, and
will be out before they are aware.

Secondly, Consider how sickly and diseased our Souls are; how apt they are to
fall into sin: Sickly men are most careful; Now our Souls are Because our souls
are sickly.
sick of sin, sick of Pride, sick of Covetousness, and Earthly-mindednesse,
easily carried away with the sins of the times; they are sick of pronenesse to
do evil, and indisposednesse to that which is good, therefore we had need to
watch over our souls, we had need be our own Porters. Matthew. 13. 34. our
Savior Christ does compare every Christian to a Porter; The Lord of the house
takes a great journey, and commands the Porter to watch: We should all be
Porters, and keep the gates of our Souls, for we are always in danger.

Thirdly, Consider that God has awakened many of in already, and therefore We
are already awakened.
it is a miserable thing for us to sleep again: wicked and ungodly men that
were never converted, and healed, and awakened, and wrought upon, they go to
Hell and damnation in a sleepy security; but when a man has been once
awakened, and has shaken off sleep, and God has made him look about him, to
see how he might be saved; if this man fall asleep again, it is a most
miserable thing; the latter end of that man will be worse then his beginning.

Fourthly, Consider the badnesse of the Times, and Places, and Families Badness
of the times, and carelessness of the most.
we ^^ve in; they are all secure, and therefore we had need be so much the more
vvatchful; and you know it is a very hard thing, for a man not to do as others
do; therefore the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. would not have them sleep as others
do, as who should say, Others do so; and therefore you have so much the more
need to look to your selves, that you may not do as others do.

THE NEW BIRTH.
Joh. 3. 6. That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, but that which is born
of the Spirit, is Spirit.
MY Purpose is to speak of the several Works of Gods holy Spirit in the hearts
and minds of his chosen; they are Gods peculiar people, and therefore he will
work greater Mercies for them, then for any else: Now the First grand
distinguishing work of the Holy Ghost in the Elect is Regeneration; he is the
Author of Spiritual life in them, they are born of him, though by nature they
are born of the flesh, and so are flesh; and in that estate can never enter
into the kingdom of God: yet when the Spirit of God comes to regenerate them,
they come to be Spirit, they come to have a new life, and the Spirit of God
gives it them: it is true that Christ is the Author of this life, he procured
it by his death, he quickens whom he will, as he told his Disciples, Joh. 14.
19. Because I live, ye shall live also: Life is derived by Christ to all the
Members of Christ; for as all in Adam died, Adam is the general root of all, in
his loins, and by him they come to be dead in sin; so Christ is the Second
Adam, and all that are in his loins, all that are in him, he is a quickening
Spirit to them, 1 Cor. 15. 45. The first man Adam was made a living Soul, the
second Adam was made a quickening Spirit: Christ is the second Adam, and is a
quickening Spirit to all that are in him; God the Father has appointed him to
be the Prince of Life, as Peter tells his Hearers, Act. 3. 15. The Lord Jesus
Christ, he is the Prince of life to all the people of God: and therefore Saint
John says, He that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son, has
not life, 1 John 5. 12. He is the Father of this new Birth, and he is the daily
and continual Father of it: He is not a Father for one, or two, or diverse
years, but Isa. 9. 6. he is called, An everlasting Father, to regenerate a
people to God; and he does it by his Resurrection, 1 Pet. 1. 3. This must needs
be granted, That Christ must be the Author of this new Life.

Now you will say, Then why is it attributed to the Spirit? The Text gives it
to the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost; now if Christ be the Author of this new
Birth, and the giver of this new Life, and God the Father has appointed him to
be so, Why is it then here said, That the Spirit does it? Regeneration
attributed to the spirit,


I Answer: It is given to the Spirit for Three Reasons:

First, Because Christ does it by the Spirit: Whatsoever Christ does without,
he does it by the Spirit: when he cast out Devils here upon Because Christ does
it by the spirit.
Earth, he did it by his Spirit; all the outward Works that he wrought, he
wrought them by his Spirit; and therefore the Spirit is called, the Finger of
God, Luke 11. 20. Now if Christ do this Work by his Spirit, if he do
Regenerate all his people by his own Spirit, there is Reason why they should be
said to be born of the Spirit.

Secondly, Another Reason is, Because though this life be all from Christ,
Spirit is the bond of union between us and Christ.
it is he that begets it; (it is he that is the soul of every Believer, as I
may so speak) yet it is the Spirit that is the Bond of Union; it is the Spirit
that joins Christ and them together, it is the Spirit that tyeth the knot, it
is the Spirit that unites and puts them together into one; though Christ be
life, and eternal life, yet notwithstanding they are all Aliens from Christ,
they are all out of Christ, that the Spirit does not join together with Christ:
they that have not the Spirit of Christ, they are none of his; they are all out
of Christ, they are like dead branches out of the Vine; it is the Spirit that
is the bond of Union between Christ, and those that are Christ's.

Thirdly, Another Reason is, Because the Spirit quickens the Word, whereby
Because the spirit quickens the word whereby we are born again.
this is done: The people of God, the thing that they are born of again, it is
the immortal seed of the Word, 1 Pet. 1. 23. You are born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible; Now this seed is sown in all men's
hearts, scattered among all the Congregation, but yet it does not Regenerate
all the Congregation: The Reason is, where the Spirit comes, that makes it
fruitful, and that makes it to quicken the heart; and thus you see the meaning
of the words, That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit.

Now here are Two Points:

First, That the Spirit of God, or the Holy Ghost, Regenerates all the people
of God; whosoever is born again, is born of the Spirit.

The Second Point is this, That all that are Regenerate, all that are born of
the Spirit, they are Spirit; that is, they are spiritual, they are like the
Spirit.

The First is, That it is the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, that does
Regenerate That the spirit of God does regenerate all the Saints.
all the people of God; this is that which makes them to be new Creatures, to
be new men, to be altogether different from that they were before; this is that
which does distinguish them from themselves, even as much as white from black;
this is that which does alienate them from the courses of the world; this is
that which does make them to be singular and odd fellows, as if they were of
another world; this makes them lead a different kind of life, and follow a
different kind of way from all their neighbors, because the Spirit of God works
in them; as Ishmael and Isaac, though Ishmael was born after the flesh, yet
Isaac was born after the Spirit, as the Apostle alludes, Gal. 4. 23. that is,
one took one kind of course, the other another; one was born one way, the other
another way; the Spirit begat one, the Flesh the other; and this made Ishmael
to persecute Isaac, because Isaac could not abide his courses; they were of
different Natures and Dispositions, one was born after the Spirit, the other
after the Flesh.

Now here be Six Things I would show unto you:

First, What Regeneration is.

Secondly, Why it is so called.

Thirdly, Wherein it consists.

Fourthly, The Reasons why the Spirit of God only works this work.

Fifthly, How he works it.

And Lastly, The Uses.

First, What Regeneration is: And it is thus much, namely, The renewing What
Regeneration is.
of the whole man, and by degrees completed after the Image of God in Jesus
Christ: This is Regeneration; and there be Five Things to be opened in it:

First, That it is the renewing of a man; It is not every change, there A
Renewing.
may be abundance of changes and alterations, and yet a man for the main may be
the same man he is; a man may be changed from a Drunkard to be sober; from an
Adulterer to be chaste; yet still he was the same man he was before, though
there be changes wrought in him: but Regeneration is the renewing of a man, the
making of a man another man, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Old things
are passed away, and all things are become new: The Lord does take away the old
frame, and the old affections, and the old inclinations, the old acquaintance,
the old course and conversation; all these things pass away, and the Lord puts
in new things in the room thereof, till all things become new; thus it is in
this work, as the Apostle speaks, Tit. 3. 5. According to his mercy he saved us
by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; the Lord
removes the old rubbish, and puts a new fabric in the room; as a Goldsmith,
he takes a vessel of dishonor and melts it, and makes it a vessel of honor;
God does undo the old workmanship, and makes a new: as David says, Create in
me, O Lord, a clean heart, etc. Psalm. 51. 10. David thought he had lost all,
therefore he prays to God that he may be new cast, that he may be taken all
to pieces, as a VVatchmaker takes a VVatch that is out of order, he takes it
all to pieces, and sets it together anew again; so he prays God to deal with
him, he had lost all in sense and feeling, and would have God make him a new
workmanship, it is called the renewing of a man. Ezekiel 11. 19. there is an
excellent place, I will give them a new heart, etc. The Lord puts out, and he
puts in, even just as a Suister does when she works cut-works, she puts out the
old heart, and puts in a new heart; he takes out that which was stark naught,
and puts in that which is good and agreeable to his mind: the old heart is
corrupt, and the old man is stark naught, there is nothing good in it; these
the Lord takes out, and puts in all new: A man is altogether naught and
reprobate before; what poor creatures are all people that are not Regenerate?
they are all proud, and vain, and foolish, and wordly, and earthly, and harden
their hearts, and are careless of Gods ways, they have no fear of God before
their eyes, they are altogether rotten, how ill-favouredly do they pray? How
worldly do they go on in their callings? How unfruitfully do they come to
Church? They are all rotten and refractory, they do nothing that right is; now
when the Spirit of God does make them up, he puts out all old things, and makes
them new. This is the First thing, Regeneration, is the renewing of a man.

Secondly, As it is the renewing of a man, so it is the renewing of the whole A
Renewing of the whole man.
man: It is not only in some things, for Saul was another man in some sense;
but Regeneration is the renewing of the whole man, as the Apostle says, The
God of peace sanctify you throughout, in body, soul, and Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
23. it is a work upon the whole man; our Savior Christ compares it to leaven,
which a woman took and leavened the whole Lump: It is like unto Original sin,
as Original sin infects the whole man; so Regeneration does repair and renew
the whole man; it is as general and universal, as original sin: the fruit of
the Spirit is in all goodness, Ephesians. 5. 9. It is in all goodness; in the
goodness of a man's mind, and in the goodness of a man's affections, in the
goodness of the inclination and d^sposition, in the goodness of the whole
man; the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness; indeed it begins in the
goodness of the mind, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 23. Be renewed in the
Spirit of your minds: Where he calls upon them for this new work; Put off the
old man (says he) and be renewed in the Spirit of your minds; that is the
First thing, when a man has a new mind given unto him, a new knowledge put
into his understanding, a man is renewed in knowledge, Col. 3. 10. This is the
first thing, when God renews a man's knowledge and apprehension of things,
when a man begins to know the plagues of his own heart, and the evils of all
his own ways, now a man begins to see through these things, and now he begins
to see the ways of God, and to dive deep beneath the irksomeness of them, to
know the amiablenesse of them, the sweetness of them: the delights of them are
hidden from a man, so long as he is unregenerate; but when God does begin to
regenerate a man, now he begins to discover them to him, that a man sees what
they are: he could say before that the ways of God were good, but he could
never taste and find them so; but when a man is renewed, now he sees the
luster and amiablenesse of them: so also, he sees the ugliness of sin, this
was covered before, sin deceived the heart, and carried him after it; but now
sin begins to be laid stark naked, and a man sees the deformity of it, here
begins Regeneration in the mind; for the understanding is the key of the Soul,
the key of all the Faculties of the Soul, it is like a sluice or flood gate,
pull up that, and the water goes out and runs all abroad; so when the Lord does
pluck up this sluice, and lift up a man's heart, and mind, and understanding: now
the waters of life flow into the soul: this is against them now, that have
plenty of knowledge, and yet notwithstanding go no further; that have new
minds, and old wills and affections, there is a new brain, but an old heart;
this is not regeneration: regeneration (it is true) begins in the
understanding, but it runs along in all the soul, it descends into heart and
mind, and all the whole man, and therefore it is called a new creature;
whosoever is in Christ is a new creature; Behold, I make all things new, (says
Christ) Rev. 21. 5. As Regeneration is the renewing of a man, so it is the
renewing of the whole man.

Thirdly, It is done by degrees: Though Regeneration be in all parts, By
degrees perfected.
yet it is not in all degrees at once; the spirit of God does renew more and
more, and beget a man more and more; there is of the old birth a great while,
but he does eat it out more and more, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 3. 18. And
we all with open face, etc. Mark here, he calls this change glory, because it
is a glorious creature; as long as a man is not renewed, he is a base creature;
but when he is renewed, he is a glorious creature: Now says he, when the Lord
does this, he does it from glory to glory, from one degree to another; as this
is done by the spirit of God, so he does it more; he proceeds from little
beginnings to greater perfections; it was not so with Adam, God made him in his
full stature at the first, he was a man at the first dash; but this new
creature, is as a Babe conceived in the Womb, it begins there, and so grows
up; As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. He is a
babe first, and so grows, though it be not a starveling but grovvs, yet it is
but a vveak one at first, and must grow and come to its strength more and
more: it is like a good husband that begins with a little, and arises up to a
great estate in the end; so Regeneration makes a man a good husband, puts a
little stock into his hands, and makes him rise to a great matter.

Fourthly, This is according to the Image of God: It is not all kind of
Renewing: A man may have a new work that he had not before; According to Gods
Image.
but the work of regeneration, as it is a renewing, so it is a renewing after
the image of God; man had quite and clean lost the Image of God, which
consisted in Righteousness and Holiness; Now when Gods Spirit comes to
regenerate a man, that renews him according to this Image: As the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 4. 24. That ye put on the new man which is created after his
image: and how is that? In Righteousness and Holiness. As it is in Nature,
though a man be never so godly when he begets a man, he begets him after his
image, as he is by nature polluted and unclean: Genesis 5. 3. So Adam begat Seth
in his own image: so when the Spirit begets a man again, he begets him after
his own image, he makes him merciful as his heavenly Father is merciful, Luke
6. 36. and perfect as he is perfect, Matthew. 5. ult. There are none regenerate
and born again, but those that are like God, the Lord stamps upon them his own
similitude, and makes them like to himself.

Fifthly, This is the Image of God in Jesus Christ; who is the express image of
his Father; he is the pattern after which this frame is made: In Jesus Christ
nay, God did order it should be so from eternity, Romans 8. 29. Whom he did
foreknow, he did predestinate, that they should be conformed to the image of
his Son: It Is true, this similitude is not presently made out, it is but by
halves as it were; it is but a poor first draught, and never perfect in this
life, but it shall be made perfect, 1 John 3. 2, 3. We know when he appears, we
shall be like him, and shall see him as he is; then we shall be perfectly like
him, and see him as he is, and know him as he is; as Paul says, Col. 3. 2, 3.
You are dead, and your life is hid in Christ, etc. Here the work is hardly come
to its glory, there is a great deal of baseness and old rubbish still, but it
shall be glorious before God has done, it shall come to be perfect then; in
the mean time, it is but by degrees; but the work of regeneration puts a man to
go to Christ, and believe in Christ; You that follow me in Regeneration, etc.
says our Savior, Matthew. 19. 28. When a man is regenerate, regeneration puts a
frame into a man's heart to be like unto Christ, and to follow his steps, and
his example, that as he has done, so he may do more and more: this is the work
of regeneration, That the Spirit of God works in Gods people, conforming them
to the Image of Christ: Yea, Regeneration does more than repair a man, more
than reduce a man to that estate wherein he was in Adam's loins before the
Fall; it is the ingrasting of a man into Christ, and the estating a man into
the Merits and Privileges of the Lord Jesus Christ, it is a greater matter,
then the bare restoring of a man to that which he lost, it is the restoring of
a man to a better estate; this differences it from Sanctification. Thus we see
what Regeneration is.

Now the Second Thing is, Why it is so called? Why this same blessed work of
the renewing of the whole man after the Image of God in Christ Why called
Regeneration.
Jesus is called Regeneration. There be Two Reasons of it.

First, To show us how marvellously we are corrupt by Nature: Until the To show
the great Corruption of Nature.
Spirit of God take us in hand, a man is quite rotten, there is no soundness
left, there is nothing in him will serve, it is not a little melting will serve
the turn, it is not a little plaistering, or patching, or piecing will do the
deed: though there be a thousand changes in a man, yet if a man be not another
man, if he be not a new creature, it is to no effect, it will never bring a man
into the kingdom of God; what says Christ, Joh. 3. 3. Verily, verily, I say
unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God:
As who should say, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, a man is all to shatters,
all to pieces, all rotten, and unless he be born again, and made a new
creature, it is impossible he should enter into the kingdom of God; though a
man be never so much altered, he is not in the estate of Grace till he be a new
man, till the Lord has given him a new frame, and a new inclination: except a
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, he cannot see the kingdom
of Grace: that is the first dowry of the kingdom of Grace, to give a man a new
Being that he never had before: a natural man is just like an old rotten house,
that has not one piece that will serve the turn; but a man that will make it
an habitable house, must take it all down to the ground, and build it up from
the ground: so it is here, there is not one piece will serve the turn; though
ye see admirable things in men, though they seem excellent in the eyes of men,
yet they will not serve the turn, they are rott^n and stark naught; there is an
absence of all Good, Romans 7. 18. Nay besides, there is an universal
indisposition in a man, like to a thing that is all rotten and marred, and can
never be made up again, except it be made spick and span new; and so it is with
a man, he is altogether corrupt, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 1. from the sole
of the foot, to the crown of the head, nothing but bruises and putrified soars;
take a man that is never so civil, and of fair carriage, so long as he is not a
new creature, this is nothing for the entering into the kingdom of God, and
being amiable in his sight: Nay, Genesis 6. 5. the Text says, The thoughts of the
heart of man are only evil continually, there is nothing found in a man, though
he daily think of Grace, and think of God, his thoughts cannot be said to be
good, for the mind whereby he thinks of these things is rotten, and unsavory;
though he speaks of never so good things, the same things the Saints of God
speak of; though he does the same actions the people of God do; though he hears
the same Word, and receives the same Sacraments, he cannot do them aright,
they are abomination in Gods sight, therefore when God regenerates a man, he
must make him another man then he was before. This speaks natures corruption.

Secondly, Because the things of Regeneration are admirably set out by The work
well expressed by the Name
way of this similitude: Natural Generation is generally, sweetly answered in
this Work of Regeneration.

First, As a man cannot come into the World without Parents, but he must have a
Father to beget him, so it is in this new Birth: as in the other Father, both
in Natural and Spiritual Generation.
there was an earthly Father, so here is an heavenly Father, as the Author to
the Hebrews speaks, Heb. 12. 9. How much rather shall we be subjected to the
Father of Spirits? There are two Fathers, an earthly Father, the Father of the
natural and corrupt man, and God the Father of our Spirits, that is, the Father
of our spiritual Nature, as many excellent Divines do expound it: though it may
be expounded the Father of our Souls; yet this is more likely, because here is
an opposition between the Father of the Flesh, and the Father of the Spirits:
God himself is the Father of this new work.

Secondly, Here is a Mother too; That Jerusalem which is from above, is the
Mother of them all; they are all Zions Children, here is A Mother in both.
the Womb that these new creatures lie in, Christ's Spouse; the Lambs wife is
their Mother; though the world hate them and her too, yet they love her; nay,
though the woman be thrown out into the wilderness, yet their hearts run after
her; the Regenerate only are the true born, this is their Mother.

Thirdly, As it is in the Natural Birth, There is a shaping in the Womb, before
there is a coming into life: so it is here, as the Apostle says, there is a
First, Conception, and then Birth.
conceiving of a man in the womb, before he is, Gal. 4. 19. My little Children,
of whom I travel in Birth, till Christ be formed in you; There is the
Conception; it is true, wicked men have many Conceptions, but they do not bring
forth, Christ is not formed in them; they may have many stirrings that way, but
they perish in the Birth; but Zion travels and brings forth Children, Isa. 66.
8.

Fourthly, Again, As it is in the Natural Birth, None is brought forth, without
the pains of travel; So there be pains in this new Birth, legal terrors Pain
accompanies both Births.
which the Reprobate are killed with and die under, but the godly come forth
from under them safe and bettered.

Fifthly, Again, As it is in the first Birth, the Child that is born and comes
into the world, he comes from no Being to a Being, from no Existency Both come
to a Being they had not.
to an Existency; so it is here in this new Birth, those which were no people,
are now made the people of God; those that had no being in Christ, now have a
being in him; they are come into a new world, into a new heaven and a new
earth; others live in this world, but they live in a new world.

Sixthly, Again, As it is in the first Birth, A man comes to have Children, to
have Brothers and Sisters; so in this Birth, a man comes to have new New
Kindred follows both.
Kindred, all the Godly in the world are of his Consanguinity; though they be
counted the Puritans of the Parish, yet they are of his blood, and Christ
himself is their Brother, and Abraham is their Father (under God) and Sarah is
their Mother; there is a new Kindred. Indeed here is the difference, that the
Children of the first Birth they are visible, and their lives and courses are
visible, and their alliance and kindred is visible, and all that they are and
do is visible; but the Children of the second Birth are not visible: indeed
their persons are visible as well as others, but their life is an invisible
thing, their excellency, their glory, this new creature in them, this is
invisible, it is like that River in Spain, which runs fourteen miles under
ground; whence they have a Proverb, That the Bridge over the River is fourteen
miles long: So there is a River in Surry that is just the like, it runs under
the ground invisible, they cannot see it; so these new creatures they cannot be
seen, their lives run under ground, their lives are hidden with God, indeed
their persons, and outward actions and courses may be seen; nay, wicked men may
do those very outward actions which they do; they may Pray together with them,
and come to Church together with them, but this new workmanship they cannot
see, that runs along under ground, the world sees it not, neither can they
know it, because they know not Christ the Author of it: Thus we see the second
thing, namely, Why it is so called.

Now the Third Thing is, Wherein this blessed Work does consist: and it Wherein
Regeneration consists.
consists in Two Things, Joh. 1. 12. The Evangelist says, To as many as
received him, he gave power to become the Sons of God. Here be Two Things, and
both these Regeneration consists of:

First, A Passive receiving of Christ, Whosoever receives him.

Secondly, An Active Title to God, as to a Father, They have power to become
the Sons of God.

First, A Passive receiving of Christ; To as many as received him: for Passive
receiving Christ.
he came to his own and they received him not; his own, even his own Elect,
would not receive him, till he made them receive him; but as many as received
him, as many as were made passively to receive him, did receive him also
actively: so that this word implies the Passive receiving of Christ; for there
is none can receive any thing, except it be given him from above, Joh 3. 27.
That is, except there be first a passive reception of it: It is a strange
phrase, N^ m^^ can receive Christ, till Christ is first received of him; he can
never take Christ, till Christ come into him, till Christ ingraft himself into
him, and him into Christ; this is an act of God, it is a passive receiving of
Christ: the reason is, because all the Graces, and all the Activity of Gods
people flows from this, their Faith, and all; for Faith is an act, which
receives from the passive receiving of Christ, as Paul speaks to the
Colossians, As you have received Christ, so walk in him; Faith receives Christ,
that is an active receiving of Christ, but there was a passive receiving of
Christ first; for a man is in Christ first in a passive manner, before he is in
him in an active manner, Christ has taken him already, before he can take
Christ actually: This is the first Thing wherein this work of Regeneration
consists, The Passive receiving of Christ.

Secondly, It consists in having an active power and title to become a Son of
An active power to become a child of God.
God; together with Jesus Christ; These are the Two Things wherein Regeneration
consists. I know many Divines branch it otherwise, and make Regeneration to
consist otherwise:

First, Of Mortification.

Secondly, Of Vivification.

First, Of Mortification: Whereby the Spirit kills the Lusts of the Flesh more,
as Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the Flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the
Spirit mortify the deeds of the Flesh, ye shall live: Mark; here is
Mortification, and it is done by the Spirit; if you through the spirit mortify
the deeds of the body.

Secondly, There is Vivification; that is, when a man does not only die unto
sin, but rise up again to a new life, Romans 6. 11. Likewise reckon ye your
selves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
This is the other work of Vivification, when a man is made alive unto God, and
is made able by the spirit of God to be alive unto God, and to wind himself out
of death into life, by the spirit of the holy One. These be the Two Parts
whereof many Divines make Regeneration to consist of; but though they beat at
the same thing, yet I rather make them the Effects and Consequents of
Regeneration, as flowing from Regeneration; this passive work goes before, a
man never goes on in mortifying the works of the Flesh, and never raises
himself up to this heavenly life till he be Regenerated; so that regeneration
is the first ingrafting of a man into Christ, whereby he is alive, that he may
do all these things; it is a power put into him whereby he may believe and
repent, so that Believing, and Repentance, and Mortification, and Vivification
are acts of the new creature; a man must therefore be a new creature first, now
this is by Regeneration, so that Regeneration consists only of these Two
Things: First, Of a passive receiving of Christ the Son of God. Secondly, In
having a title to be the Son of God; and Regeneration does not only bring a
relative change, but a real change to a man: If you would know the meaning of
the phrase, A relative change is this, when there is a change in a man, from
that he was before; but the change does not lie in a man, as the change of
Justification: before he was not Justified, now he is Justified, the man is
changed; but he is not changed in himself, but it stands only in Gods
imputation; he is not just in himself, but by imputation just Now the real
change is, When God does purify and make up the defects in a man more and
more, that is a real change; so that I say, Regeneration is not only a relative
change, whereby God accounts a man as a child; but it breeds a real change in a
man, it gives a man a spiritual Being; for the Spirit of God when it comes to
work this work, is a fruitful principle of all good in that man more and more:
Therefore the Apostle says, The fruits of the Spirit, are joy, peace,
long-suffering, etc. Gal. 5. 22. It Is true, the Spirit does not bring forth
these Graces till after a man is regenerate, but by working that Regeneration,
which makes the soul to bring forth these fruits, and making the heart an
honest heart, and so a good ground to bring forth these seeds; the Spirit is a
fruitful principle of all good in that man. Thus you see the Third Thing, viz.
Wherein Regeneration consists.

Now the Fourth Thing is the Reasons of this Point, Why the Spirit of Reasons
why the Spirit works Regeneration.
God does work this work of Regeneration.

The First Reason is, Because it is merely according to the Will of God: Man
has no power at all, man has no activity, it is merely at the pleasure It is
the good pleasure of God
of God, whether he will do it or no; Jam. 1. 18. Of his own Will begat he us;
he only had an hand in it, he only did it, and it was merely at his good Will
and Pleasure, he might have chosen whether he would have done it or no; it is
no fruit of our liberty, it is no brood of our breeding, it is merely the free
act of God in a man, Joh. 6. 44. No man comes to me except the Father draws
him; There Christ shows it, this bringing of a man to be in Christ, it cannot
be from any man, except the Father draw him; except he send forth his heavenly
Spirit, he can never come to Christ; all our sufficiency is from God, we cannot
so much as think a good thought, we cannot renew our thoughts, we cannot renew
our inclinations, or our wills, or our affections; we can do nothing of our
selves, it is only his work; therefore seeing it is such a special work, it
must be, only the Spirit of God that must work it; it is a glorious work, a
supernatural work; this new Birth, is such a Birth as comes from above, Psalm.
110 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, etc. says the
text, that is, all that are born of God, they are brought forth in the day of
Gods power, in the day wherein God is pleased to put forth his power in them;
therefore they are called the seed of Christ, Isa. 53. 10. They are his seed,
but unless he begets them by his Spirit, they can never be so; Therefore if we
consider the greatness of the work, it shows plainly, it must needs be the
effect of the Will of God, and his good Pleasure toward man, and therefore
must be wrought by the Spirit.

Secondly, Another Reason is, Because it is not a work of this world: It No
other agent can do it.
is a work of another world, it is none of the creatures of this life, it is
beyond the sphere of the activity of any natural agent, they cannot reach it,
Joh. 1. 13. Which were born not of the will of the flesh, nor of blood, etc. It
is not of man's Will, he cannot so much as Will it, or Desire it effectually, he
cannot wish it truly, nay, his heart had rather have the world; nay, says he,
It is not of the Will of the Flesh, that is, a man may go and beget another
Child in the world, because it is of the Will of the Flesh, it is in the power
of the Will of the Flesh, Gods power going along with him, but this is not so,
whatsoever a man be, though he has never so many excellent parts, it is not in
the Will of the Flesh to do it: Then again, it is not of Blood, it is no
terrene or earthly thing, this new creature is otherwise made, than any new
creature in the world besides, therefore he concludes, it is only born of God,
it is God only that is the great Author of this great work, it descends down
merely from above.

Thirdly, Because it is so far from being wrought by any power Man is totally
against it of himself.
in man, or any counsel in man, or any endeavors in man, it is so far from
that, as that a man is totally against it; A man is an enemy unto it, a man
has reluctance and repugnancy against it, he would not be regenerate; when a
man does think he desires heaven, and to be regenerated of God, he does
apprehend Regeneration in a wrong way, and heaven in a wrong way, so as he
apprehends it, he does Will it; he thinks of heaven as of a fine place, and a
place full of pleasure, and therefore desires it; but that he should always be
with God, that he should always be praising and thinking of God, and minding
of God, and have his heart weaned from all other things, and set it on God,
this is heaven, but he hates these things, and so hates heaven, so he Wills
that which he apprehends to be Regeneration; but Regeneration, is when a man
has a new heart, and when he is a new-man: he was wordly before, but he is now
brought to be spiritual, he was proud before, but he is now come to be humble,
but the heart cannot abide this, therefore let the Lord fling in abundance of
throws into a natural man's heart, to begin some preparatory work this way, to
make a man begin to look out toward heaven, he flings all away, he is weary of
them quickly; as a man at a Sermon, perhaps may have throws concerning the new
Birth, but the corruption of his heart will throw all way, he cannot endure
them, they are contrary to the corruption of a man's nature; nay, when God comes
to work upon his own people, what a deal of pleading is there with the world,
the flesh, and the Devil, that they may not be cast out: Therefore when Peter
saw that through the grace and power of God, this work was wrought in those he
wrote unto, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Mark how he speaks, Blessed be the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us
again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead: He
lifts up his hands to heaven, and blesses God that ever this work was wrought;
he saw so much ado, and such a stir, and such a deal of opposition; this is a
plain sign that it is not of man, it is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of God which shows mercy, Romans 9. 16. Neither can man Will,
neither can he run, neither go, nor stir toward it; nay, though God make him
go, how apt is ^e to laggar in the way, and draw back again? So you see the
Fourth Thing, Why it must needs be the Spirits Work.

The Fifth Thing is, How the Spirit of God works this Work. It is after How the
Spirit works Regeneration.
an unspeakable manner: Who can declare the noble acts of the Lord? The works
of God in Nature are mavelous. David himself, when he looked upon his natural
Birth, the Conception of him in the Womb of his Mother, he wondered at it,
Psalm. 139. 14. That was a wonderful work, how much more is this unspeakable,
and unutterable? As it is said of our Savior Christ, Who can declare his
generations? So may I say in a lower sense, of this Work, Who can declare this
Regeneration of his people? But yet thus far the Scripture does authorize, and
warrant us to go.

First, That he does it by the word of Life; By the Gospel of Salvation, by the
Preaching of it, or otherwise according as he pleases, that is the By the Word
of Life.
immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the word of God, etc. And as Paul says to the Cori^thians,
Though you have ten thousand and instructers, yet you have not many Fathers,
for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15. As
who should say, You are begotten and born again, and you are born again by the
Word, and I was an instrument under God of your new Birth, by the Word which I
have Preached among you; and therefore, 1 Timothy 1. 2. he calls Timothy, His own
Son; So Tit. 1. 4. he calls him, His Son in the Faith: that is, he was an
instrumental Father under God, by the Doctrine of Faith, to bring him to be a
Child of God: So that I say it is done by the Word, Of his own Will has he
begotten (...) by the Word of truth, Jam. 1. 18. The Spirit of the Lord
sanctifies the Word when he is pleased to convert a man, the Word shall show
him what a miserable creature he is by nature; it shows him that flesh and
blood cannot enter into the kingdom of God; it shows him that he is utterly
forlorn in himself, and past all recovery, and shows him where life is to be
had: namely, in Jesus Christ, discovering his worth, and excellency, and
necessity, and that all Grace and good is in him, and shows him the freedom of
this gracious offer: Thus the Spirit of God, when he propounds the Word to the
soul, holds it before the eyes and conscience, and sanctifies it, and puts a
power into it, to enter deep into the soul, that it may Conceive in the soul.

Secondly, The Lord does it by an unspeakable working: There is a Divine work
which the Lord works; The spirit comes into the soul after the By a secret
and supernatural power.
manner of water; as Christ says, Joh. 3. Except a man be born again of water
and the holy Ghost, etc. that is, unless he be born of the Spirit, which
works in the spirit of a man, as water does in working upon a ^oul thing. Now
what this working is we cannot tell; but we can tell you the effects of it:
whereas the soul was rotten and naught before, and impotent to all good; now it
begins to have a better disposition and a new power: And whereas it did savor
of the things of this life before, now it savours of the things that are above:
but this is a secret kind of working in the soul, therefore it is called the
washing, and the la^er of it: And the Apostle speaking of the Corinthians, what
miserable creatures they were before Regeneration, he names Drunkards,
Idolaters, Adulterers, etc. and all manner of filthy persons, Such were some of
you (says he) before your Regeneration, but now you are washed, and justified,
and sanctified in the Name of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 11. That same washing there, he
means by that you are Regenerated; so that Regeneration, it is a supernatural,
an unspeakable kind of washing of the soul by the holy Ghost, whereby the soul
has its Corruption washed from it in part, and made clean in pa^^ and way made
for all the Graces of Gods Spirit to come in now, and all the fruits of the
spirit to be brought forth: Thus the Spirit of God works this work, he works it
in an ineffable manner by the word of Life, and by a secret kind of washing.

I come now to the Application of this Point: And first of all, If the Spirit
of God be the Regenerater of Gods people; then we may here see Use. 1. Of
Confutation of Pelagians, etc.
the error of the Papists, Pelagians, and others; That set up the Will of man,
and put any activity in the Reason, and Judgment, and Wisdom, and Election of
man; This Doctrine of theirs is un^ound, and contrary to the working of Gods
holy spirit: If it be such a work as God sends his own Spirit to do it; What
man can do it? It is called Regeneration, and this shows it is not of man: who
is able to beget himself, and shape himself in the womb, and dispose of his own
body in the belly? Nay more, Can any man beget himself again? The very name of
Again, shows that it is a work only of God, none but he can do it; and we see
it plainly, it is wrought no where, but where God himself does it, and they
that have it are able to speak it, that they did not choose God, but God chose
them; I was found of them that sought me not; all the souls of his people will
subscribe, That it was not in them that willed, or in them that ran, but in God
that showed mercy: It is God only that is the Author of this thing, and none
but he.

Secondly, Again, This should teach us to consider that we have always
Informaton, Of our continual need of the Spirit.
need of the Spirit of God: If the Spirit of God has begotten us again, then
we have always need of him; it is not in this as in the first Birth; when the
Child is born, though the Father be gone, the Child may subsist; but it is not
so here: but the Spirit of God as he begets a man, so he is fain always to
stand by him and bear him up, and give him supplies of Grace from day to day:
As it is with the Air, the Sun does not only enlighten it, but it does every
moment give light to it: for suppose the Sun should shine four or five hours in
the day, yet if the Sun should withold its light, the Air would be dark
presently; it is not as it is with Fire, let a man heat the water, though he
take away the Fire, the water will keep its heat a while after; but do but
withold the light of the Sun, and all is gone in the same moment; so it is
with this new Creature and the Spirit of God, he does dwell in the soul, as the
Sun in the Air; his presence warms the soul, and quickens the soul, and inables
a man to good, and gives a principle of life, and enables to all actions that
are good; therefore how should all Gods people carry themselves toward this
Spirit? They should have a care that they quench him not, nor go against him in
any particular.

The Third Use is for all Gods people, in whom God has wrought this
Exhortation 1. Not to grieve the Spirit.
blessed work; the Spirit of God has regenerated and begotten them again. I
say to all such persons, Let them endear this Spirit of God, let them not
grieve, or offend, or displease him, seeing he is such a gracious worker in
them: Ephesians. 1. 13. The Apostle makes this very Inference, in whom after ye
believed ye were sealed by the holy Spirit of Promise: that is, whereby you
were Regenerated; Regeneration is the first seal of the Spirit, whereby he
seals Gods good will to a man. Now, has the Spirit of God sealed you? Then do
not grieve him, nor cause him to take any indignation against you; for though
he will never depart from them, whom he has made new Creatures, yet
notwithstanding he may hide his face for a time if we displease him. Yea,
Consider, Will any natural Child willingly displease his loving Father? The
Spirit of God is our Father, therefore we should have respect to him.

Again, This should be a Motive to Gods people, to be willing to do any 2. To
do any thing for God.
thing for God; because he has made them, as David says, Psalm. 100. 3. This
very Consideration, That God has made us, and re-made us, he has done that
for us that all our own wits could never have done, that the whole world has
not the like (the Lord gener-ally lets the whole World sink in ruin and
damnation) should be a Motive to you, to be willing to serve him gladly, and to
call upon his Name, to be ready pressed to execute any of his Commands, to enter
into his presence upon all occasions, seeing it is he that has made us, and
not we ourselves.

To them that are Unregenerated: Here we see where to have Regeneration; 3. To
the Unregenerate to pray for the Spirit.
it is only in God, and in the Spirit of God, to renew a man, and make a man up
again: As David prayed when he had the Spirit, Lord, take not thy holy Spirit
from me. Psalm. 51. 11. So when a man has not the Spirit of God, he should pray
to God, Lord, Give thy holy Spirit to me, and send down thy holy Spirit into my
heart, that may work this work in me. But it may be many of you will think that
you expect this, and desire it, and wish it, and use some means. I Answer, Then
show it by thy coming unto God for it, from day to day; will any man say, That
Noah did expect that God should deliver him from the Deluge, if he had not took
that course which God appointed? If he had not built an Ark, certainly we may
justly say, That he did not look that God would deliver him. Therefore it is
said of Noah, That as he did expect that God should keep him; so being warned
of God, he built an Ark, etc. Heb. 11. 7. So when a man shall say, That he
looks that God should deliver him from his natural estate and condition, that
God should renew him by his Grace and goodness, yet if a man will not prepare
an Ark: if when a man is Commanded and directed by God what to do, yet he will
not come to God, to do that which should be done for him, these men do but
deceive their own souls, and treasure up indignation against themselves. I
remember the story of Moses, Exodus 14. when the Children of Israel were in
Pi^hahiroth, and the Egyptians were behind them, and the Mountains were on the
side that they could not pass, and the Sea was before them, and there was
notable crying out, Oh! that God would deliver them, now they were dead men,
the Egyptians were come out to destroy them, the Mountains were on the side,
and the Sea before them: Now mark what an Answer God gives to their cry; cause
the people to go forward, you keep a crying to me, I pray go forward, you are
not yet at the red sea, but go to the red sea, and when you are there, then cry
to me; you are idleing, and lazing, and mistrusting me; though the red Sea be
before them, yet cause them to come thither, and when they are there, then cry
for help to me: So thou say thou desire that God would Regenerate thee,
and quicken thee, and turn thy heart, and vouchsafe thee his holy Spirit: do
you so? I say it is very well, the thing is very good, but if the desire be
sincere, you will take that course Gods bids you: art thou come to the utmost
difficulty? Are not many things to be done which thou refusest to do? Must thou
not seek God more, and more carefully? Go forward, go forward, if thou meanest
to have help and aid from God, otherwise it is in vain: if thou would go on
in the ways of God, and do what God Commands thee, thou should be quickened
and renewed.

Fourthly, Another Use is for Examination: To examine our selves Of
Examination, whether regenerated, or ^o. First Sign, When doing good is
natural.
whether the Word of God has wrought this for us, yea or no. And the first
sign is this, If thou be born again, if thou have this new Nature, then it
is natural to thee to do good duties, to follow good courses, and to yield
obedience to the commandments of God; it is not enough for a man to do good
duties: a natural man, an unregenerate man may do them, but whether is it
natural to thee? A proud man may do the actions of humility, a proud man may
pull off his Hat, and give the time of the day, and speak meanly of himself; a
proud man may suffer another to do him wrong, and put up base language, he may
do these things, but the man is a proud man still, he has no humble nature;
but the question is, whether it be thy nature to do this? May be thou do
these things for fear, or some by-respects: A worldly man may speak of heavenly
things, but is thy nature heavenly? A man may think of God, but is thy nature
godly? Here is the thing, If a man be regenerate, there is Grace got into a
man's Nature, Jer. 31. 33. When God Regenerates his people, he says, He will
write his laws in their inward parts; he does not only say they shall do these
duties, but their very hearts shall carry them, their very hearts shall go to a
Sermon, their very souls shall go about the duties of God; as it is with the
fire, water may heat, but not by nature; but it is the nature of fire to heat:
So if a man be Regenerate, it is natural to him to do good duties, Romans 2. 14.
A man by nature may do the things commanded in the Law: but here is the
question, Whether he does them with this new nature, this heavenly nature? The
old creature may hear, and pray, and be sober, and moral, for by nature the
Heathen did the things contained in the Law: But if a man be Regenerated, as he
does the things contained in the Law and Gospel, so he does them with a new
nature; as Deuteronomy. 5. 29. when the Children of Israel had spoken admirable
speeches; All that the Lord says to us we will do; they made goodly
professions: now mark what God says, Oh that there were an heart in this
people to keep my commandments! As who should say, These are very good words,
and I know that you think what you speak; but Oh that this were written in your
hearts, that this were natural to you; this will not hold, your hearts are not
carried this way.

Secondly, If the Spirit of God has Regenerated a man, then the heart The
heart's a good soil for Grace.
begins to be a good soil for Grace, and the heart begins to be suitable, so
that the heart is fit for Grace; A natural heart is not a proper soil for
Grace: As if a man should bring a Plant from Spain, and set it here in England,
it cannot thrive, unless a man meet with a soil that is fit for it: So Grace,
if it come into the heart, and the heart is not a soil for it, it can never
thrive there, unless the heart be Regenerated, and unless there be a new
nature: There may be admirable things in a natural man, excellent good
purposes, and resolutions; God may come to him, as a Passenger that lodges for
a night, but he is gone the next morning; he may come as a sojourner, to endure
for a while, but here is no dwelling for him; these resolutions, and purposes,
and desires cannot last long, that heart will squander them away; it is like
the putting of a new piece into an old garment, Matthew. 9. 16. When a man puts a
new piece into an old garment, a fine new purpose into an old heart, a new good
desire into an old mind, the rent will be worse, for that man will return back
again, and will have his lusts, and will be worse then he was before, for the
heart is not able to hold these: it is true, in the best hearts of Gods people,
is a great deal of unnatural soil for Grace; but there is some of this good new
soil, that Grace now can hold, and shall hold, so that the gates of Hell shall
not prevail; it is not for any goodness of the heart, but for the goodness of
Grace in the heart: there may be transient acts of goodness in a wicked man,
as Prayer, and suchlike transient acts; but when the transient act is done,
there is a conclusion: but nature is permanent and an enduring thing, it is not
only to come to Prayer, and then be dead; to come to a Sermon, and then be
dead; but it is a permanent thing, a man is godly between Prayer and Prayer,
and religious between Sermon and Sermon, and in all his ways he sets himself
to be good, and well disposed all his days. God complains against those that
give him transient acts of goodness, Oh Ephraim! what shall I do to thee, that
art as a morning cloud, etc?

Thirdly, If the Spirit of God has made a man a new nature, then He cannot
live in Sin.
he cannot live in sin, As the Apostle says, 1 John 3. 9. He that is born of
God, sins not, etc. he is born of God, and it is against his nature to go on
in sin; a man cannot go against his nature: it is true, a man for a little time
may go against his nature, as Moses, though his nature was mild and meek, yet
he was transported very much, Hear ye rebels, and shall I bring water out of
this rock? He was carried away in his passion, but he could not hold on in that
strain, for it was against his nature; so if a man be overcome with any other
sin, yet when a man is renewed, as a Spring clears it self of the mud, so this
new nature is so opposite and contrary to sin, that he cannot go on in sin.

Fourthly, If the Spirit of God has wrought this work in thee, Then it It is
pleasant to do the will of God.
is pleasant to thee to do the will of God; Look what a man is naturally
inclined to, it is mavelous pleasant to him to follow it: As for example, If
a man's nature be gluttonous, how pleasing is it for him to satisfy his
Appetite? And if a man's nature be given to Intemperance, how pleasing is Excess
unto him? And if a man's nature be proud, how pleasing is it to be flattered,
and spoken fair, to be reverenced and respected at every word? A man loves
these thngs a-life, because they suit with his nature: So if a man have a new
nature, and partakes of the divine nature, how pleasing will Prayer be? And how
pleasing will the Word be? how pleasing will Counsels and Exhortations be? how
pleasing to be corrected and reproved for sin? How sweet are thy words unto my
mouth, says the Prophet David, Psalm. 119. 103. As our Savior says, Joh. 4.
34. It is my meat and drink to do his Will that sent me: So I have l^nged for
thy Commandments (says David) I have loved to know wherein I might glorify
thee, and be serviceable to thee: Now when it is irksom for a man to obey, he
cannot abide strictness and preciseness, and he counts it a disgrace to him to
deny himself in such a thing, and he goes to duty like a Bear to the Stake,
and he has no forwardness, it is a sign he has no new nature.

Fifthly, If a man be born again, Grace will get the upper hand; when Grace
gets the upper hand.
a man meets with lusts, and concupiscence of Soul, though they may exceedingly
bear a man down for a time, and transport a man beyond himself, yet in the end
Grace will have the victory and prevail, 1 John 5. 4. He that is born of God,
overcomes the world, all temptations of the world, all pul-backs and
draw-backs, he that is born of God, he will have the mastery; so 1 John 5. 18.
the Apostle says, The wicked one cannot touch a man that is born of God, that
is, with a deadly touch, as he touches wicked men; he touches wicked men so,
as he infects them, and poisons them, and carries them away.

Sixthly, He that is born of God, he is one that loves the Children of God: He
loves the people of God.
If there be any Saint in the parish, any Child of God, there is his affection
and bowels most; I speak of spiritual affections, for otherwise Grace does not
take away nature, but set it up, having refined it. But I speak of spiritual
love, if a man be born of God himself, he loves all others that are born of
God, 1 John 5. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God;
and he that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten. If a man
loves God that begets, he must needs love them that are begotten of God.

Lastly, If a man be born again, then a man labors to do good, and to He loves
Spiritually to profit others.
spread the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, to the glory of God: He loves to be
communicating that he has; he that has this Spirit, loves to be breathing
upon others, and would fain scatter his sweet things up and down where he
goes, and would fain leave a sweet savor of himself wheresoever he comes;
this is the nature of him that is born again and regenerate, to beget others:
That man is unworthy to be born, by whom another is not born, as we say; when a
man is born again, he labors to beget others to God, to be generative, and
fruitful, and abundant in doing good up and down, he labors to beget his
Children, and Family, to God; and to draw his neighbors and acquaintance unto
God: he would fain have people know Christ, and obey him, and submit unto him.
Thus you see the signs whereby we may know, Whether we be born again, or no?

CHRISTIANS Ingrafting into CHRIST.
1 Cor. 12. 13. For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body, whether we
be Jews or Grecians, whether we be Bond, or Free, and have been all made to
drink into one Spirit.
WE have spoken of Regeneration, which is a work of the Spirit, and the first
implanting of a man into Christ: Now we come to speak of a new work of the
Spirit, The implanting of a man into the Church, the Body of Christ, when the
Spirit makes a man to be a Member of the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ; and
this is done all under one; for being once ingrafted in Christ, we come to be
Fellow Members with all those that are Christ's; and this we have here in the
Text, By one Spirit we are all Baptized into one Body, etc. The Apostles
meaning is this, All we that are the people of God, we are all one Body; and
the efficient cause of this, is the Spirit of God, it is by the Spirit that we
are made thus, and the instrumental cause, though it be not here expressed, yet
it is employed, and that is Faith; and the means of confirming this Faith are
the Two Sacraments: First, The Sacrament of Baptism, we are baptized into the
same Body. Secondly, The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, intimated in one part
of it, namely, the Cup, which is put for the whole, and are made all to drink
of the same Cup, we are all of one and the self same Body; as many as are in
Christ, are endued with the same Spirit; not one endued with one Spirit, and
another endued with another Spirit, but by one Spirit we are Baptized into one
Body; our Baptism is one, and our Food one; it is altogether one, though our
condition in the world be never so different, bond, or free, though our
Country, and Nation, and Parish be never so various one to another, one of
one, and another of another, Jews and Gentiles, we are all baptized into one
Body, and this is done by one and the self-same Spirit.

Now to speak of the putting of a man into the Body of Christ: We will show you
these Five things.

First, What this Body of Christ is. Secondly, What this putting of a man into
it is. Thirdly, That this is done by the Spirit of God. Fourthly, How the
Spirit of God does it: How a man is made part of the Body of Christ. Fifthly,
The Application of the Point.
For the First, What is this Body of Christ, which is Spirit of God What this
Body is.
does ingraft his people into? In a word, It is the invisible Church of God:
which is a peculiar company of men and women, out of all Nations under heaven
predestined to eternal life, gathered together by the Word, and made all one
in Christ: This is the Body of Jesus Christ: so that here are Five Things that
are to be opened.

First, It is the Church of God; as the Apostle says, Col. 1. 18. He is The
invisible Church of God.
the Head of the Body, the Church: So that the Church is the Body of Christ,
that same peculiar company of men and women, as Saint Peter calls them, You are
a chosen generation, a peculiar people, a royal priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9. The
Author to the Hebrews calls them, The Assembly of the first born, Heb. 12. 23.
And Christ himself calls them, A little flock, in regard of the multitude of
other people that is in the world, and are not of this brotherhood: Now I call
this invisible, for though their persons, and courses, and manner of life be
seen and known, and they may be known who they are, yet all of them were never
known, nor ever will be; there may be more then we can tell, and fewer then we
think of; The foundation of God is sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who
are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Lord had seven thousand in Israel that had not bent
their knees to Baal, when Eliah could see never a one: So that this is the
First Thing; it is the invisible Church of God.

Secondly, It Is such a company as is gathered out of all Nations under heaven;
Gathered out of all Nations.
As Saint John speaks, Rev. 7. 9. After this, behold and lo, I saw a great
multitude of all Nations, and Countries, and Tongues, etc. Though it be a
little Flock in respect of the Reprobate; yet it is a great multitude
considered in it self: and they stood before the throne, and before the Lamb,
with long white Robes, and with Palms in their hands: This white Robe is the
Righteousness of Christ Jesus imputed, which begets another Righteousness
which is inherent in some measure; and the Palms in their hands, is the sign of
Victory over Sin, Death, and Hell; and this is a great multitude: and it was
out of all Cities, and Nations, and Kindreds of the world; and therefore our
Savior Christ, speaking of his own taking of this company home unto himself at
the last day, see what he speaks, Mat. 24. 31. He shall send his Angels with a
great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather his Elect from the four Winds,
from the one end of the Earth to the other: The Lord gathers here one, and
there another, as a man would gather a Posie in a Garden, here a flower, and
there a flower. This is Another Thing in the Body of Christ: it is a Company
gathered out of all Nations, and People, and Places, at one time, or other.

Thirdly, This same godly Company, are a Company of Predestined Predestined
unto life.
men unto Eternal life. For there are none but the chosen of God that are the
true Body of Christ; this is a company only of Elect men, and women, and babes;
therefore they are called Elect, Romans 8. 33. They are such a company as are
written in the Lamb's Book of life, Rev. 21. 27. Therefore all those that seem
to be of God, and go a great way with the people of God, and yet turn back, as
Orphah from Naomi, Ruth 1. They were never of this number, 1 John 2. 19. They
were not of us, they went out from us; if they had been of us, they would have
continued with us: So that it is only the Elect of God that are of this
Company, that are the Members of this Body.

Fourthly, It is such a godly Company as is gathered by the Word of God:
Begotten again by the Word.
The Word of God gathers them together; they, as well as other people by
nature, are of another Body, of another Corporation, as vile, and as wretched,
and as miserable in themselves, if left to themselves; but God found them when
he passed by them, and said to them, Live; they were defiled as well as others
in their blood, but the Lord turned their hearts by the Word, and does beget
them again thereby: This is that immortal seed whereby God does beget them
again unto eternal life.

Fifthly, They are such a company as are made one, knit and combined together
in Christ; though themselves are never so many, and never so remote and distant
from one another, may be they never saw one another, nor ever heard of one
another, one lives in one Country, another in another; one in one parish,
another in another, and have little bodily communion, and are not known one to
another; may be some of this company are in heaven already, and some upon
earth; yet they are all one in Christ, they all meet together in one heart and
soul in Christ Jesus, they are all of one mind in him, as being all one body,
as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 12. 12. And they are all one seed, Gal. 3. 16.
Now to Abraham and his seed were the Promises made. He says not, To seeds, as
if they were many; but, To thy seed, as of one, that is Christ: that is, which
is Christ, and all that are Christ's; they are one seed, the seed of the woman;
indeed all men come forth of the woman's loins, the wicked as well as the godly,
only here is the difference, The one is the seed of God, the other of the
Serpent: Now Christ, and all that are Christ's, are one and the self-same seed;
though they are different in Place, different in Country, different in estate
and condition; some Jews, some Gentiles, some Bond, some Free, some Noble, some
Mean; yet they are all one in Christ Jesus, as the Apostle says, Gal. 3 28.
There is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. It Is true, you are
different among your selves, one is a master, another a servant, one is a rich
man, another a poor man, so there is a difference; but they are all one in
Christ Jesus, they have all one and the self-same Faith, they have all one and
the self-same Father, there is but one Lord, and one Spirit to quicken and
unite them all: Thus we see what this Body of Christ is.

Now in the Second place, What it is to be put into this Body; to be implanted
What putting into this Body is.
into it, to be knit into this Body: I Answer, in a few words it is this:

It is a part of a man's Ingrafting into Christ by Faith, whereby a man is
ingrafted into the Body of Christ, having one common life with all the rest of
the Members for mutual consent, and profit, and care, and help, and sympathy,
or fellow-feeling.

First, It is a part of a man's ingrafting into Christ; For the ingrafting A
part of our ingrafting into Christ.
of a man into Christ, and into the body of Christ, are not Two things, but God
does them by one and the self-same act, as you may see, Romans 12. 5. We being
many are one body in Christ, and every one Members one of another: that is, by
being Members of Christ, and by being ingrafted into Christ, we come to have
fellowship, and conjunction, and joining one with another: it must needs be the
same work, for the putting a man into Christ in whom are the other Members,
that very act makes a man to have fellowship with Christ, together with all the
other Members, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 11. 17. Though some of the branches
be broken off, and thou being a wild olive tree, wast grafted in for them, and
made partaker of the root: When a man is ingrafted into this Olive tree, he is
ingrafted with the rest of Christ's Members, and he does partake together with
the other Members of the same root, and of the same Gifts, and Graces, God does
both under one: Therefore though I handle this after the other, it is because I
cannot handle them both at once. Saint John says, 1 John 1. 7. If we walk in
the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another; So that
if a man be in Christ, he has communion with the Body of Christ; if he has
fellowship with Christ, he has fellowship with the Body of Christ; so that you
see the Spirit does both by one and the self-same act, as the Apostle says,
Ephesians. 2. 12. Ye were at that time without Christ, and aliants from the
commonwealth of Israel: It is all one thing to say that a man is out of
Christ, and an Aliant from the commonwealth of Israel, without that
corporation, without that Body, he is no Member of that Body; therefore it
follows on the other side, If a man be in Christ, and ingrafted into Christ,
then he is of this society, he is of the commonwealth of the Israel of God: So
that this is the First Thing, It is a part of a man's ingrafting into Christ.

Secondly, This likewise is done by Faith: When a man is ingrafted Wrought by
Faith.
into Christ, he is ingrafted into him by Faith: As the Apostle says, Romans 11.
23. And they also, if they abide not in unbelief, shall be grafted in, for God
is able to graft them: As who should say, If ever they have Faith, they are
ingrafted into Christ; it is Faith that ingrafts a man into Christ, and the
same Faith that makes a man to be of the Body of Christ, that puts a man into
the number of the Members of Christ; as Paul says, To Titus my Son in the
common Faith, Tit. 1. 4. that is, it is such a Faith as does not only ingraft
this man into Christ, but the very self-same Faith, another man having it, it
does ingraft him into the Body of Christ too: So that it is a common Faith,
whereby one is ingrafted into the Body of Christ as well as another, as Act. 2.
44. They were all of one mind, and one heart, they all hung together as one
body, they imparted their gifts, and things they had, even to their very Lands
and Goods, one to another; here was a sweet communion: but then, what was the
reason of this? What was the Instrument that wrought this? It was Faith; for
the text says, they were believers, or else they could not have done it: And
therefore as we are said to come to Christ, so to the Body of Christ, as Heb.
12. 22. But ye are come to Mount Zion, to the City of the living God, the
celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels; and to the
congregation of the first born, which are written in heaven. You are come, he
speaks of a spiritual coming by Faith: So that this putting into the Body of
Christ, is by Faith.

Then in the Third place, It makes a man have a common life with all the Making
us have common life with other Members.
rest of the Members of Jesus Christ: As you may see, Col. 3. 4. When Christ
which is our life shall appear; ye also shall appear with him in glory* Christ
who is our life; We that are the people of God, Christ is our life, we have one
and the self-same life, all one and the self-same mind in the ways of God; As
it is said, Act. 4. 32. The multitude of them that believed were of one heart
and one soul; all the people of God in the whole world would quickly be
acquainted if they were brought together, for they are all of one and the
self-same disposition and mind; As our Savior speaks to his Father, Joh. 17.
21. That they all may be one, as thou art in me, and I in thee, so that all
they may be one in us: As the Three Persons in the blessed Trinity are three
distinct Persons, and yet are all one; so in some sense, the Members of the
Body of Christ, though they be of several callings and conditions in the world,
yet they are all one, that they may be all one as we are one, verse. 21. They
all live by the same rule, and walk by the same rule, they are all guided by
the same Word, and swayed by the same Commandment, they all walk in one Way,
they all Pray by one and the self-same Spirit, they have a life that is common:
look as one lives, so lives another; look as one repents, so another repents;
look as one believes, so another believes; and look as one apprehends of God,
and comes before him with affection, and fear, and trembling, so does another;
though they never saw one another, yet they all meet in the same life, for they
have the same root of life, the same cause of life.

In the Fourth place, It makes a man to be of one consent with all the people
It makes of one consent with all the people of God.
of God every where; As you may see, Zeph. 3. 9. For then will I turn to the
people a pure language, that they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, to
serve him with one consent. The Lord helps them all to Pray after one pure
language, and gives them all one pure consent in the Service of God (though it
is in different degrees indeed, one arises to an higher pitch than another)
therefore the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you brethren, by the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye speak all the same things, that there be
no divisions among you: As who should say, All the Members of Christ are so, I
beseech you endeavor to have this sign of being Members of Christ, be all
joined together in the same mind; it is true, that this union, and consent, and
agreement, and oneness of heart and mind (as I may call it) is very imperfect,
but in some it is more imperfect then it is in other; some have attained to a
further degree, there is a great deal of unlikeness of affections, a great deal
of unlikeness in Prayer, a great deal of unlikeness in Obedience, there is a
great deal of jarrings now and then through weakness; but as the Apostle says,
As far as we have attained, let us be thus minded, Phil. 3. 15, 16. Let us walk
by the same rule, and mind the same things; the Children of God throughout the
whole world, they are of one mind, as far as they have attained, though in
Faith, in Repentance, in new Obedience they differ gradually in their
seize, yet they all agree in this consent of judgment, That sin must be
hated, that a man must live in no sin, that a man must yield Obedience to all
Gods commandments, that a man must deny himself in all things, that in all
things God must be glorified; they all agree that we are Members one of
another, and that we must love one another, and forgive one another, as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven us; they all agree in this, They are all of one
mind: and as one is mortified, so is the other; and as one is meek and gentle,
so is the other: It is true indeed, one has attained further then another; but
whereunto they have attained, they are all alike minded: Now whereunto we have
not attained, God will reveal it in his good time unto us, says the Apostle:
May be one sees such a thing is a duty, which another does not, yet all see
that it is their duty to fear God, and obey him in all their ways, and they
all set themselves to hate and oppose all manner of known sins: As far as they
have attained, they are all of one mind.

Fifthly, All this is for mutual profit, and help, and care, and sympathy, For
mutual care and help.
as you may see delivered by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. That it must be for mutual
profit, see the seventh verse. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every
man to profit withal; that is, when the Spirit of God does manifest himself in
one man one way, and in another man another way; he gives one man (may be) the
gift of Teaching, to another man the gift of Knowledge; some have excellent
gifts in one kind, some in another (but all have the gifts of new Obedience.)
Now look whatsoever gifts they are, whenever the Spirit does manifest it self
to any Member of the Body of Christ, it is to be helpful and useful to others,
so that the Members of Christ need one another: that you may see, verse. 21, 22.
The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee: nor the head to the
foot, I have no need of thee, etc. We cannot be without the poorest, and
vilest, and contemptiblest Member in the Body; nay, the very life of the Body
may depend upon the vilest Members.

So again, That they are to care for one another; That you may see in the 25.
verse; Lest there should be any division in the Body, but that the Members
should have the same care one for another. You see how it is in the Body of a
man, the head has care of the feet, it guides the feet; and the foot has care
of the head, to hold it up, and carry it up and down; and the hand is useful
for the relieving of any part, they have all the same care one of another, so
it is in the Body of Christ. And for a Sympathy, see it in the 26. verse,
Wherefore if one Member suffer, all suffer with it; and if one Member rejoice,
all rejoice with it; all have a fellow-feeling of one another necessities and
comforts. Therefore when the Spirit of God does implant a man into the Body of
Christ, it is all one with the implanting a man into Christ, he does give him a
common life, one mind and heart, he does give them all natural help, and
natural care one of another, for they have need one of another.

In the Third place we must show, That the Spirit does this, And why he That
this is the Spirits work.
does it.

First, That it is the Spirit that unites and tyeth all these Members together;
This makes them hang together; therefore it is called, the unity of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 4. 3. He exhorts the Ephesians that were the Members of Christ, to keep
the unity of the Spirit; because as the Members of Christ are united to Christ,
so they are united mutually by the Spirit; Therefore take heed (says the
Apostle) to keep the unity of the Spirit, that you may be of one mind, and one
heart: Therefore the Apostle speaking of the Body of Christ, he compares it to
a building; A building consists of diverse bricks, and stones, and timber, which
being joined together, make up an house: So the Members of Christ being joined
together, make up an house for God to dwell in: But who makes this? The text
says, the Spirit of God, Ephesians. 2. 22. The Spirit of God makes up this blessed
building, all the elect of God, all the faithful, all the heirs of Grace in the
world, are as an house or body: though there be never so many parts in it, yet
they make all but one body or house, so it is here; Now the Spirit unites
these, and lays them artificially together, so that they may prop one another.
Ezekiel. 11. 19. The Lord there speaking of his Elect, I will give them (says he)
one heart, and make them of one mind; How will he do it? I will put a new
Spirit within them; And so he makes them to be of one and the self-same mind.

Now the Reason, Why the Spirit of God does do this, is, Reasons why the Spirit
of God does thus unite to the Body of Christ. None but the Spirit is able.


First, Because none else besides the Spirit is able to do it: For by nature we
are woefully and fearfully different from the Body of Christ, we are of another
nature, of another kind, of another life; nay, we are contrary to it: all the
Members of Christ, they are as young sucking children; but wicked men, and all
men by nature are Lions, and Leopards, and Bears, and Tigers, as the Prophet
speaks, Isa. 11. 6. 7. Now the Prophet there speaking how Christ means to
effect it, is to unite these together, to make the Lion and the Lamb to have
communion together, to make the Bear and the Kid to lie down together: Mark how
he shows how Christ will do it, in the second verse of the same Chapter, the
text says, The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; he speaks of Christ;
that is, whereas this requires a great deal of power to do this, to make a man
to be clean contrary to his nature; whenas a man's nature is carnal, and wicked,
and earthly, to make him of the Body of Christ; therefore says the text, The
Spirit of Might shall be upon him, etc. There is a great deal of Might required
to turn their dispositions: it is a mighty thing to change a man that is a
drunkard, a proud person, a wicked wretch; to turn this man topsie-turvy, to
make him mind other things, to make him clean another man; this requires
infinite wisdom: Therefore the Spirit of Wisdom shall rest upon him to do it;
and the Spirit of Knowledge, and the Spirit of the Fear of the Lord; that is,
the Lord Jesus shall put in the Spirit of Fear into men's hearts, and this will
turn them, this will alter men's minds, and conversations.

Secondly, There is none so fit as the Spirit of God to do it: For this None
but the Spirit is fit to do it.
Body of Christ, it is a company of Sons and Daughters that God has up and
down in the world, that are able to cry, Abba Father: now who is so fit to do
this as the Spirit of the Son? As the Apostle says, That he might redeem them
that were under the Law, that they might receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.
5.

Fourthly, How the Spirit of God does this; and that is Two ways, as How the
Spirit does Unite to Christ's Body. By being one and the same spirit in all
Members.
the Scripture reveals to us.

The One is, By being one and the same Spirit in all the Members of Christ: He
comes into them, and dwells in them as one and the self-same Spirit, and so
makes up this union: The same Spirit that was in Paul, was in Peter; and so all
the rest of the Members of Christ one and the self-same Spirit is in them, 1
Cor. 3. 16. Know ye not that year the Temple of God, and that the Spirit
dwells in you? Therefore look what Spirit of Faith one man has, another
comes to have the same Spirit of Faith: as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4. 13. We
having the same Spirit of Faith with them, as it is written, I believe, and
therefore I speak; so we believe, and therefore we speak.

Secondly, The Spirit does this by uniting and tying a knot between these By
tying a knot between all the Members.
Members: He does unite them, and make them hang together in one; he makes them
to be of one heart, and of one soul by knitting and combining of their hearts
all together: Therefore this fellowship is called the fellowship of the Spirit,
Phil. 2. 1. Though Paul were far off from Philippi, yet he could adjure the
Philippians by the fellowship of the Spirit. But you will say, How can this be?
Can the people of God have communion and fellowship one with another when they
are so far asunder one from another, and may be never saw one another, may be
never heard one of another? How can this be? I say, Very well: for the Spirit
of God has a long arm, and is able to make the people of God shake hands,
though they be a thousand miles asunder; it is the Spirit that tyeth this knot,
and unites them together: As Paul speaks, Col. 2. 5. Though I be absent in the
Flesh, yet I am present with you in the Spirit; and methinks I am in your
company and meetings; when you meet together; I see you in my mind methinks,
and I joy in your order: The Spirit makes the communion between the people of
God; and hence it is that they can love one another, because all the Members
are tied together by one knot; and they come to help one another, and do any
thing one for another; even by the very love of the Spirit which they have one
toward another, Romans 15 30. The Apostle had some need of the good Romans to
help him: Now see how he does entreat help from them: he desires them by the
love of the Spirit, to pray heartily for him: he knew that the love of the
Spirit would be a great motive to them: you know you and I are joined together
by the same Spirit, for the love of the Spirit pray for me. Thus we see,

First, What this Body of Christ is. Secondly, What the putting a man into this
Body is. Thirdly, The Reasons why. Fourthly, How the Spirit does it.
Now I come to the Uses. Uses. The want of the Spirit is the cause of
difference.


And First, Is it so that the Spirit of God does unite all the Saints of God
together in one Body? Then here we may see the reason of the difference of men
in the world: The difference of our Congregations; some companies that hang
together are of one mind, another of another mind; the reason is, they have a
different Spirit; but all the Saints of God have the Spirit of God which makes
them hang together; and the wicked, they have another Spirit.

Secondly, Does the Spirit of God join all the Saints of God together in Let
none put asunder what the Spirit joins.
one Body? Then that which God has joined together, let no man put asunder. It
is spoken in regard of man and wife; if it be such a horrible thing to part man
and wife, then what a horrible thing is it to part Saint and Saint that are
joined together by the Spirit of God; this blessed communion of the Spirit,
what a fearful thing is it for a man to root it out? When there shall be
heart-burnings and strivings between those that are the children of God, what a
fearful thing is this? Is the number of those that fear God so great, that we
can spare any? Or are the Graces of Gods Spirit Wilderness Graces, that can
walk alone and need no help from, or can do no good to others? Therefore the
Apostle prays God in the behalf of the Corinthians, That the Members of
Christ may be of one mind, and live in peace, 2 Cor. 13. 11.

Thirdly, Here we may see how to try our acquaintance, and whether To try our
acquaintance hereby.
the company we join our selves unto, be good or no: If our company be right,
the Spirit of God tyeth the knot; therefore the Apostle will tell you, whether
you have the right communion and fellowship, or no; try the spirits, whether
they be of God or no, says he, If the fellowship we have one with another be
not of God, if the Spirit of God do not knit us together, our fellowship is not
right. 1. Joh. 1. 3. there is an excellent place, That they may have fellowship
with us (says he) and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ: As who should say, We would fain have you have fellowship
with us; and I tell you what kind of fellowship you must have, if you be
acquainted with us, you must have fellowship with the father, and with the Lord
Jesus Christ, for our fellowship is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ:
so that we may see, whether our Company be right or no, by this.

The Last Use is this, Is it so that the Spirit of God joins all the Saints To
stir up a sympathy amongst the Saints.
of God together in one Body? Then we should have a fellow-feeling with all the
Members of Christ: Do not say thou art a Member of the Church of England, and
not of France, or Germany; do not say thou art a Member of this Parish, but not
of another; do not say so, for if thou art a Member of Christ, there is one
Body, and one Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4. If there be one Body, there must be one
Spirit; and therefore we should have a fellow-feeling.

But how shall we have a fellow-feeling with the Members of Christ? How to
work, maintain, and express this sympathy. By informing our selves concerning
one another.


I say, First, We must inform our selves as much as we can concerning one
another; As when the Ark of God was among the Philistims, old Eli, though he
gave way too far to his Sons wickedness, yet was he very careful of the Ark
and people of God; and therefore (1 Samuel 4. 13, 14.) he went out and sat in
the highway, that so he might hear, in the first place, what was the news; and
you know how his heart trembled when he heard that the Ark of God was taken: So
it was with David, when any came out of the Camp of Israel, he says to them,
What is done I pray thee? 2 Samuel 1. 4. So we should enquire concerning one
another.

Secondly, We should visit our fellow members: As it is said of Moses, By
visiting our Fellow Members.
though he were a great Courtier in Pharaoh's Court, yet he went out to look
upon his Brethrens burdens, Exodus 2. 11. he would be ever and anon steping out
to see how his brethren fared, and how did this affect his heart with their
trouble?

Thirdly, We should lay to heart their Afflictions: It is a strange thing By
laying to heart their afflictions.
how the people of God in all ages, have been affected with the Afflictions of
the Church; nay, though they have not seen it, but only foresaw what would be
afterward; As Elisha wept when he foresaw what cruelty Hazael would use
toward the People of Israel, 2 King. 8. 11, 12. So Daniel, Dan. 8. 27. when
God revealed the Afflictions of the Church to him two hundred years before it
should come to pass, yet when he heard of the Affliction that should fall out,
the text says, that Daniel fainted; and how can we think that the Spirit of
Christ has united us into one Body, when we have not this disposition in our
souls?

OF THE SABBATH.
Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it Holy.
THAT which I intend to speak concerning the Sabbath at this time, I will cast
into these Propositions:

The First is this, That there must be some set time Proposit. 1. A set time
for worship.
for the Worship and immediate Service of God.

Now the Reason why there must be some set time for Gods immediate Worship, is,

First, Because all Actions cannot be done at once, Eccles. 3. 1. There is an
appointed time for every Action under the Sun: Then if there be a time for all
actions, surely there must be a time for the Worship of God.

Secondly, There must be a set time; Because such is our dullness in the

Secondly, The Second Proposition is this, That as there must be some Propos.
2. Some set time for worship every day.
time for Gods immediate Worship, and Service; so there must be some set time
every day, all the days of our lives; there must be some defined and
determinate time for Worship of God every day, at the least morning and
evening. David, though he were employed in great affairs, yet he had three
times a day to glorify God in, in his holy Ordinances; Three times in the day
will I praise thee, Psalm. 55. 17.

The Reason of this is, Because men live like Beasts without daily invocation
upon God, 2 Chronicles. 13. 10, 11. Abijah there speaking against Je^choam the King
of Israel, though himself had no great goodness in him, he says, The Lord is
our God, and we offer sacrifices, and burn sweet incense every day; Every day
they did it; as who should say, it were a sign that God were not amongst us, if
we did not this: he takes it as a principle written in the conscience, though
he were a natural man, yet he does reason thus, that where there is not every
day some time for Gods Worship, God is not amongst them.

Another Reason is, Because every morning God renews his Mercies,
Lamentations, chapter 3. 23. Every morning his mercies are renewed to us, and in
the evening his compassions sail not; therefore every morning we are to set our
selves before God, to ask of him the forgiveness of our sins; every morning
and evening we are to do this. Psalm. 92. 1, 2. David says, It is a good thing
to give thanks unto the Lord, to sing praises to thy Name, O thou most High; To
show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night.

And then again God is the Alpha, and Omega, he is the beginning, and David
says, Psalm. 5. 3. My voice will I lift up unto thee in the morning; as soon as
ever he awakes in the morning, his heart is lifted up to God: so it is good for
a man to make the first part of the day holy, that the rest of the day may be
thereafter: and so as we are to begin the day with the solemn Worship of God,
so we are to end it in the evening, that we may reckon up all our accounts, and
make even with God; as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 26. Let not the Sun go down
upon your wrath: so let not the Sun go down upon a dead heart, upon a carnal
heart, upon a worldly heart; but as the Sun goes down upon our bodies, so let
the Sun of Righteousness set upon our hearts, that we may lie down in peace,
having all our reckoning made even, and all scores cancelled.

The Third Proposition is this, As there must be some time for Gods Propos. 3.
Every day in some sort a Sabbath.
immediate Service, and there must be every day some set time, at least morning
and evening, so likewise every whole day, all the days of our lives, should be
in some manner a Sabbath day to the Lord, we should be holy every day; The
Apostle finds fault, Gal. 4. 10. That they observed times, and seasons, and
days, and months, and years; we must not be earthly-minded one day, and
heavenly-minded another; but we must be every day holy to the Lord.

The First Reason is, The Covenant which God has made with us does That being
delivered from the hands of his enemies, he shall serve him without fear, Luke
1. 74, 75.
in holiness and righteousness all the days of his life: Every day must be a
Sabbath day, whenever a man gives himself up to God, there is an Oath hangs
upon him, and he breaks this Oath, if he set upon it with all his might, that
every day may be a Sabbath day; he is to be careful to live godly, and
religiously in all places, and at all times, and in every action he puts his
hand unto; a man is not only to make conscience on the seventh day, but every
day of his life.

The Second Reason is, Because not to make every day an holy day, is Job. 27.
10. Will be always call upon God? To be holy sometimes, and not at another
time, is the trick of an hypocrite; will he always call upon God, will that
man always obey God and worship him, will he always set himself to keep close
with God? No, an hypocrite will not do so. You may know an hypocrite, he has
his fits, and his pangs, and his moods; but a godly man, a sincere hearted man,
is one that does compose himself to keep a constant course in Gods worship; as
Act. 24. 16. There says Paul, Herein do I exercise my self to keep a good
conscience always, both toward God and toward man: And as it was the
practice of Paul, so of all the Elect people of God, of all sincere Christians
in the world, Act. 26. 7. all the Elect of God, all the beloved of God, they
did instantly serve God day and night.

Thirdly, Because blessedness does consist in this, In keeping every day that
fears the Lord always, Prove. 28. 14. and that does righteousness at all
times, Psa. 106. 3. It is true, the Servants of God are sometimes out of the
way, they have their swervings and failings, but their resolution is to keep a
constant course in Gods Worship, and they do strive to humble themselves under
the hand of God for their failings, and to be the more wary because of them.

Lastly, This is the Sum and Scope of all the Law of Righteousness; it David,
Psalm. 16. 8. He set the Lord always before him; that is, every day he did make
it an holy day, that he might walk as in Gods presence, and live as in Gods
Courts, that he might do all his worldly business as in the presence of God.

The Fourth Proposition is this, As there must be a set time every day, Propos.
4. A particular special day for Gods worship.
and we are to keep every day as a Sabbath day in some sense, so there must be
a particular special day, set apart for Gods immediate Worship and Service:
This is the next Proposition I will prove unto you; for though every day is to
be a Sabbath day, yet we have particular callings, and we have business in the
world to employ our selves about, so that we cannot be every day hearing of the
Word, and employing our selves in Prayer and spiritual exercises; though every
day we are to keep it holy, yet we cannot be vacant wholly and totally every
day; Now therefore I say, That there is a set day that the Lord has called for
to be devoted unto him: The very Schoolmen themselves do acknowledge this, and
the very Heathen have found it out; They have set a day apart for the Service
of their Gods, which they call their holy day, wherein they lay aside all other
business, and set themselves apart to honor and worship their Images and
Idols, according to their manner. Now I will make this good by many Arguments,
that God will have a set day, besides the every day Sabbath, he will have a set
particular Sabbath for his Worship and Service.

The First Reason is, Because he will have a little emblem and picture of the
is nothing but enjoying communion with the Lord, and feeding upon him
continually, there is nothing but this is the kingdom of heaven; Now God will
have a little picture of this among his Saints here upon earth: You know there
remains a rest for the people of God, Heb. 4. 9. It is an express place, the
word in the Original is, There remains a Sabbath for the people of God. As who
should say, There is a glorious Sabbath that all the Elect of God shall have,
and they are preserved for it, and that is reserved for them, and they shall
enter into it, when this body of death is laid down, and they shall enjoy God
face to face, to all eternity, they shall behold him as he is, and have
communion with him; now the Lord will have a little picture of this here in
this life; we cannot have it altogether in this life; for we have mortal
bodies, that must be fed, and clothed, and stand in need of the creature; for
man's sin is not yet purged away, but there is a great deal of rubbish still
left, therefore this cannot be complete here: but yet God will have a little
picture ot this, even in this life, and that is the Sabbath day, wherein they
are to lay aside all the works of their ordinary callings; and rest from all
servil labors, this is Gods day, and we must now call upon him, and hear what
he says, and wholly employ, and occupy our selves about him, as near as we
possibly can; but now, this we cannot do every day, for we have Children to
look after, and Families to provide for, and there be an hundred occasions to
call a man away; it may be a man thinks to go into his Closet, and seek God in
private, and one occasion or other calls him aside, that he cannot go on; but
the Lord will have a little emblem and expression of the kingdom of heaven upon
the Sabbath day: therefore the Apostle says, It remains for us, scil. in the
life to come.

The Second Reason, why the Lord will have a set day for his Worship and The
honorable of the Lord, Isa. 58. 13. that is, we must count the Sabbath day an
honorable day; a day of honor, wherein Gods Servants should from morning to
evening fall down before him, and confess that great is the Lord God: We should
wholly dedicate it unto him, seeking of him in Public and in Private; that we
may store up holy affections for all the week following.

Thirdly, Because God sometimes calls for an extraordinary day, and an

Now that God calls for extraordinary days, it is plain,

1. First, He calls for extraordinary days of rejoicing; when God compasses
us about with songs of Deliverance, and works wonderful Mercies for us, we
ought to set a part a day for rejoicing, and delighting in his goodness and
favor toward us, and this day is to be an holy day, as Nehemiah 8. 9. This
day is holy unto the Lord your God, mourn not, nor weep; So that when we are to
rejoice toward God for any spiritual favor toward us, we ought to keep this
day an holy day, we ought to employ the hours of the day in laboring to affect
our hearts with his kindness, and laboring to make his goodness to have
impression upon us, that we may with cheerfulness run over all our days
afterward, that we may adhere unto him the better all our life time.

2. Secondly, As he calls for extraordinary days of rejoicing, so he calls for
extraordinary days of Fasting and Humiliation, and that in Four Cases.

1. First, When we fear some heavy judgment to come upon us, or else when
some judgment is already upon us: may be some heavy judgment is upon us, or
else we fear it to come upon us, and now we are to set an extraordinary day
apart to seek the Lord; as 2 Chronicles. 20. Je^osaphat proclaimed a Fast, when the
Land was in danger: Suppose the Lord should take away the Gospel, and the feet
of those that bring glad tidings should be turned from us, then should we Fast
in those days, we should grieve before God, and bewail the loss of his Mercies
and Favors; that we may have his Goodness to quicken us, and keep us, and
uphold us in the want of them.

2. Secondly, In case that we want some Mercy that we cannot well be without,
in such a case as this, if ordinary seeking will not do the deed, we ought to
set apart an extraordinary time to prevail with God; as Ezra, he was in danger
of the enemy, and if he should go to Jerusalem, the enemy would set upon him;
now, thought he, if I should go to the King, though he were very great with the
King of Persia, at that time, yet thought he, if I should go to the Kigng for a
Band of Soldiers, he would think our God were a weak God; I have told him what
a strong God we have, and that he is ready to help all those that trust in him;
now if I should go to him for a Band of Soldiers, he might think that our God
were not able to deliver us, and it would be a great dishonor to God;
therefore he set a day apart for a Fast, and labored to get aid and help from
heaven, Ezra 8. 21. So when a Child of God is exceedingly afflicted with any
cross or temptation, and he shall wonderfully dishonor God, and cast a snare
upon them that fear his Name, in this case he is bound to seek God
extraordinarily, and if the ordinary means that God has appointed will not
prevail, he is to set a part a Fast to seek him extraordinarily.

3. Thirdly, If we be assaulted from hell, and Satan, and our own hearts, with
strong temptations, then we are to seek God extraordinarily; as it was with
Paul, when the Messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him, when he lay under
some heavy temptation, either unto Pride, or Lust, or Uncleanness, some prick
in the flesh, that the Lord sent upon him, and let him be encountered withal;
then Paul sought God in a solemn manner, more then ever he did at other times,
2 Cor. 12. 8. For this I besought God thrice.

4. Fourthly, In case a man is to do some notable service, he is to enter into
some new Calling; or if the Lord does put him upon some new service, that does
require some more then ordinary help, now a man is to seek God by Fasting and
Prayer, as you may see it was with Barnabas and Paul when they entered into the
Ministry, Acts 13 3. Now the reason why I name these things is to show you,
that sometimes God will have an extraordinary set day for his immediate worship
and service, when we are to lay aside all other business, and set out selves
apart, to call upon his Name, and seek him. The thing I gather from hence is
this, If there be an extraordinary set day, then there must be an ordinary set
day for Gods immediate Service.

Another Argument is taken from the Equity of it, and that stands Two ways:

1. First, It is very equal when as we have six days to provide for our Adam,
in eating of the forbidden fruit? in that God gave him liberty to eat freely of
all other trees in the garden, and forbad him only the eating of that one? Now
what excuse could Adam have for not abstaining from that one? So here, God
having given us diverse days for the good of our bodies, and for means and
maintenance of the things of this life; duty requires, that we should not touch
Gods day, nor set our foot upon it, nor turn our eyes away from it, we ought to
remember it; as Joseph said in regard of his Mistress, when she enticed him to
folly; mark how he answers the temptation; My Master has put all things into
my hands that are in the house, he has withheld nothing from me but only thee
his Wife, and that is equal, and reasonable, how therefore shall I do this
great wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39. 9. So should we say, when we
are tempted to break the Lords day, we should say, The Lord has not imposed
any day besides, the Lord has given us all the six days for our use, how
therefore shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God with worldly
thoughts, and speeches, and actions upon that day? It stands with very good
equity that it should be so.

2. Secondly, It stands with equity, in regard of our Souls; if our bodies
which are the worser part, have several days for their use, then how much more
should the soul have one day, which is a thousand times more worth then the
body? You know what Christ says, W^^t will it profit a man to gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? Matthew. 16. 26. Our souls are more worth then our
bodies, and we have more need to seek out for Holiness and Grace for them, and
to be well provided for in regard of them, then for any thing in this present
world; if we want meat, we can but starve; if we want clothes, we can but
famish; if we want outward things, we can but temporally perish; but if we want
Grace and the Favor of God, we perish for ever. Now if there be six days
allowed for the good of our bodies, how much more should we be willing to have
one day for the good of our souls specially considering what need we have
thereof? This Argument our Savior Christ uses to prove the Sabbath, Mark ^.
27. The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath: The Sabbath was made
for man, as meat was made for the body; and a man cannot be without food, no
more can the soul be without the Sabbath; so that we see, there must be a
solemn day set a part for Gods Worship and Service.

The Fifth Proposition is this, That as there must be a set day for Gods
Propos. 5. One day of Seven to be set apart for Gods worship.
Worship and Service, so this day must be one of seven, not one of eight, or
nine, or five, or four, but one of seven; and this, though it be not naturally
moral, yet it is positively moral, though it be not natural, written in the
heart of man, as a man: if he had no teaching, his conscience would find out
that he should not be idle, and steal, and commit murder; the Conscience will
grope out these Ordinances and Statutes of God; and the Conscience will find
out that there must be a set day for Gods Worship and Service; the light of
nature will find out that, but that it must be one day of seven, that it cannot
find out; but I say, that it is the positive law of God, that it must be one of
seven.

Now, Because it is not written in the heart of man, but in the Commandment

Secondly, Another Reason is this, As the Lord has commanded this seventh The
seventh day, is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; Now then if the seventh day be
the Sabbath of the Lord our God, then we must not divert any of the hours, or
any part of the day away; when our minds run into the world, we must curb them
and remember that the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord our God.

Thirdly, Another Reason is, That our Cattle, and Servants, and Children,

Another Reason is, Because he has sanctified it; therefore the Lord blessed
the seventh day, and hallowed it: Now then, if the Lord has sanctified the
seventh day, and appointed it, if he has set it apart for that purpose, for
spiritual employments, and not to be filled up with any thing else, we are
guilty of Sacrilege, if we do not give him this, as Levit. 27. 28. the Lord
says, Whatsoever is devoted unto the Lord, that is most holy unto him; now God
says, he has devoted the seventh day to himself, therefore we are to keep it
holy: Nebuchadnezzar, a very heathen, when he knew that the Vessels came out of
the Temple of the Lord, he would not employ them to a common use, Dan. 1. 2. He
put them into the house of his god; which was the holiest place he had.

Fifthly, This is necessary, because we are apt to be worldly, and carnal,

The Sixth Proposition is this, That as it must be one of seven, so it is not
Propos. 6. That day of the seven to be kept holy, on which God rested.
indifferent which of the seven days we keep holy, but it must be that day
whereupon God rested, therefore it has the name of a Sabbath; Sabbath is
nothing but rest: The reason of the name is Twofold, First, Because God rested
upon that day; And Secondly, Because we are to rest upon that day.

The Seventh Proposition is this, That all that is in the fourth Commandment,
Propos. 7. All that is in the Fourth Commandment, is not essential to it.
is not essential to the Commandment: the fourth Commandment delivers only
these Two things, First, That God will have a seventh day; Secondly, That this
seventh day is to be the day of Gods rest: This is the whole meaning of the
fourth Commandment: now all other particulars in the fourth Commandment, are
not essential to the fourth Commandment; as that God made Heaven and Earth in
six days, and rested the seventh day, etc. It is not essential to the fourth
Commandment, but because at that time when God delivered the Decalogue, there
was no greater work then the Creation; and the rest from that work, was the
rest from the greatest work in the world; theefore it was kept upon the last
day of the week, upon which God rested from the Creation: Now the meaning of
the fourth Commandment, is in the eighth Verse; all the other particulars, are
but Commentaries to open it to the Jews, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy; this is the fourth Commandment: The Sabbath, that is, the day that God
rested on, and the day that we are to rest upon: this is the holy day that is
devoted to the Lord; now it was kept upon the last day of the week, because God
created heaven and earth, and rested upon that day; and the Creation of heaven
and earth was the greatest work that God then had done.

But then you will say, Why does the Commandment say, That in six days God
created Heaven and Earth, and rested the seventh day?

I Answer, 1. It is no strange thing, to see some things in the Commandments
Deuteronomy. 5. 22. God spoke to the Jews; now no wonder, that God, speaking to the
Jews, did speak diverse particulars according to them, and in their phrase,
which if we had been alive, and they to succeed us, God would have spoken
according to us, as he did according to them.

2. Secondly, We see plainly, there are some things in the Commandments, which
do not concern the whole world, but only the Nation of the Jews, as in the
first Commandment, I have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the
house of Bondage: [Thou shall have no other gods but me:] That is the
Commandment; but though they, together with the other, were put into the Tables
of Stone, yet it concerns only the Jews. It Is true indeed, it is a type of our
deliverance, that we are delivered from Hell, and Sin, and Satan, as they were
delivered out of Egypt, and the house of Bondage; but literally these words
belong only to the Jews; and the Commandment is this, Thou shall have no other
gods but me; So it is for the fourth Commandment.

Again, There is something in the Fifth Commandment, that does not concern us,
but only them, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc. [That thy days may be
long in the Land which the thy God gives thee] that belongs only to the Jews,
it is meant particularly of the Land of Canaan. This then is the effect of the
Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in
the Land of Canaan. So that the first words are the Commandment, and the later
part belongs only to the Jews: So Deuteronomy. 5. 14. the Fourth Commandment, it was
put into the Tables of Stone thus, Remember the seventh day to keep it holy,
for the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shall do no
manner of work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, etc. that thy manservant,
and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou; that belongs to us, as well as
to them; but then it follows, Remember thou were a servant in the Land of
Egypt: Here you see the Jews have another Argument, besides the Arguments that
we have; but though we have not that Argument, yet the Commandment stands
still, and the Commandment is only thus much; namely, That there must be a
Seventh day, and that seventh day God rested upon: now whereas the Jews kept
the last day of the week, that was only by a temporary Commandment, because the
making of heaven and earth, was the greatest thing that God had then done, and
God rested from that upon that day; but now if God work a greater work then the
Creating of heaven and earth, and rest from that, then by virtue of the fourth
Commandment, we are to keep that day holy, upon which he rested from that work.

Now I come to the Eighth Proposition, That this Fourth Commandment, Propos. 8.
The 4th Commandment continual, always to abide in the Church.
concerning a Sabbath day, concerning the keeping of a Seventh day holy, is a
continual Commandment, always to abide in the Church of God; I will prove it
by diverse Arguments, that it was not to continue only in the time of the Jews,
but it is to abide always in the Church to the coming of the Son of man; there
is not a jot of Ceremony in the fourth Commandment.

The First Reason is, Because God did institute the Sabbath before there Adam
in his Innocence: Now all Ceremonies did prefigure Christ; and before Adam
fell, there was no Promise of the Seed of the Woman, nor no need of it, and so
no need of a Figure to represent it; but before Adam fell, the Sabbath was
prescribed, Genesis 2. 2, 3. On the seventh day God rested from all that he had
made, so that God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it: So that you see
God having rested upon this day, he sanctified it, and put holiness upon it;
therefore we are not to name that Common, which he has named Holy; now though
we do not read of Adams keeping this day, nor Abels, nor Enochs, nor Noah's, nor
Abraham's, nor Isaacs, nor Jacobs; yet it does not follow it was not kept: for
Moses does not take in hand to set down the actions of the Fathers, but only
generally; for you see what a short story we have of Methashelah, a good man,
though he lived a thousand years almost, yet we have scarce Three Syllables
concerning him. Now since Moses did not undertake to set down all that they did,
therefore they might keep the Sabbath, though he did not set it down: neither
afterward does he set it down for 319. years, and 111. years, which 430.
years, to the time of the Judges, we have nothing spoken of concerning the
Sabbath; therefore seeing God did Institute it to Adam in his Innocence, that
is enough; but what though the Fathers had not kept it holy, does it therefore
follow that we must not keep it holy? They had many wives, does it therefore
follow that we must have many wives? So, suppose they did not sanctify the
seventh day, (though we can see no proof that they did not) yet this is
enough, That God did sanctify it before any Ceremony was.

Again, Though we do not read that they practiced this, yet the Scripture does
intimate to us that they did it.

The Second Argument to prove this, is out of Exodus 16. 23. before the Sinai,
before the Commandment was spoken from Horeb; yet you may see that the Sabbath
is spoken of, and the Lord does find fault with Israel, for not keeping of it,
which intimates it was a day they well knew, and the Lord says afterward to
Moses, How long will ye refuse to keep my Laws and Statutes? As in verse. 28.
the Lord there speaks of a Sabbath, as a day well known unto them, that it was
commanded to be sanctified by them, and this was before the delivering of the
Ceremonial Law; therefore it is not a ceremonial Law, but a positive Law,
equipollent with the moral Law.

A Third Reason is, Because it was written by the singer of God in Tabels of
stone and put into the Ark, Exodus 31. 18. and Deuteronomy. 10. ^ the Commandments were
written upon Two tables of stone, and by the finger of God; Now all Divines, in
all ages, agree upon this, that the writing of this Commandment in the Two
tables of stone, is an evident Argument of the morality of it. For as a
Reverend Divine says, Not to think the Fourth Commandment to be moral, is the
way to all Atheism; for if one should say the Fourth Commandment is not moral,
but ceremonial; another might step up the next year and say the Second, and the
Fifth, is not: So that whereas the Law is written by the finger of God in
tables of stone, if we root it out of the tables of stone, we shall root it out
of the heart of man; therefore the writing of it in the tables of stone, is an
evident Argument of the morality of it to all ages.

A Fourth Argument is this, The Lord does urge this Commandment, memento,
remember before it: As who should say, Be careful of this, and take heed of
forgetting it, take heed of those that shall teach you the contrary, that this
Commandment is not moral. 4. It is negatively delivered, and affirmatively;
the other delivered only one way; either affirmatively only, as the Fifth,
Honor thy Father and Mother: or else negatively only, as all the rest: There
is never a Commandment delivered both negatively and affirmatively, but only
the Fourth, as, Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy; there it is
delivered affirmatively: And afterward it is delivered negatively, In it thou
shall do no manner of work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, etc. The Lord
has delivered it both ways; noting, that this Commandment is equal and
equipollent with the other: and the Lord did this in infinite wisdom, because
he had not written this Commandment in the heart of man by the light of nature,
therefore the Lord did urge it more with Arguments, that what was wanting in
the light of nature, might be supplied by the pressing of Arguments.

5. Another Argument is, Because if this be not moral, then we have Ten, as
Deuteronomy. 10. 4. it is not an Ecclesiastical thing, but the Lord has said it, as
you may see there: And he wrote upon the Tables according to the first writing,
the Ten Commandments, which the Lord spoke unto you in the Mount, out of the
midst of the fire. The Lord spoke Ten Commandments; now if the Fourth
Commandment be not moral, there be not ten Commandments: And you may as well
deny the Articles of the Faith, and the Petitions of the Lords Prayer, as the
ten Commandments.

The Sixth Argument is this; Christ tells us plainly, that it is a Matthew. 24.
20. Pray (says he) that your flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath
day. Our Savior Christ here prophesied of the destruction of Jerusalem, which
was forty years after Christ's Ascension, when all Ceremonies were ceased, as
Paul had proclaimed before the destruction of Jerusalem, That if any man would
be Gal. 5. 2*
circumcised, Christ should profit him nothing, Galat. 5. 2. That is, if he
would keep the Ceremonial Law: Now Christ bids those that should live forty
years after the Ceremonies were ceased, I would have you have a care of the
Sabbath, and delight in hearing of the word of God, and meditating upon it, and
so forth; and if any occasion come that you fall into the hands of your
enemies, pray that your flight be not in the Winter, nor on the Sabbath day: as
who should say, If it be in the Winter, that will do hurt, and be troublesome
to your bodies: and so if you fly upon the Sabbath day, that will trouble your
consciences, if you regard Gods commandment and the good of your own
consciences; if you regard or fear Gods name, it will grieve you to fly on the
Sabbath day, whereby you shall be deprived of the Congregation of Gods Saints;
therefore pray that your flight be not upon that day: Intimating, that it was
Moral; for if it had been Ceremonial, he would not have wished them to pray
that it might not be upon that day.

Now whereas our Savior does so often condemn the Pharisees in regard of their
strictness of the Sabbath; it is not as if he did disallow the keeping of it;
but they were foolishly precise, they strained at a gnat, and swallowed a
camel; they crowded out, and regarded nor Mercy and Judgment, they would not
pull a poor beast out of a pit, or relieve a poor man upon the Sabbath day:
they found fault that a man should be helped from deaths door by our Savior
upon the Sabbath, this was their folly. Now our Savior did not condemn strict
keeping of the Sabbath, but he did condemn their Superstition; for ever since
Adams time, it was lawful to do works of Mercy on the Sabbath, it was Lawful to
pull a beast out of the pit, and do works of Mercy, and Necessity upon the
Sabbath day. And, whereas the Law says, The Jews might not kindle a fire on
the Sabbath Exodus 35. 3
day, if we were in their case, we might not neither; for they were in the
Wilderness, in an hot Country, where they needed no Fire, and having their
Food provided to their hands. And being in an hot Country, if they kindled a
Fire, it was out of wantonness, but if it had been a cold Country, in Adams
time, and Abraham's time, and in all times, it was lawful to kindle a Fire.

Again, another Argument is this, The very Heathen themselves have
Alexandrinus, a godly Father, that lived but a little after Christ, says, That
the Heathen did count the ^eventh day, an Holy day. And it is related of
Alexander Severus Emperor of Rome, though he were a Pagan, and Infidel, yet
every Sabbath day, he retired from his Warlike affairs, and went up into the
Capitol to worship his gods. And it is reported again in Heathen Histories,
our boys go not to School upon the Sabbath day, neither are Humane Arts taught
on that day; but we have a Rest upon that day: Nay, some of the Heathens tell
us, That they keep it from the Creation; therefore Philo tells us, That the
Sabbath day, is the Creation day: and diverse other poor people, that never had
Scripture, or Prophet, or Minister among them, but went merely by the light of
Nature, and what they had learned from their Ancestors and Fathers, they did
keep the Sabbath day. Nay, one of them says, That on the Seventh day, all the
Host of Heaven and Earth was finished. Therefore seeing the very Heathen have
learned to keep this day Holy, it is an Evident Argument, that this is a Moral
Commandment. I conclude the Proof of this Point, with the saying of our
Savior Christ, Mat. 5. 18. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot
or title of the Law shall pass away: Mark, our Savior says there, that
there shall not one jot or title of the Decalogue pass away. As for the
Ceremonial, and Judicial law, they stand not still, but the whole compass of
them is removed, the Ceremonial Law is quite and clean abolished; and the
Judicial Law, in many particulars; therefore our Savior meant it not of those
two Laws, but he speaks of the Decalogue, and he says, Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, before one jot of it shall pass away, much less an whole branch
be rooted out. And Gal. 3. 10. the Apostle says, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in this Law to do them; not only
he that continues not in the fourth, and fifth, and all the rest. And Jam. 2.
10. the Apostle there says, If a man should keep the whole Law of God, and be
guilty only in one point, he is guilty of all. Suppose thou did keep the
Three first Commandments, and all the Six last, if thou keep not the Fourth
Commandment, thou art guilty of the breach of all the Commandments.

I let this pass, and come now to the last Proposition, which is this, That
Propos. 9. The first day of the week was the Lords day, and so to continue to
the end of the world.
though the last day of the week were kept for the Sabbath, till the coming of
Christ, yet the first day of the week, that seventh day, is now the Lords Day,
and is so to continue to the end of the World: I frame it thus, The change of
the seventh day, to the first day of the week, is not by Ecclesiastical Law, or
by the Law of man, or Apostolical Tradition, but it is by the Institution, and
express Commandment of God.

The first Argument to prove it, is taken out of Psalm. 118. 24. It is an
Argument Austin did use it in his time, the Psalmist Prophecieth of the
Resurrection of Christ, the Stone which the builders refused, is become the
Head-stone of the Corner, this is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in ver.
22, 23
our eyes. (Our Savior Christ, Mat. 21. does expound it of his Crucifying, and
Resurrection) This is the day that the Lord has made, we will be glad and
rejoice in it. The Psalmist speaks here of the Resurrection of Christ; now
speaking of this very day, says he, This is The day that the Lord has made:
And we for our part, that are godly, and desire to be built upon this Corner
Stone, we will be glad, and rejoice in it; we will keep it as a glorious day, a
day of Thanksgiving, and Rejoicing in God. The thing is plain, see Isa. 56. 1,
2. the Prophet Prophecyeth of the Day of Christ, and says, They are blessed
that keep the Sabbath, thus says the Lord, Keep Judgment, and Justice, for my
Salvation is at hand to come, and my Righteousness is to be revealed: Blessed
is the man that does this, and keeps my Sabbaths. This is a Prophecy of the
day of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and he pronounces a blessing upon
those that keep the Sabbath in those days. Again, Isa. 11. 10. it was
Prophesied of old, that the first day of the week, should be the Sabbath day,
the Lords day: In that day, there shall be a Root of Jesse, which shall stand
up for an Ensign to the people, and the Nations shall fly unto it, and his
Rest shall be Glorious: Not only the Fathers Rest shall be glorious, when he
had Created Heaven, and Earth, and rested the seventh day, but Christ's Rest
also shall be glorious; for all Divines agree, that the Prophet speaks of the
Rest of Christ, from the work of Redemption; now his Rest shall be glorious. As
God the Father Rested from his work, and his Rest was glorious for four
thousand years together; so Christ's Rest from his work shall be glorious, there
shall be glory and honor put upon it, as well as upon the Rest of the Father,
when he Rested from making of Heaven and Earth.

Secondly, Another Argument to prove this, is out of Rev. 1. 10. there I was in
the Spirit on the Lords Day, so that it is not by Apostolical Tradition only,
but by the Institution of God himself, he does call it the Lords Day, I was in
the Spirit upon the Lords Day; he calls the first day of the week the Lords
Day, by the same reason that the Sacrament is called the Lords Supper. Now the
Sacrament is so called, because the Lord Instituted it, and therefore it must
be Holy: so the Lords Day is called so, because the Lord Instituted it, and
therefore it must be kept Holy.

Another Argument is this, Our Savior Christ himself does Entitle himself Lord
of the Sabbath, Mark 2. 28. and John 5. 23. he says, They shall Honor the
Son, as they Honor the Father; As they honor the Father with a Sabbath, in
regard of his Rest from the work of Creation, so they shall honor the Son with
a Sabbath, in regard of his Rest from the work of Redemption, which being
compared with Rev. 1. 10. where it is called the Lords Day: These two being put
together, do plainly prove it.

Fourthly, Christ himself did command his Apostles to keep this day, it Paul
says, What I have received from the Lora, that I declare unto you, 1 Cor. 11.
But I will prove it was the Commandment of Christ to them, by this Argument,
Because the first day of the week was always kept for the assemblies of the
people of God, before the Apostles durst order any thing in the Church: the
Apostles never durst undertake to set up any order in the Church, until the
Holy Ghost fell upon them in fiery tongues, and that was forty days after.
Now the first day of the week was kept long before this, John 20. 19. they kept
the first day of the week: and again the next week, ver 26. they kept the first
day of the week; and Luke 24. they kept the first day of the week. And if you
compare three or four places of Scripture together, as Mat. 28. 16, 20.
together with John 20. 19, 26. we shall see plainly in John, that they did meet
upon the first day of the week, and in Mat. 28. we shall see that Christ
appointed them so to do, it was by his Commandment.

Fifthly, Another Argument to prove that it is by Divine Institution, and As
Moses was faithful in all his house, so Christ is faithful in all his house,
Heb. 3. 2, 3. He proves that Christ is more faithful then Moses: Now Moses was
faithful, for he delivered the whole mind of God to the people of Israel, there
was nothing left out, for time, or place, or manner; there was not any Ceremony
in the worship of God left out, but he delivered all to them, he was faithful.
So Christ is faithful in his house, therefore seeing Christ knew how ready men
were to neglect, and profane the Sabbath, plain reason tells us, that he would
order it himself.

Again, Who should Institute any Ordinance in the Church, but only he

Again, Another Argument is this, It has been the Practice of all holy Now if
there were no Argument but this, that the Apostles did keep it, this were
enough to prove the change of the day, when we find that the Apostles did
sanctify this day, this were proof enough to stay our minds; for certainly
they had a more Infallible guidance and direction then we have, and they
insisted upon this day, 1 Cor. 16. 1. 2. They ordained, and John the Divine
kept this day, though he were in the place of his banishment, where he could
hear no Sermon, but was all alone, yet he would keep the Sabbath, on the first
day of the week, and the Lord rewarded his sanctifying of this day, by
declaring the Revelation unto him, to encourage all good people to go on in
keeping this day. But to leave these, and come to the time of the ancient
Fathers, immediately after the Apostles; they all agree upon the first day of
the week: Ignatius does so; and Saint Austin says, as the Virgin Mary is among
women, so is the first day of the week, among days; as she was blessed above
women, so is the first day of the week blessed above days: No man that makes
conscience of his ways, but shall find a blessing upon every day; but God has
blessed this day in a more peculiar manner, and the soul that makes conscience
of the keeping of it, may by the Covenant of God expect a blessing.

Now to come to the dead times of Popery, If ever the Sabbath was out of
memory, and out of date, then was the time; for then there was a great falling
away, a great forsaking, a great declining, and people hearkened to Doctrines of
Devils, and Damnable Heresies, and the whole world groaned under Popery: Yet in
the dead times of Popery there were abundance of Prophets, the Lord did keep
their Judgments entire in this thing, as Gregory, and Silvester, and others,
though they were Superstitious Papists, yet they say, That the change of the
Sabbath, from the last day of the week to the first, is by Divine Institution.
Now to come to the times of Reformation, here we have abundance of Reverend men
beyond the sea, both in Germany, and France, that maintain it is by Divine
Institution.

Another Argument is taken from the Judgments of God; If men will not

First by his Judgments, for the wrath of God has been revealed from heaven
upon those that have profaned this day: the Stories in all ages show it. In
the Council of Paris, where Divines out of all Countries in Christendom were
met together, to consult about matters of Religion, Ministers stepped up, and
made complaint, concernining the Sabbath, Let us make a Canon for the
sanctifying of the Sabbath day, for to our knowledge, the Lords wrath has
broken out upon the Country for the breach of this day; and one related one
story, and another, another; as one told a Story of a Miller, that grinding
upon the Sabbath day, a fire brake out, and burnt Mill, and Man, and all.
Another, of an Husbandman, that going into the field to fetch home his Corn
upon the Sabbath day, thunder and lightning brake forth, and burnt him and his
corn. Many such stories were related in that Council, and the Magdenbergs have
a story of a Nobleman, that using to Hunt upon the Sabbath day, the Lord
brought it so to pass, that his Wife brought forth a child, with a head just
like a dog. I could relate abundance of Stories beyond sea, but we have enough
here at home; the Town of Stratford, in Warwick shire, as it is related in the
Practice of Piety, was Burnt three times upon this day. And the Story of the
Parris Garden, 1583. they were gathered together this day, to see the sport of
the Beasts fighting together, and the Scaffold fell down, and eight were slain,
and abundance hurt. So there are many more such Examples, I remember my self
above a dozen within this half year; the Lord has revealed his displeasure
from heaven, for the breach of this day.

Secondly, Again the Lord has sealed this in the conscience of his people. For
who are they that break this day, but loose, and vain, and profane men? And
who make conscience of it, but those that most fear God, those that God has
most crowned with Righteousness and sanctification? they delight in this, and
Sanctify it, and count it Holy to the Lord; and the more a man fears God, the
more careful he is of the keeping of this day, and the more he is grieved to
see it profaned, either by himself or others, because he has experience of
the blessings of God upon the keeping of this day; no man does Sanctify this
day conscionably, but he shall find a blessing, therefore it is surely from the
Lord.

The First Use is this, Is the first day of the week the Sabbath by Divine
Whole, yet I suppose he must dwell a whole year with me. And if I hire a man
for a day, it is for an whole day: so that in Grammatical sense, when the
Scripture says, Thou shall Sanctify the Sabbath day, it is meant a whole day*
It is not in this, as in other words; any piece of a stone is stone: but in
things that signify the whole, it is not the same, as a day; a part of a day,
is not a day: the least part of water is water, or of fire is fire, but a part
of a day, is not a day Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day; and I was in
the Spirit on the Lords day; and they met together on the first day of the
week: it is a day, therefore the meaning of the scripture is, that it should be
a whole day, and it is so in reason, and therefore we are to keep an whole day:
therefore we should not curtail the Lords day, as the servants of Hanun did the
garments of David's servants. You know what became of Ananias, and Saphira, that
brought but part, when they should have brought the whole; they should have
brought the whole price of their inheritance, but they brought but part,
therefore the Lord smote them with death: so when the Lord requires a whole
day, and we give him but a part, we shall bring vengeance upon our own heads.

There are diverse arguments for it: First the week consists of seven days,
Why yea, the Lord has given us six days, therefore six whole days. Now by
the same reason God must have an whole day; if we take any part of the seventh
day, then we have more then six days, which is contrary to the scripture.

Another reason is this, God rested the seventh day: now look what time you
shall keep the Sabbath from evening to evening; then the days were reckoned
from evening to evening from the creation; though now under the gospel, because
Christ arose in the morning, they are reckoned from morning to morning.

Fourthly, another argument is this, God never ordained half holy days
Blacies day, which is to be kept in the fore noon: so they have other days
that are to be kept in the afternoon, but in the fore-noone, they may do what
they list: so heathens did, as Ovid says, the former part of the day is holy,
the latter part of the day is not holy; the Lord has no such days as these,
but all holy days in scripture: if God ever appointed a fast, or new moon, or
feast of Tabernacles, whatsoever holy day, he did institute, it was an whole
day, and not a part of a day, therefore much more this solemn day.

Again, the judgment of all Divines in all ages has been concerning an
Irenaeus, who says, we are to continue in the Sabbath all the day long, for
the Lord has required all the day to be kept holy unto him, and the saints of
God have always kept an whole day: so saint Austin says, It is not enough,
that we keep three or four hours of the day, but that we rest the whole day.
And what rest? not only to rest from our bodily labors, for the beasts keep
this Sabbath; nor the rest of sport and pastime, for that is the Sabbath of the
golden calfe, they ate and drink, and rose up to play: No, but that thou may
be vacant to God all the day in prayer and serving of him. So in the Council
of Mexicon there was an assembly of ministers out of all nations in
Christendom, and they ordained a canon, concerning the Lords day, We ordain,
that people keep the whole Lords day holy, and that they set themselves the
whole day to pray to God, and delight in God, and hear his word: and if a
countreymans servant break this day, his punishment shall be to be beaten with
severe blows, [ictubus gravi^ribus, are the very words of the Council;] and
if a Lawyer offer to plead this day, he shall not have the benefit of his
pleading or case; and if a minister break this day, he shall be excommunicated
half a year, and thrown out of the Church, and shall not be received into the
Church again, but upon great humiliation. This was the judgment of Divines in
all ages, and it is the observation of a reverend Divine, Musculus, upon Exodus
20. God does not say, Remember the Sabbath, to keep it holy; he that keeps it
an hour or two, keeps it holy: but, Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy;
he will have a day kept holy: Nay Calvin, whom they take to be on their side,
to be a patron of their liberty, he himself writing upon Deuteronomy. 6 upon these
words, Remember the Sabbath day, he says, we are to keep this day, (speaking
of himself, and all the people of God,) we are to keep this day; and not a
part of it, but all of it.

The second Use is this: we may hence see that sports and pastimes are not

The reason is good, first because our weekly works, are things Commanded at
other times, now sports and pastimes are never Commanded by God, but only
permitted: now if things commanded, and things that are good at sometimes, if
these notwithstanding may not be done upon the Lords day, then much less must
those be done that are permitted only.

Secondly, because weekly works do less distract a man from God, then sports
and pastimes. I appeal to any man here present, if he be not more heavenly and
better employed, and less distract from good thoughts, and gracious
affections, when he is plowing, or sowing, or threshing, then when he is
diceing, and carding; sports and pastimes beat a man further off from religion,
and let a man go to prayer after sports and pastimes, he shall find himself
more unfit and unaffected a great deal, then he shall when he comes from the
works of his calling. Now if those things that do less distract from Gods
worship and service are forbidden upon the Sabbath day, then surely much more
those things that do more distract, must needs be forbidden upon that day.

THE END.

