THE Unnatural Brother: A TRAGEDY.

As it was Acted by His MAJESTY's Servants, AT THE THEATER in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

LONDON, Printed by J. Orme, for Richard Wilkin, at the King's Head in St.
Paul's-Church-Yard. MDCXCVII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
There are lately published, Ibrahim the XIII. Emperor of the Turks, A Tragedy,
and the Spanish Wives a Farce: Both Written by Mrs. Mary Pix.

The Younger Brother, Or Amorous Jilt: Written by Mrs. A. Behn. Printed and
Sold by Richard Wellington.

THE PREFACE.
NOT many days after the very cold reception which this Play met with on the
Stage, as I was walking up and down my Chamber something discontented, tho not
much mortified neither, at the unkindness of the Town, I happened to cast my
eye on a Book which lay in a Window, and that proving to be the first Volume of
Mr. Drydens Plays, I opened it, by mere chance, just on a Prologue of his which
begins thus,

Self love (which never rightly understood)
Makes Poets still conclude their Plays are good:
And malice in all Critics runs so high,
That for small Errors they whole Plays decry;
So that to see this Fondness, and that Spite,
You Would think that none but Madmen Judge or Write.
I was both surprised and pleased with that Chance which had so thrown me on
those Verses. For whereas before, I had for some time tortured my Brain, to
find out those many imperfections which probably might have occasioned the ill
success of this Play, I then began to lay aside some part of that care, and to
think that the Malice and ill Nature of the Critic, in catching at every
little slip, and improving of every inconsiderable fault, might perhaps have an
equal hand in that misfortune, with the weakness or fondness of the Poet.

I had no other way to clear this point, and find out the truth of the matter,
but to employ all the Friends and Acquaintance I had about the Town, to inquire
into those objections which were generally made against this Play. They did it:
and, as I have very good reason to believe, gave me a faithful account of all.
And yet all, at last, came to no more than this: That the Play was too grave
for the Age, That I had made choice of too few Persons, and that the Stage was
never filled; there seldom appearing above two at a time, and never above
three, till the end and winding up of the whole.

These are the mighty faults that have so entirely Damned this Play: and yet if
these must be thought faults now in our nicer Age, I am sure they were not
thought such heretofore by the Ancients; for they generally made use of but few
Persons, and never made it any part of their business to fill the Stage. Nay,
we all know that Horace lays it down as a Rule.

-- Nec quarta loqui persona laboret. Nor were these thought faults by our more
modern Critics, about Fifteen or twenty years ago, when that excellent Play of
the Orphan first appeared on the Stage. For that, tho liable to all the very
same exceptions which hitherto have been made against this, yet was received
with all the applause imaginable. I must confess, foreseeing part of what has
since happened, and merely to gratify the Rabble, after I had finished this
Play, I added a Comical part to it. Wherein, so there were but a smart kind of
a hurry and confusion, with a Song or two at the end

-- His nam plebecula gaudet. I thought it would have passed well enough. But
the Comedy being altogether independent from the Tragedy, and the whole
appearing something too long the first time it was acted, I easily consented to
have it all left out, and so threw my self wholly on the Men of sense for my
Judges.

Verum Equitis quoque jam migravit ab aure voluptas
Omnis, ad incertos oculos and gaudia vana.
For, to my cost, I find that even our men of Sense, have been so long
entertained with the gaudy, glaring splendour of our Operas, that nothing now
can please their eyes, but what dazels 'em: And that their ears have, of late,
been so well belabour'd with Drums, Kettle-Drums, Trumpets, and Hautboys, that
they are almost become deaf to Sense, or any thing else, conveyed to 'em in a
less Noise, than those their darling-Consorts generally are. But no more of
this -- which may seem a little tart, and to savor strangely of the vanity of
a discontented Poet, who will be sure to find out any other reason for the
miscarriage of his Play, than that which was perhaps the only true one, I mean
the badness of it.

But I had almost forgot to acquaint the Reader with one objection more,
against this Play, than what I have yet mentioned. On the third day, there was
a certain Lady in one of the Boxes, who thought she could not more effectually
decry it, than by declaring aloud that it was nothing but an old Story taken
out of Cassandra. And I readily grant it: yet can by no means allow that to be
a fault. Mr. Dryden has said too much in the defense of such an innocent piece
of theft, and extremely well justified the thing, both by his Arguments, and
Practice. All I desire of that Lady, by way of amends, is, that if ever these
Papers have the happiness to reach her hands, she would be pleased to renew her
acquaintance with the story of Alcinoe in that Romance, and compare it with
this Play: And then I dare be bold to affirm, she will not think me overmuch
beholding to it: But may perhaps be so charitable, as to entertain a more
favorable opinion both of the Play, and of the Poet.

I have but one word more to the Reader, and then I shall leave him to the
Play, either to read it, or let it alone, which he pleases: And that is, that
he would not charge me with any Errors of the Press. The Bookseller in my
absence, has undertaken the care of inspecting it, and therefore he only ought
to be accountable for all such faults.

EDW. FILMER.

PROLOGUE.
Blessed were these happy days, if ever any,
When Poets flowed with Wit, and you with Money.
But now, both Wit and Money run so low,
They Are at the poorest Ebb they e're can know,
This Clipped, that dwindled into Farce and Show.
As for our Coin, the Wisdom of the State,
May stop our ruin and prevent our Fate;
What will not pass by Tale, may pass, by Weight.
But who can our corrupted Wit restore,
And make that Current as it was before?
O! could we but with equal Balance sit,
And by the nicest s^ruples weigh out Wit,
How many pieces good, and fair to sight,
Would yet be found by many Grains too light?
In this great dearth of Wit, our Poet here
Presumes to treat you with his Country fare,
Not that he thinks it better than your own,
Or what you daily meet with in this Town:
No, tho a Poet, he is not so vain;
You are to judge, he but to entertain.
Freedom of Censure he to all allows,
And with submission to your Judgment bows.
He only hopes you will be pleased to excuse,
Small faults in a raw unexperienced Muse,
Which trembling comes, full of sad frights and fears,
And almost naked on the Stage appears,
No Paint, no Patches, to adorn her brow,
That is
No thundering Consort, nor no glareing show;
Those pretty knacks, so much of late in use,
To varnish, and set off a homely Muse.
Good, easy sense, our Poet bad me say,
Is all that he has aimed at in this Play;
Well too, he thinks, if he that mark has hit,
Since the best Sense, is ever the best Wit.
EPILOGUE.
THE Poet, with the Soldier shares this fate,
Courting your favor, he incurrs your hate.
Tho one does for your daily pleasure write,
The other, for your darling interest fight,
Yet equally unkind, you both do slight
The Man of War forsooth's too rough, unfit
For civil Company; The Man of Wit,
A mere pretending Fop, a scribbling Tool,
Made up of Madman half, and half, of Fool.
What is it then, that thus in every age,
Draws one toth field, the other to the Stage?
No hope of Fame or Profit sure, for they
In this too like, their harder Stars obey,
Both drudge for little Honor, and less Pay.
What e're it is provokes 'em, yet we see,
Each fondly courts his unkind destiny;
For as the generous Warrior, void of fear,
Presses on danger still as it draws near,
And tho he sees thousands before him fall,
Yet briskly ventures on, and flings at all:
The Poet so, tho daily on the Stage,
He sees the dire effects of the Critics rage,
Yet fearless dares those doughty foes engage.
And one's no sooner fairly down, but strait
Up perks another, careless of his fate.
As for the Poet of this present night,
Who spite of all discouragement dares write,
He neither fears nor does the danger slight.
If you resolve to kill, he says you may,
He only begs a very short delay,
Come all again, and maul him, -- the third day:
The Persons represented,
MEN.
Beaufort Governor of Lions. Grammount Nephew to the Governor. Dampierre
Brother to Grammount. Montigny Friend to Grammount.
WOMEN.
Elvira Wife to Grammount. Leonora Sister to Grammount. Lysette Woman to
Elivira.
A Page and other Attendants.

The Scene is a Castle about a League distance from Lions in France.

ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Beaufort and Dampierre. Beau. NO more: thou have wrought a secret from
my Breast*
Which may in time prove fatal to us both.
For now methinks I do begin to hate
Thee, Dampierre, as the only Man on Earth
Who has it in his power to check, and blast
Those Glories, now in my declining years,
Which I so justly purchased in my Youth!

Damp. The languishing sick Man, without reserve,
Freely lays open his Infirmities,
To his Physicians kill in hopes of Cure:
The hearty Penitent, then only meets
With true and real comfort, when he dares
Unload his o'ercharged Conscience, and expose
His nicest Scruples to the pious ^^re
Of some grave Ghostly Father.

Beauf. Ah Dampierre!
Could I with the good Penitent Confess,
And at the same time quit the darling Sin;
Or with the afflicted Patient hope for ease
Of all my pains, by telling my Disease,
I then were truly happy* But alas!
Elvira's not so fair, as she is good:
The shining luster: of her ver^uous mind,
By far surpasses that of her bright Eyes.
Those Eyes, which yet dart beams resistless
As the Sun in his full Noon tide Glory,
Beams, which strike me blind to virtue* honor,
And indeed to all things else but love. Oh --

Damp. Reflect not so severely on your faults,
I do beseech you, Sir, but as a man,
Allow some grains for humane frailty.

Beauf. Have I, in my great Masters service spent
Full Forty years, and won renown enough
To glut the most ambitious Hero's hopes?
Have I passed over the boiling heats of youth
With an untainted reputation?
And shall I now, now in my riper years,
Stain all the glories of my former life?
No, Dampierre, no, it cannot, must not be.

Damp. Do you in earnest love Elvira, Sir?

Beauf. Love her! does the devout Recluse that has
Renounced this world aspire to Heaven?
Does the Ambitious Hero covet Fame?
Or the old Miser dote on hoarded Gold?
Love her! By Heaven, I never loved glory
Half so well, nor so much dreaded the success
Of doubtful War, as now I do of Love.
Fearless, I have a thousand times outbrav'd
The greatest dangers, and outfac'd grim Death
In the most ugly shape that War could show it;
Yet now want courage to encounter
Her fair Eyes, and like an arrant Coward,
Tremble and quake at her approach for fear.

Damp. For fear of what, Sir, of a Woman?
Elvira is no more, no more than a
Mere Woman; an imperfect piece of Man,
Made only for his Pleasure.

Beauf. Hah! by Heaven
She Is Natures Master piece, she is all Divine,
Fair as an Angel, Virtuous as a Saint.
But why, alas! do I so much as name
Her hated Virtue: Would she were a Whore,
A Common Prostitute, since she is Married:
Or rather since she is Married to Grammount,
O! let me wish her Dead, laid in the Grave,
And hoarded up l^ke some old misers Wealth,
In the dark intralls of the happy Earth,
Where none the mighty Treasure could enjoy,
Since I cannot.

Damp. Nay, now, Sir, I could chide.
VVish not Elvira Dead, but think her still
Amongst the living wonders of the Age,
The fairest much of her bewitching Sex.
Who, tho she may have charms enough to kill,
Yet may too entertain some soft desires,
To cure the wounds her fatal Beauty gives:
And therefore, Sir, you ought at least to hope.

Beauf. It is to innocent desires alone,
That hope dares show a comfortable end;
But mine are guilty all: How then can hope
Pretend to flatter him, who were he blessed
In all the joys successful Love can give
Must yet be wretched, miserable still,
Torn with the pains of a too late remorse,
Sharper than those of disappointed love.

Damp. These, Sir, are odd fantastic notions
Of a working brain, fitter for Schools
Than for a Lovers care, whose Mistress is his all.
He who dares rifle the industrious Be,
Snatches the Honey careless of the Sting:
And he who briskly plucks the blushing Rose,
Laughs at those Thorns that would revenge the Rape.

Beauf. How powerful do thy arguments appear,
To a mind wholly prepossessed with love!
Thou art a Master, sure, in that soft art,
And may assist me: I alas! am rough,
Grown old in Camps, my Tongue unapt for talk;
And unaccustomed to those softer terms,
Which Charm that fair, that dear believing Sex.

Damp. Let me but know what you would have me do,
And think it done: think your self happy, Sir,
If in my power it be to make you so.

Beauf. Thou then shall break the Ice, prepare the way.
Thou have a tongue, nimble and fluent
As the well feed Lawyers, soft and smooth
As the old crafty Courtiers, who denies
Your suit, yet would persuade you he is still
Your friend. Speak, will thou do it?

Damp. Sir, I will.

Beauf. But art thou sure thou will?

Damp. Most certain, Sir.

Beauf. Have thou considered well?

Damp. Yes, I have.

Beauf. Perhaps already thou forget'st
Who it is I love.

Damp. No, it is Elvira, is it not?

Beauf. It is indeed Elvira, but then sure
There should be more of that Dear Name than one*
Hah! What say thou?

Damp. Not that I know of, Sir,
It Is Grammount's Wif^ I mean.

Beauf. Thou should have said
Thy Brothers, thy Brothers* Wife, on whom
Thy Uncle, the unhappy Beanfort doats.

Damp. I should indeed, nor did I wave that word,
For any such great kindness it imports,
As might o'erthrow the resolution
I have made to serve you, Sir: no, were she mine,
This fair Elvira mine, as she is now
Grammont's; I Would not retract one syllable*
Of what I have said, but freely sacrifice*
My Life, my Honor, all in short, that is dear
To your repose.

Beauf. Come, come to my Arms then,
Let me embrace and hug thee, Dampierre.
By Heaven thou art -- a most illustrious
Villain, a rank Pander. Oh Grammount
How de^ply would thy Brothers baseness wound
Thy generous Soul, could thou but guess
His foul intent. But thou art good, so true
To Virtue and to Honor, thou can never
Think on a crime so Black, as this base wretch
Dares act; this miserable wretch, who at
One fatal blow, would strike a Dagger
To his Brothers Heart, damn both himself and me*
And plunge us all into a horrid gulf
Of everlasting misery.

Damp. If my too forward zeal be an offense,
Punish my giddy rashness as you please:
Yet do it, Sir, something a gentler way.
Charge me not with such black and horrid crimes,
As Heaven knows my very Soul detests.
Or rathertake my hated Life, see here,
My naked breast ready to meet the blow,
My Tongue prepared to bless the hand that strikes.

Beauf. I scorn to stain my Sword with such base blood,
Live, and repent thy rashness if thou can,
If not, resolve never to see my face again.
Ex. Beauf.
Damp. Not see your face again, but on the terms
Of penitence, my noble Uncle. Yes,
Yes, but I shall, or I am much deceived.
This qualm of Conscience, is in him no more,
Than a mere aguish fit; the cold one gone,
A hot one then will certainly succeed.
O all you black and dismal fiends of Hell,
Who take delight in mischiefs baneful sport,
Feed still, and blow up his incestuous flame
To a resistless highth; then from his passion,
Ill concealed, as from a flowing spring
Let daily doubts, fears, jealousies, heart burnings
And eternal jarrs, arise within these walls:
Let Beaufort hate Grammount, Grammount Elvira,
And Elvira both, whilst Dampierre hates 'em all,
And justly too.
I was the first* pretender to Elvira,
But by the faithless Grammount under-min'd,
All my best hopes soon vanished into air,
And I beheld her circled in his Arms.
Nor durst I then think of revenge on him
That did the wrong, he was but too secure,
Supported by a partial Uncle's power,
And by Elvira's Friends. But now I know
That Beaufort doats on her, from this dear day
I date my hopes of a severe revenge.
But see, Grammount appears in close discourse
With his inseparable friend Montigny:
My mind at present's strangely ruffled,
Therefore I Will withdraw, ere they perceive me.
Ex. Damp. Enter Grammount and Montigny.
Gram. Blessed in the softest Passion of my Soul,
Possessing, in my dear Elvira, all
The world calls Virtuous, or my eyes think fair;
How can I, friend, without a blush complain,
Or murmur midst such vast, such charming joys,
As tasted once, would make an Anchoret
Forget his way to Heaven, and think to find
It here below.

Mont. Forbear, my dearest friend,
Take heed, should thou be rash enough to pine,
Whilst with a liberal hand, kind Heaven
Pours all it is choicest blessings on thy Head,
Such black ingratitude, no doubt, would be
Severely punished by some signal judgment
From above.

Gram. Unkind, cruel Montigny,
Thou know, at each sad thought of losing thee,
Tho circled in my dear Elvira's Arms,
I feel such strange distructing pangs of grief,
As naught but the most perfect friendship
Can excuse; so vast, so sensible a pain,
As wounds my very Soul, and damps and soures
The sweetest joys of a possessing Lover.

Mont. Thou best of Men, and dearest too of Friends,
Let me embrace, and hug, and press thee thus,
Near to that heart which owns no other bands,
But those of everlasting friendship for
The generous Grammount: Heaven knows with what
Regret I leave thee, Friend; yet must we part.

Gram. O say not so, each word's a mortal wound,
Each syllable a Dagger to my heart.
Rather recall the hasty sentence, and
Repenting thy unkindness, give me Life,
And what I value more, my Friend.

Mont. O my Grammount, forbear; thy kindness else
Will be the ruin of thy friend; do not,
Oh do not force me to repeat,
What equally afflicts my Soul as thine,
It must be so.

Gram. It must not, by all that is good,
Thou art no more tha^ Friend I took thee for,
If thou can thus forsake me, leave me thus,
And not give one poor shadow of a reason
For so severe a separation.

Mont. Honor, my Friend, it is honor calls me hence:
Honor, that Idol to which all must bow.

Gram. Honor! whither can Honor call thee friend,
That Grammount would not go to share the Prize?

Mont. Whilst I lie here, supinely surfeiting
On all the joys of soft bewitching ease;
My aged Sire, laden with years and fame,
Plays the young man, and makes the Spaniards feel
The smart of Wounds, I only should have given.
Thither I go, thither I fly, my Friend,
To court fair Honor in the midst of Blood,
Horror and dire Confusion.

Gram. Those Frontier bickerings call not for thee,
Montigny, there is little honor to be gained:
But if thou art resolved to go, refuse not
The assistance of my Sword, oh let me share
The Toil, and Glory, with my dearest Friend.

Mont. Thou must no more think on the Wars, Grammount,
But from the Genial bed, reaping the sweet
Reward of all thy glorious labors past,
Raise up a race of Hero's, whose bright fame,
For early virtues, may soon equal thine.

Gram. Since honors strictest Laws must yield to Love,
Let Beauty then prevail, tho friendship cannot.
I have a Sister, by the world thought fair,
Virtuous and young she is: her Fortune's such
As may at least equal the largest hopes
Of the most Noble Youths our Age can show:
If thou can learn to Love my Friend, she is thine

Mont. How Prodigal! how Lavish my Gram.
Thy Friendship makes thee, with a careless hand
Thou scatter'st Treasures should be the Reward
Of a vast merit only: or the price
Of many great and glorious Services.

Gram. Nay now thou triflest --

Mont. By Heaven I do not:
Tho yet my heart a stranger be to Love,
Yet it is with admiration I behold
The rare perfections of that beauteous Maid,
But I must study to deserve her, friend.
Happy, if after all the noblest toiles
I may aspire to such a recompenc^,
And with thy leave, my generous Grammount,
Lay all the Trophies of successful War
At the fair Charming Leonora's Feet.

Gram. Away preach to rough Seamen in a Storm,
Or whisper to the boisterous Winds when in
Their lowdest fury, and they shall sooner
Hearken to thy tale than I: But see,
My dear Elvira coming to my aid,
And Leonora too; thou can not sure
Hope to maintain thy ground against us all.
Enter Elvira and Leonora.
Elv. From those dark Clouds which in thy Face appear,
My boading heart foretells a rising Storm
Of grief within thy Breast, speak, my Grammount,
what ruder cares, to thy Elvira yet
Unknown, sit heavy on thy drooping Soul?

Gram. Thou best of Women, pard'n the guilty cause
Of this disorder in my troubled mind.

Elv. Oh name not pardon, but quickly let me share,
And bear an equal part of all thy care.

Gram. Have thou not seen some men, extremely Rich,
Tell me Elvira, amongst their dearest store
Of Gold, and Silver, Jewels, and other things
Of highest value, lock securely up
Some pretty, favorite toy:
Who when returning to review their wealth,
And missing only that, yet could not bear
The petty loss, tho all the rest were safe?
The case, my dear Elvira, is my own,
Thou art the dearest treasure of my Soul,
Thou art --

Elv. Forbear, Grammount, I guess the rest,
Tho not so much from what thou now have said,
As from Montigny's silence, and thy grief.
Each seems a like concerned, each dreads the loss
Of a dear friend; yet, you Montigny, will,
Nay must be gone.

Gram. Must, oh no, alas!
He will be gone, uncalled, unasked, unsent for,
He will forsake his friend. Oh Elvira,
Oh Leonora, yet try all you can,
Your softest Arts, to move this cruel Man.

Elv. What may be done let us resolve to do,
I for a Husband plead, a Brother you.

Leon. Sure friendships cause, argued before a friend,
Cannot but meet with a successful end.

Mont. Such powerful advocates who can withstand?
Honor! thou strange fantastic airy thing,
Thou losing bargain to the bravest Souls,
Thou easy purchase, costly to maintain,
Thou cloak to bold ambition's restless hopes;
No more, to thy capricious humors will
I blindly bow, nor court thee as a slave.
The present time to friendship I will give,
And what that spares, shall be entirely thine;
Still all that man in reason ought, I Will do
To satisfy my Friend and Honor too.

Elv. See my Grammount, the cruel man repents,
Friendship has wrought its much desired effect,
And fixed the Rover here.

Leon. What would you more?
He yields and gives you the glory of the day;

Mont. Half vanquished by my friend, I durst not^st and
The shock of so much Beauty as you brought
To Storm the Fort: Honor it self durst not
Pretend to hold it out against such odds.
Can you, my Friend, pardon a proud Rebel
Now imploring Grace?

Gram. Talk not of Pardon, my Friend,
Give me thy Hand, Elvira, Montigny thine.
Thus guarded, I dare challenge all the World,
To show but one Man more, as happy, as
My self. Methinks mankind should envy me,
Thus blessed in a lasting full fruition
Of all those glorious Charms, the sweetest love,
Or truest, dearest friendship can afford.
Henceforth, be every day, within these Walls,
By all, kept as a solemn Festival,
Sacred to Love and Friendship: and to me,
May both, as now, ever propitious be.

The End of the First ACT.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Dampierre pulling in Lysette. Damp NAy prithee why so refractory?
Lyset. I am in haste, or if I were not,
What business pray can you have with me?
You, who have scarce vouchsafed
One look this way, this long, long
Day or two.

Damp. Business of importance Child,
And such as in the end might prove
To thy advantage if discreetly managed.
But --

Lyset. But what, nay pray out with it.

Damp. Why, thou art a very foolish ignorant
Young Wench, that ever stand'st in thy
Own light.

Lyset. Your wisdom's much mistaken in my
Character, I dare aslure you Sir,
For I am neither so silly, nor so igonrant,
I thank my kinder Stars, but that I very
Well understand the post I am in, with all
The by-advantages, that may be made by
One of my profession that has wit.

Damp. Wit! prithee of what use is Wit in your
Commonwealth, hah!

Lyset Oh, Sir, believe me, that Waiting Woman
That wants it, is the greatest slave in
Nature. Whereas we that have it, rather
Command than serve, and in a very little
Time b^come real Mistresses, whilst
They, poor Ladies, only enjoy the empty,
Useless Title.

Damp. Good!

Lyset. For by our witty, sly, and subtle insinuations,
We at length become so absolutely necessary to 'em,
That they live not but in us;
They see with our Eyes, here with our ears,
And judge not of any thing but by our wise
Directions.

Damp. Admirable!

Lyset. So that if love once fires their tender Hearts,
It Is we that either fan the growing flames,
Or else suppress them quite.
Wisely, we manage their inclinations
To our best advantage: and suffer 'em to love,
But when, and where, as little, or as much,
As we think fit.

Damp. Incomparable!

Lyset. In short, Sir,
It is by our all powerful interest,
That the ugly, and the awkwerd fool, if liberal,
Succeeds in his Amors: Whilst the gay,
Well bred, handsome wit, too often miscarries
By his unseasonable thrift.
It Is we indeed, do all, gain us, and they are yours;
Proportion but your gifts, to your desires,
And you can never fail: Since to confess
The very truth, it is we that set to sale,
Their favors, and good graces of all sorts
And sizes, even from a simple, single smile,
To full fruition, Sir.

Damp Hold, hold, enough: the world cannot produce
Thy equal, here, here is Gold for thee.

Lyset. For me, Sir, and why, I pray?

Damp. No matter Child, here is yet more take it,
And deserve it, Girl.

Lyset. Let me but know which way,
And much may be done.

Damp. Why, watch Elvira narrowly, let not
One look, one smile escape thy diligence,
Never be from her, but be a constant Spy
On all her actions.

Lyset. Ple do it:
And yet, I doubt, I shall but lose
My labor, and you your money,
At least, if you expect any thing
Extraordinary from my observations.

Damp. No matter, I Will venture my money.

Leyst. And I my pains: tho I am confident
You will be strangely disappointed,
When from an exact Diary of all her
Actions, you will only find, that of
Sixteen long hours, she daily spends,
At least twelve in Prayer, or fulsom
Dalliance with her onw lawful Husband.
And so I am your Humble Servant, Sir.
Ex Lyset.
Damp. Go on, and prosper Girl:
For if I catch Elvira tripping,
Or can but find the least appearance of a slip,
I Will quickly make a Mountain of a Molehill.
Then to Grammount I Will go, and tell him all,
Yet seem to leave much more behind untold:
So make him beg to know, what known shall pinch
And gall him to the quick. They love too well
For Man and Wife, and what is yet worse,
So good an understanding between them,
Suits not with mine, nor with my Uncles purposes.
But he retuns not, as I thought he would,
And to find out the reason, much perplexes me.
But see, where he comes, all melancholy,
Sad and pensive, almost lost in his own
Wild distracting thoughts. The Devil now works
Hard, and I Will not be his hindrance: But wait,
Then take my time to lend a helping hand,
In this our common Business.
He retires to a corner of the Stage. Enter Beaufort.
Beauf. How poor,
And how contempt^ble a thing is man,
Made but more wretched, by those very same
Distinctive faculties of the Soul,
Which yet seem to sooth, and flatter him,
With an imaginary Excellence,
Above the rest of the Creation.

Damp. Good!

Beauf. Reason, what art thou, but the very source,
And spring, from whence flow all our miseries?
Thou art that glimmering light, by which alone,
We can discern those crimes, which otherwise,
We never had understood; at least, as such.
And so had known no guilt.

Damp. Better and better!

Beauf. Our phlegmatic dull Priests, have all mistook
Their errand sure, and grossly hitherto
Imposed upon the credulous world:
Whilst with an erring Zeal, they have preached down Lust,
Yet given a Pass, to more pernicious Love.
For Lust is, at the worst, but a brisk,
Generous heat, and natural ferment
Of the blood, laid by the next dear Child
Of joy, that dares contribute to the cure.
But when the Devil tempts us to love one,
And only one: not all the Sex beside,
Can quench the hellish flame;
But be she Mother, Daughter, Aunt, or Niece,
How near soever tied to us by Blood,
It matters not: She, she alone can cure,
That gave the fatal wound.

Damp* He Is fast enough, I am sure, now I Will bolt.
If I dare venture to approach you, Sir,
It is with the same awful reverence,
As penitent sinners do the offended Gods:
With the same humble hopes too, that at length
Your mercy, o'r your justice, may prevail;
Pard'ning those crimes I have with tears bewayl'd,
And would have expiated with my blood,
Would you have suffered it.

Beauf. Ha! Dampierre,
And in this humble posture too, nay then,
No change, to me, can ever appear strange:
Since in so very, very, small a time,
Thou art turned Saint, and I a Devil.

Damp. Far be it, Sir, from me to assume
The Glorious title of a Saint, and yet,
A very little time, may usher in
Strange alterations. Believe mine real then,
And make your virtue, as remarkable
In pard'ning, as in censuring, a crime
Committed but in thought, and hatched there
Only by too warm a zeal, for the great
Beauforts Service.

Beauf. Curse on thy ill timed change,
Which only comes, unseasonably now,
To upbraid my weakness.
Pard'n thee! Yes, withal my heart I pard'n thee,
But on this one condition let it be,
That thou never talk to m^ of virtue more.

Damp. Alas, what mean you, Sir?

Beauf. Be wicked still;
Be vicious, as thou ever were,
Go boldly on, and stop at nothing.
Thy wanton fancy, represents as pleasing
To thy senses, but gratifie'em all,
Even to a loathed satiety.
Then come, and waving all uneasy qualms,
Teach by experience the vast pleasure
Of unbounded vice: gladly I Will hear thee,
And become thy wanton Proselyte, my great,
My glorious Master.

Damp. Heaven protect you, Sir,
Now you talk strangely; perhaps you doubt me,
And this way only hope to learn the truth:
For you, I know, are eminently good
And virtuous.

Beauf. Hah! that lie will damm thee
Past all hopes of mercy: I am nor good,
Nor virtuous, but, by much, more wicked,
Than an honest heart dares think. I rage,
I burn in an Unlawful, and Incestuous flame:
Alas! there is a perpetual tumult
In my distracted mind, nor can I fix
One wandering thought, but what still leads me
To the very brink of Hell. Oh Elvira --

Damp. Forget her, Sir, I once dearly loved her,
Yet when I found she could prefer,
My Brother's tardy passion before mine,
I quickly shook the lazy off, and
With an indiffernt eye, could safely gaze
On all those Beauties I before adored.

Beauf. Forget her! no, too easily alas!
I can forget that she is Grammount's Wife,
Or Beaufort's Niece, but that she is fair,
That she is charming, above all others
Of her Beauteous Sex, that, that, I never
Can forget.

Damp. If you must think on her,
Think then, at the same time, on her too rigid
Virtue, that eternal bar to all your
Guilty hopes.

Beauf. There is no bar to impetuous Love,
At least, Virtue I Am sure is but a weak one.
But why do I vainly talk of Virtue?
I am convinced, there is no such thing on Earth.
No, all is but pretense, all is mere Hypocrisy.
Look Dampierre, round this vast Machine the World,
It Is but a larger Theater, on which
Each skilful Actor, plays that part alone,
Which, for his profit, he can manage best.
Come then unmask: thou see my naked heart,
To all the world beside, be the reformed,
The good, the pious Dampierre, but to me,
Be what thou ever were.

Damp. Hah! what is that, Sir?

Beauf. Nay perhaps I may not find a name for it,
That may please you: But to be plain, and short,
Help me to the enjoyment of Elvira,
And I Will disclaim Grammount, I Will cut off all
His fairer hopes, to make a way for thee,
My darling, to the possession of my
Envied Wealth.

Damp. Misled, by a too hasty Zeal,
I made an offer once, not all your wealth,
Nor even that of the whole world,
Can e're prevail with me to make again
That kindness then was slighted, scorned, repai'd
With cruel injuries, and a boisterous
Storm of black reproaches.

Beauf. Upbraid me not
With what is past.

Damp. By what is past, I but
Too plainly see, the kind return my best
Endeavors, for your service, in that kind,
Are sure to meet with.

Beauf. By various and insulting Passions agitated,
I felt unheard of torments in my mind,
My very Soul was, as it were, stretched on
The Rack, and all that storm, was naught but the
Strong Convulsions of a dying Virtue.

Damp. Heaven forbid, the generous Beaufort
So much renowned for solid Virtue, should
In a Storm of Passion, yet make shipwreck
Of it all: No, to the Wars, Sir, there --

Beauf. Talk not to me of War, too long already
I have toiled in the barren Fields of Mars,
Wasted my Youth and Vigor in rough Camps,
And bloody broils: Deaf to the Virgins Plaints,
The Widows Curses, or the Orphans Cries,
For Lovers, Husbands, Parents, Butchered all
In hateful War. In short, I loath that Trade
Of cutting throats, and am resolved henceforth
To Love, and that Elvira too.

Damp. Oh, Sir, think what the censorious world will say.

Beauf. Even let the world say what it will:
I care not, she, I Am sure, is a mere
Stranger to my blood. Come then, be once more
Kind, I know thou love me, Dampierre,
I know thou do.

Dam. You may be well assured I do.

Beauf. O let me embrace, and hold thee in these Arms,
Till thou have granted all I can desire.

Damp. Had you before been half thus kind?

Beauf. It is not now too late.

Damp. Fool that I am, to stand here, only to
Be tempted to my Ruin. Oh! why
Do I not rather fly, not from you only,
But, for your sake, from all Mankind?

Beauf. Nay, now thou art too cruel: Come, thou must,
Thou shall, thou will.

Damp. Alas! What would you have me do?

Beauf. Go to Elvira.

Damp. Well, for once I will.

Beauf. Tell her -- by Heaven I know not what -- tell her --
Yes -- if she delights in martial Stories,
Tell her the many glorious Deeds I Have done
In War, the bloody Battles I have won,
The Towns I have taken: Tell her, in short,
All that may make her hearken to the Name
Of Beaufort with Delight.
Then, in a gentle Sigh, tell her I die
For Love, and if, after all that, thou dare
Proceed yet further, tell her at last
It is for her I die.

Damp. Something like this, I am resolved to do,
But cannot yet tell what. I*ll instantly
Go to her, and with my utmost Cunning
Try to dive to the very bottom
Of her Heart: Where if I find yet any
Room for a new Passion, you may be well
Assured, that to your best Advantage,
I will turn the Weakness of her yielding Mind.

Beauf. Go, fly: Oh may we both successful prove,
Thou in thy subtle Arts, and I in love.

The End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I. A Forest.
Leonora alone. Leon. WHilst all rejoice, Montigny, at thy stay, only waste in
Tears the time away:
Uncertain, what to hope, or what to fear,
I wish thee gone, yet fain would keep thee here.
All ^ays I try, to chase thee from my mind,
All Arts I use, yet can no Comfort find:
For if, t'elude the Torments I endure,
My Hopes from Absence seem t^ expect a Cure;
Even those Hopes ridiculous appear,
Since how can he be absent who is lodged here?
Laying her Hand on her Heart. A welcome, yet a fatal Guest to me,
Whilst I the Prisoner am, and he is free.
What then, poor Leonora, will thou do,
Thou love alas! but art forbid to woo,
That is Man's dear prerogative alone,
Thou must in secret sigh, in secret moan:
And taught by stricter Rules of Modesty,
What most thou love thou must pretend to fly.
Thus strangely wretched, surely there can be,
For all thy Woes, but one sad Remedy:
Die then, yet in thy Death, so lucky prove,
That all the World may know, thou diedst for love.
Each Poet then, thy Passion will rehearse,
Sing thy sad Fate in everlasting Verse,
And every Lover strew thy passing Hearse.
Enter Elvira and Lysette.
Life. See Madam, where she is.

Elv. Retire a little.
Ex. Lysette
Leon. Oh Heavens! I am surpised.

Elv. What? in this dismal solitary Place
Alone, and all in Tears, my Dear?

Leon. Those treacherous Teras will be my Ruin.
Aside.
Elv. Nay, seek not to hide 'em from your dearest
Friend, that would be too unkind: Oh! rather,
Let me know the unhappy Cause of this
Disorder.

Leon. I will, but you shall pass your Word then,
Not to laugh at me.

Elv. My dearest Child, I do,

Leon. Nay, but I am confident you will laugh,
Since I my self indeed, can scarce forbear,
When I reflect on it.

Elv. I will not,
Nay, I cannot laugh at what moves thee to weep.
Thy Tears, my Dear, would extort Pity
From an Enemy, much more from one that loves thee.

Leon. This your unmerited Kindness, Madam,
makes me yet more ashamed than ever,
To betray my Folly* For it was nothing more,
Believe me, than a mere childish Passion.

Elv. Whatever it was, imparting it to me,
You will oblige me much.

Leon. Were it a Secret,
Or of the least Importance, I would never
Try to conceal it from you: Be so kind,
Dear Madam, as to impute my Folly
To my tender Years.

Elv. Ah Leonora!
It Is not your Folly, but your Cunning now,
That I have reason to complain of.

Leon. Were I as capable of Cunning, Madam,
As you believe I am, yet certainly
I would not use it to impose on you,
To whom I stand so many ways engaged.

Elv. I know you ought not, yet I Am sure you do.

Leon. Suspect it not, indeed you wrong me much.

Elv. No, it is you that wrong your self, wrong me,
And all our mutual Vows of Friendship too.
For know, that with no small concern of late,
I have observ*d your gayer Humor fade,
And change into a sad, dull and deadly
Melancholy: With Grief I have beheld
You fly all sorts of pleasing Company,
Only to court Retirement in some Grove.
This made me set Lysette to watch your Steps,
By whom, just now informed, That you were gone
This way alone, I quickly followed you,
Though not without some Apprehensions,
From the dismal Wildness of this uncouth place,
Although I knew Montigny and Grammount,
Were here before, seeking Diversion*
In these o'ergrown Woods. Come then confess,
What brought you to this unfrequented place?

Leon. Ah, what would you have me do?

Elv. Tell me the Truth,
For should you still endeavor to conceal it,
The swelling Secret would, in time,
Grow too unruly for your tender Breast,
And force its way, at last, with much more Noise,
And eager Violence, than would be fit
For so much Innocence to own.

Leon. I yield:
Your kind and tender importunity,
At length has con^uer'd all my Fears.
Share then that fatal secret which, of late,
Has robbed me of my Rest, of all my Peace.
Yet spare, oh spare my Tongue, the ungrateful Task,
Of naming what I still must blush to own:
But let these Tears convey it to your Breast,
Whilst on my tender Knees I thus implore
Your Pity, and your Pardon.

Elv. Rise, rise, my Dear,
Take this Kiss, and with it too my pardon,
My Pity, and my faithful promise,
To assist thee in thy Love: For Love it is,
If I must guess, that has possessed thy Soul.
If so, my Dear, you must be plainer yet,
And name the happy object of your Vows

Leon. Ah Madam, I doubt I have already
Said too much, for see, my Brother coming,
Oh give me Leave to hide my Grief from him,
And all the World but you.
Enter Dampierre. Leonora runs out, and Elvira offering to follow her, is staid
by Dampierre.
Damp. Nay, Madam,
You must excuse my Rudeness, I but seize
The next at Hand, to know by what strange fate
Dampierre of late is grown so terrible,
As to oblige you with such eager haste,
To fly him.

Elv. You cannot think your Sister should avoid you,
Nor ought you to believe I would.

Damp. But, Madam, may I not believe my Eyes?

Elv. You may, for they can only tell you,
That Leonora fled, and that I followed,
And all perhaps without one Thought of you.
But you of late are strangely altered sure,
You would not else so easily suspect
Your Friends of so much incivility;
Believe me it is a Fault scarce pard'nable.

Damp. Since my too light Suspicion seems a Crime,
With all Submission I entreat your Pardon:
Alas! I am no more the Man I was --

Elv. Why, what strange Misfortune has befallen you?

Damp. So great a one in the person of my Friend,
As Heaven, in all its Anger, scarcely could.
Have sent a greater. Ah! had those fair Eyes,
Madam, beheld what these have lately seen,
How much would they have lost, by this time
Of their wonted luster: at least, if sorrow,
Sighs, or frequent tears, could have diminisht it.

Elv. You think me very tender hearted sure,
Or else have some strange story to relate,
Extremely moving.

Damp. Believe me, Madam,
It is a tale would move the hardest heart
To some compassion: Think then, you see
A man, completely blessed above all others,
In the richest gifts of Nature, and of
Fortune; a Man, renowned abroad for Arms,
And no less famed at home for goodness,
And for Virtue.

Elv. You have said enough,
To let me know he is your Friend, who e're he be:
But sure a Man of his high Character,
Can never prove unfortunate enough
To want our Pity.

Damp. Yet, Heaven knows, much more
Unfortunate he is, than either good,
Or great: In short, he Loves, Loves where he scarce
Dares ever hope to be beloved again;
So, sadly lingers out a hated Life,
In all the torments of a deep despair.

Elv. Believe me, it is pity he should so misplace,
His love on one, who sure deserves it not.

Damp. I Will not pretend to rate her mighty worth,
But only tell you she is wondrous fair,
Fair as the fairest of her charming Sex;
Fair as Elvira, as hard hearted too;
And what is yet worst of all, like her, she is
Married to another.

Elv. How! his passion
Then is criminal, and should be hopeless.

Damp. It Is criminal indeed, and yet the crime,
Renders it but the more conspicuous;
Or if you will give me leave to say so,
Meritorious; dear Devil tempt me not.
Aside.
Elv. I understand you not, or if I did,
I am not now at leisure to dispute
The merits of a guilty passion:
But come, let us move homewards pray,
And leave the rest to a more fitting time.

Damp. No time more fitting; nor no place more free
Than this.

Elv. But I am weary, and want rest.

Damp Here you may have it, if you please,
I beg you would hear me.

Elv. I cannot now.

Damp. Say rather that you will not.

Elv. That would be rude.

Damp. And therefore only will not hear, because
It is the unlucky Dampierre that entreats.
Just Gods! must I be still neglected,
Still despised, and whether for my self I plead,
Or for another, still cut short? no, stay,
And tho you will hear no more of his sad tale,
Be pleased at least to lend an ear to mine.

Elv. What mean you, Dampierre?

Damp. Since my friends passion is condemned, oh! give
Me Leave to entertain you with another;
Which tho not wholly innocent, perhaps,
Yet owing all it has of guilt in it,
To you alone, by you at least, should be
Esteemed as so.

Elv. You grow mysterious now,
Your looks are wild, and you much discomposed.

Damp. Behold me well: And in these troubled looks
Read the disorder of my Soul; springing
From Love, opposed by hatred and more sweet
Revenge. Do you not tremble, Madam?

Elv. Why should I tremble?
If Heaven, as I believe, protects
The Innocent, I am secure enough.

Damp. You are indeed, for love at length has got
The day; that little God, tho dispossessed
Some time by my too just resentment,
Is now returned Victorious to his Throne,
And firmly reinstated in the Empire
Of my heart.

Elv. I do begin to understand you now:
But Dampierre, have a care, desist in time,
All yet is well: but if you dare proceed,
Grammount shall surely know your good design.

Damp. Tush:
Mere bugbear words to scare young sinners with;
You would fain make me angry,
But I at present want the leisure:
A sofer, nobler passion rules my Soul.
I am all Love, all Fire, my wanton blood
Runs high, ready to force a passage
Through my distended veins.
This gloomy place, invites us too to Love,
Whose kinder shades, not only will conceal
Our amorous Thefts, but even forbidding
Entrance to the Sun,
Will shroud us in an artificial night:
That all things may be done with greater decency.
Come then,
Offers to kiss her hand. Take this warm earnest of a greater Bliss,
And think, with how much pleasure to your self,
You may in one poor fleeting minutes time,
Even o'erpay me for an age of sufferings.

Elv. Monster of a Man, Villain unhand me,
Let me quickly go, or I will fill these Woods
With cries, such moving cries, as shall awake,
And from their dismal hollow caverns draw,
Each nobler Beast of prey to be a Guard
To me, to thee base wretch, a shame and terror.

Damp. Come, come you need not use these common arts,
These faint denials, little struggling fits
May serve indeed as whets, to a weak
And puleing appetite: But mine is sharp, wound
To the utmost pitch, keen as the greedy Hawks,
That Is ready just to seize his longed for prey.

Elv. Lysette, Lysette:
Rash, heedless Girl, oh whither art thou fled?
And thou, my dear Grammount, where art thou
Now? the distressed Elvira wants thy help.

Damp. Call louder yet, he answers not, perhaps
He may not now so much as think of you:
At least you see he is not here to help you,
Therefore be wise, and what you cannot
Hope to avoid, submit to patiently.

Elv. Villain thou lie, he is in these very Woods.
Tremble, base wretch, at the bare thoughts
Of his approach; for tho he be not yet
Within the reach of my too feeble voice,
I doubt not but just Heaven will send him,
Either to rescue, or revenge his dear Elvira:
And either way, to thy Confusion Monster.

Damp. Hah! say you so, what must be done then,
Must be quickly done: and when it is done,
I Will trust thee for betraying thy own shame
Scarce forty paces hence, there is a gloomy
Place so private, as if kind nature had
Contrived it only for our use: There at
Thy beauteous shrine, I ll offer up my best
Devotions; and fill thee with such melting
Joys, as first shall tempt thee to forgive,
Then make thee beg me to renew the Offense.
Nay hang not back, for if you do, by Heaven
I Will drag you thither.
Offers to force her.
Elv. Oh all you juster
Powers above, send some relief: or give me
Strength enough to punish the base Villain.
Help, help, for Heaven's sake help.

Damp. Hah! what envious Devil has sent him?
Oh, Madam, dry up those precious Tears,
Forbear those Cries, whilst Dampierre lives
You're safe enough.
He disco^ers Montigny at a distance. Enter Montigny.
Mont. Whence came those dismal Cries?
Hah; was it you, Madam, that so loudly
Called for help, speak, Madam, speak I beg you,
What means this strange disorder in your looks,
Or do thou Dampierre, I conjure thee, tell me
What was the matter?

Damp. I know not I,
She surely best can tell what caused her fear:
Fortune, and her loud cries, directed me,
Montigny, as they have brought you hither.

Elv. Generous Montigny, waste not the time
In fruitless questions, but rather
If you have any friendship for Grammount,
Help, O quickly help me hence,
Whilst I have yet some little strength
Remaining.

Damp. If Dampierre, Madam,
May in any thing be serviceable,
Pray be so free as to command him too.

Elv. Monster, avoid my sight.

Damp. Hear you that, Montigny,
Look to her well, for much I fear she is crazed.

Elv. Oh horrid impudence! but come, let us,
Montigny, fly this fatal place:
And yet my trembling joints answer my haste
But ill.

Mont. Fear nothing, Madam, but accept this hard
For your support.
Ex. Mont. and Elv.
Damp. Impudence assist me now,
Or else this one reverse of Fortune
Ruins all, renders abortive all the
Hopeful projects of my laboring brain,
And leaves me naked to the mercy
Of offended justice. Curse on my rebellious Blood,
Curse on that flattering opportunity,
Which smiled on, yet betrayed, my dearest hopes.
Enter Grammount.
Gram. Well met Brother, saw you Montigny?
I lost him strangely.

Dam. Yes, just now I saw him.

Gram. Where, which way is he gone?

Dam. Homewards I think,
But make not too much haste to overtake
Him, least you should chance to come
Before you are welcome.

Gram. What mean you, Dampierre?

Damp. I mean, that he is already in good Company,
And would not willingly admit of more.

Gram. I fear it not, my friend to me is ever
Welcome, and by my self I judge of him.

Damp. You may, and yet may be mistaken too:
There are some certain times and seasons,
When even the very best of friends
Are but importunate.

Gram. That very minute,
My friend should think me so, I should think him
No more my friend.

Damp. Be not too positive:
Suppose an assignation made by thee
Grammount, to meet some kind, some yielding fair,
Here in this very favorable place;
And when that you were ready just to reap,
The dearest fruits of many waking nights,
And painful days, your friend should then, just then
Rudely rush in to interrupt your joys.

Gram. You are wanton, Dampierre, but at present
That Is not Montigny's case I Am sure.

Damp. I hope it is not, yet I Will not swear
For any one.

Gram. Why, hope it is not?
Pray tell me, what from Montigny's Conduct,
Can you, Dampierre, have, either to hope,
Or fear?

Damp. Oh much, too much indeed,
Or else these eyes are shamefully mistaken.

Gram. This is all riddle, prithee be plainer.

Damp. You will allow, Grammount,
That when two equal Gamesters meet to play
Upon the square, each with a high opinion
Of the others honor, if in that case,
The one play foul, the other is thereby
Exposed to a more certain loss,
Than if he played with one he knew to be
The most notorious Cheat alive?

Gram. No doubt o'nt, his confidence in the others
Honor, makes him careless, blind to all
Those little tricks, which in another,
He would soon discover.

Damp. Well then, there is none so likely to discern the fraud;
As some good skillful honest stander by*

Gram. It Is granted.

Damp. I am that honest stander by,
Who in a strange unequal game, see thee,
Grammount, most miserably cheated:
Y^^ m^re, I am your Brother, which ought
At least to add some weight to what I say.
Take my advice then, e're it be too late,
And of a^l men beware Montigny,
By whom you are betrayed, wronged, and abused,
Beyond all patience.
In short, all in this world you hold most dear,
Eyes now at stake, whilst he, that treacherous friend,
Plays foul, shamefully foul, thinking at one
Well managed throw, to rob you of your rest,
Your honor, fixing an everlasting stain
On you, and all your injured family;

Gram. My honor, Dampierre? Montigny seek to
Rob me of my Honor? Have a care,
And it thou lov*st thy self-proceed no farther.
By heaven, thou art not safe, unless thou can
So plainly prove each guilty circumstance
Against him, as can leave no room for doubt.

Damp. Having discharged my duty I have done*
If you are careless, well may I be so:
For tho I firmly do believe you wrong*d,
Yet is it not impossible for me
To be mistaken, since chance perhaps,
Not assignation, may have brought them hither.

Gram. Curse on thy double Tongue, hold me not thus
In doubt: but tell me quickly, what chance,
What assignation do thou dream of, Hah!
Tell me, who were they thou saw here?
Speak, wretch, speak, or by all that is sacred
I shall forget thou art my Brother.

Damp. You are strangely passionate, tho all at last
May come to nothing: I only say
I saw 'em here, I mean Montigny and Elvira,
Here in this dismal solitary place,
Alone too, but what of that, all places
Are alike, company, or no company,
It Is all one, you now, to persons that
Are virtuously inclined. And if you can
Believe them such, why, there is an end of all.

Gram. Just Gods! that I should ever live to hear,
The softest, tenderest Wife, and truest friend
Thus to my face abused, yet must not punish
The offender.

Damp. You wrong your self, Grammount,
In rashly blaming me, who jealous of
Your Honor, do in pure kindness only,
Speak my reasonable fears.

Gram. True:
I wrong my self, my Wife, my Friend, and thee,
In blaming thee good, honest Dampierre:
Indeed I am ashamed, that by too prompt
A passion, I should seem to give thee so
Much credit, as should make me entertain
The least suspicion, either of Elvira
Or Montigny. Farewell unworthy man,
Be not hereafter so extremely jealous
Of my honor, but consult your own.
And know, I wear a Sword, will do me right
Against all the world except a Brother.
Ex. Gram.
Damp. So, now it is all against Dampierre,
Dampierre against all: no matter,
Thanks be to Fortune, and my lucky brain,
All things do yet go reasonably well.
I have, by way of accusation,
Got the start both of Montigny and Elvira,
And that is no small advantage, in my case.
For now whether Grammount begins with them,
Or they to him complain; in all appearance,
I am equally secure, since either way,
Whatever is said of me, will seem contrived
Only to blast my reputation,
And so be all suspected: Wondrous good*
Go bravely on then, Dampierre, push at all,
Honor attends the attempt, tho thou should fall.
The end of the Third ACT.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Elvira and Leonora. E(...) It Is true, my Dear, your inconsiderate
And hasty flight, was tho the innocent,
(...) the only cause of that adventu^e.
Alas! I tremble when I reflect
(...) the great danger you were in, and blush
(...) I consider I must call him Brother,
Who could be guilty of so barbarous
An attempt.

Elv. No more of that, for if you
Call him Brother, so does my dear Grammount,
From whom with care this secret must be kept,
Least a too just resentment should transport,
And hurry him beyond the limits of
His usual moderation, so engage
The family in sad and endless broils.

Leon. Your goodness, Madam, is beyond example,
But may there not be danger in it?
Some men are of so base a temper,
That a pard'n, proves but a new inducement
To 'em, to offend again.

Elv. It Is in my power
To hinder his offending in that kind.

Leon. It Is true, and yet I cannot choose but fear,
Tho what, or why, I must confess I know not.

Elv Prithee no more of thy kind fears,
I apprehend not any thing, my dear,
Nor can I at the present think of ought
But of thy Passion, Child, it is a noble one,
Discreetly placed grounded on rational hopes.

Leon. For Heavens sake, Madam --

Elv. Nay, do not blush:
Montigny's one of such undoubted worth,
As justly may -- but see where he comes,
Where is Grammount?
Enter Montigny.
Mont. Gone, Madam, to the Governors Apartment,
Where he continues very busy in
Dispatching some affairs of great Concern.

Elv. It has been still his chiefest care to ease
The Governor in all he could, and I
Am glad he studies to oblige so good
And generous a Kinsman.

Mont. His merit justly, Madam, claims that service.

Elv. And my Grammount pays it most willingly.
Would he were here.

Mont. I, Madam, wish it too,
Yet something within me, what I know not,
Checks the fond wish, and makes me almost dread
The encounter of my dearest friend. Alas!
How can I ever look him in the Face
Again, or hear him call me by the name
Of friend, whilst Dampierre lives.

Elv. Can you believe you should oblige Grammount,
In spilling of his only Brothers Blood.

Mont. In punishing so exquisite a Villain,
I do most certainly believe I should.

Leon. Yet that Villain still, is Grammount's Brother;

Mont. Brother, alas! what signifies the name
Or empty title of a Brother?
He who by virtue, or by kindness merits
The name of friend, is not a friend alone,
But even a Brother too, and much more so,
Than is the wretch that only claims by blood.

Elv. Too low methinks, Montigny, you depress
Those sacred ties of blood, on which the world
Seems to rely so much.

Leon. Brother's a name
So dear, that the mere title only seems
Enough to justify our kindness
For the very worst of men.

Mont. It Is true,
Much is by custom given to the name
Of Brother, and therefore only, it is,
Since decency disarms my Friend
And will not suffer him to use his Sword,
That I believe my self engaged in honor
To draw mine.

Elv. Equally impious
In Grammount 'twould be to wish revenge,
As act it.

Leon. And what he cannot wish without
A crime, you cannot do without a greater.

Elv. No more of this, I know Montigny
You are my Grammount's dearest Friend,
Consult not then his Honor only,
But his repose, and that of all his Family.

Mont. Believe me, Madam, that is my only aim.

Elv. I do; and therefore beg you to conceal
This shameful story. Oh bury it
In eternal silence, let not Beaufort,
Let not Grammount, suspect the least of Dampierre's
Villainy: but above all, beware of
Making it more public by a quarrel.

Mont. Ah, Madam --

Elv. I must not be denied, unless you have
A mind to ruin him you call your friend,
And ever robb him of his sweetest rest.
I do conjure you then by all your Vows
Of friendship to my dear Grammount,
By all that is dearest to you in this World --

Elv. Press it no further, Madam I Obey,
Tho Heaven knows I do it with regret.

Elv. We'll leave you to your cooler thoughts, Montigny,
Commending moderation still, as best,
In this and all other cases between friends.
Come Leonora.
Ex. Elv. Leon.
Mont. Just Heaven! how much
Beauty, how much goodness have you bestowed
On this one Woman.
Ex. Montigny. Enter Lysette followed by Dampierre.
Dam. What! threaten to turn thee out of Doors,
Basely expose thee to the scorn
Of all thy laughing tribe, rail at,
And revile thee for a matter of just nothing?

Lyset. Nay, it is a fault not to be pardoned,
And therefore I Am resolved to be revenged.

Damp. Fault! that is a name too soft, too mild,
For such a crime: Why, it is Treason,
Downright Treason, a flat Conspiracy
Against thy Empire Child.

Lyset. Right, therefore once more I do pronounce
She sinks under the mighty weight
Of my displeasure.

Damp. Thou have it in thy power, my Girl,
To crush her into nothing.

Lyset. I have indeed, thanks to the dear delight
You take in mischief, Sir.
But hark ye now, in cooler blood,
Pray tell me what mad pranks
You played i the Forest, to put
My Saint-like Lady into such Devilish Passion.
For when all*s done, my being out
Of the way so small a time, was but an
Inconsiderable fault, too slight
To draw on so much anger.

Damp. No Pranks at all my Child,
Only an Argument arose by chance,
And I unluckily* maintained my part
With something too much heat,
Which put her Ladyship into a horrid pelt,
And made her rail at me, at thee,
And every body else I think.

Lyset. Yet, out of her abundant kindness,
She has forgiven me forsooth,
And once again received me into favor.
But that is no matter, I have not yet
Forgiven her: Nor will I, till to her cost*
I have made her know me better.
What! Pretend to turn me out of Doors,
No, my blood rises at the very thoughts on it,
Say when shall I be Revenged?

Damp. This night, this very hopeful night,
Nay if you let slip this night,
You may perhaps look long enuff
For such another opportunity.

Lyset. With all my heart then, let it be this night:
For now, methinks, I am prepared for any thing
That looks like mischief.

Damp. Bravely resolved.
Know then, Grammount at present
Is at the Governors appartment,
Where multiplicity of business,
Committed to his care alone,
By the uneasy Beaufort, will certainly
Detain him longer than ordinary:
So that the Night, which now draws on a pace,
Will in all probability be far spent,
E're he returns to his own Lodgings;
And then, then my Girl.

Lyset. Ay, then will be the time, when I
Poor inconsiderable fool, will with
Such cunning play my Treacherous part,
As shall with ease impose upon the good Grammount,
Pluck from his faithful breast
Deep-rooted Love, and in its room
Plant the rank weed of Jealousy,
Turn dearest Friendship into mortal Hate,
And so give birth to general Confusion.

Dam. Revenge, how sweet thou art! Revenge now makes
Thee undertake a part, the Devil himself
Would bogle at: No Woman sure e're suckled thee,
Or something more than man club'd to thy getting.
But see, the Governor appears,
Away, and fail not when it comes to the push
Be sure.

Lyset. Fear me not.
Exit Lyset. Enter Beaufort.
Damp. This Wench is ripe for Hell.

Beauf. Well, what News Dampierre from Elvira?
Knows she my Love, does she speak Life or Death?

Damp. Hear the story, then be your self the Judge.

Beauf. Proceed.

Damp. Know then, that leaving you
I went directly to Elvira's Lodgings,
But missing of her there, and being told,
That she was gone, attended by Lysette,
To take a turn in the Neighboring Forest,
Thither I followed her, where I first met
Lysette, and quickly managed her so well,
As not to stand in awe of her too near
Attendance: The Woman so secured,
I boldly ventured to attack the Lady,
Whom, as I could have wished, I found alone.
Our first discourse was of indifferent things,
Which yet I managed with such curious Art,
As drew her on at length to that of Love.

Beauf. Thy boldness makes me tremble, Dampierre.

Damp. From Love in general, we quickly came
Down to particulars, and then you may
Believe I failed not to describe your flame
As you your self could wish.

Beauf. named you my name?

Damp. Not yet, nor did I at first let her know
She was the person Loved: But still mad^ (...)
Of borrowed names, till finding that my art
Prevailed, and that the soft and moving Terms,
In which I told the story of your Love,
Had touched her tender heart with pity of
Your case, then I revealed the secret,
told her all.

Beauf. And how did she receive it ha!

Damp. Why Sir, with all the haughty marks of Pride,
And Scorn, she could put on; it is true, she said
Not much, and fain would have been gone, but I
Made bold by the advantage of the place,
Stopped her, and would have made her hear me out,
When on the sudden in stepped --

Beauf. Lysette.

Damp. No, Sir, Montigny.

Beauf. Montigny say thou!
Hell and Confusion! but say what followed.

Damp. Only this, as soon as he appeared,
With eager haste she flew into his arms,
Then with a scornful smile, and slighting toss
Of The head, she took her leave of me, and so
Triumphantly went off with her Gallant.

Beauf. Just Gods! How can you wink at so much base
And rank Hypocrisy: If such crimes as these
Meet with impunity, the world will grow
too wicked by the bad example.
Rather assert, assert your Sovereign Power,
And darting Thunder at her devoted head,
Let her, oh let her unpitied fall
A wretched instance of offended Justice.
But, tell me, do thou believe Montigny
Over heard thee?

Damp. Most certainly he did.

Beauf. What then in this unlucky case is to be done.
For sure if once Montigny knows I love,
'Twill not be long a secret to Grammount.
Advise me Dampierre.

Damp. Excuse me, Sir, I know no way but one
That can effectually secure Men's Tongues.

Beauf. And what way's that?

Damp. Faith, Sir, an easy one.
Cut but the Throat, the Tongue will tell no tales.

Beauf. No, that is a way too rough, I like it not.

Damp. Why now I think on it better there may be
Yet one way more, not quite so safe perhaps
As the other, but --

Beauf. Name it and I am thine
For ever, but no blood I charge you.

Damp. No, this is a Gentler way, it is but
Subtly loosening that firm tie of Friendship,
Which seems so well and firmly knit, between
Montigny and Grammount, and you have done
Your business: For if they are not Friends,
Most certain it is they will be Enemies,
There is no mean, and then you need not fear

Beauf. Most true: but then the difficulty is,
How to divide two souls so strictly, and
So long united, in the dearest bands
Of Friendship's sacred, and severest Laws.

Damp. Let me alone to manage that affair,
If Grammount Loves Elvira, before
To morrows Sun he shall as surely hate
Montigny to the death: Distrust me not,
But if you like the project --

Beauf. Like it, yes,
I guess at thy design, and like it well:
Grammount I pity thee, though it is but just
To let thee see thy danger, e're thou art
Too far imposed on by a Treacherous friend,
And wanton Wife. But it grows late,
And I am strangely discomposed. Farewell.
Exit Beauf.
Damp. Go, go to bed old man, sleep if thou can,
And dream of happy hours thou never shall see.
So, he is well prepared I think, and I have
Gained a mighty Patron to protect me
Whatever mischief happens; the more
the better now, since he is like to Answer all.
Poor I am but his humble Instrument,
Ha! Ha! Ha!
I could even kill my self with Laughing now,
To see how strangely all things have conspired,
To Crown my Roguery with Success,
And me with Safety.
Exit Damp. Enter Grammount and a Page before him with a Flambeau.
Gram. Business, unlucky business long has kept
Me from Elvira: Though all late as it is,
Methinks some dark, ill-boding fancy seems
to tell me, it is too early yet, to seek
Those Joys I ever found in her dear Arms.
A strange unusual damp has seized my soul,
And I who use, with eager Joy to fly
To my Elvira, have now scarce the strength,
Or Will indeed, to move one step that way.
Oh Dampierre, Dampierre, what was thy design?
Since I left thee, my working thoughts have been
In a perpetual hurrey; thou, alas!
Have poisoned all my dearest Joys, and in
My troubled mind, laid the foundation
Of Eternal Doubts, Perplexing, Gnawing,
Killing Doubts. And yet I know thee, Dampierre,
Base, of a Poor, Mean, Low spirit too,
And so, capable of any mischief.
Why then should thou gain credit with Grammount,
Who knows thou hat'st both him and his Elvira.
No, from my memory henceforth I chase
Thee, and each thought of thy base Treachery.
Grammount's too happy in a virtuous Wife,
And Generous Friend; though cursed indeed, in thee,
Thou Cruel, and Unatural Brother.
But hark, what noise is that?
A noise of opening a door and Lysette Enters who seeing Grammount pretends to
avoid him. He stops her and turning up her hood sees her tearing a Letter with
her Teeth. O, it is the door opens. Hah!
Who art thou that stealest
Away so guiltily?
Nay, I must see, Lysette!
Whither away at this
Unseasonable time of night,
And what paper's that thou
Mumblest so?

Lyset. Alas! I am undone, Pardon me; sir,
Oh Pardon me I beseech you.

Gram. Would have me pard'n thee e're I know thy fault,
Confess, and then perhaps thou may deserve it.

Lyset. Oh never, never, all that I desire,
Is that you would be so just, as to believe
Me only guilty, for on my life
My Lady's innocent.

Gram. Hah! thy Lady, speak, what of her?

Lyset. Why, she I do declare to all the world
Is innocent, by all that is good she is,
Nay were I to die next minute,
My Tongue should end my story with that truth.

Gram. I ask not of her innocence, but tell me,
And tell me truly, as thou hop'st for any
Mercy from me, whither were thou
Stealing with that Letter, and what
Were the contents of it?

Lyset. For Heaven sake, and for your own, Sir,
Press me no further, here on my knees
I beg you would not.

Gram. Ha! do thou dally with me?
Come, speak quickly, or by heaven thou die.

Lyset. Do with me what you please,
But force me not, I do beseech you,
To a Confession that --

Gram. What! Speak I say, tell me,
What was that Paper, to whom directed,
And from whom?

Lyset. Alas I die for fear --

Gram. If thou continuest obstinate,
Not all the world shall save thee from my Fury.

Lyset. It was --

Gram. What was it, speak I say?

Lyset. It was a Letter --

Gram. From whom?

Lyset. It was a Letter from my Lady --

Gram. Well said, to whom?

Lyset. To -- Yet, Sir, excuse me I conjure you.

Gram. Hah more trifling, out with it boldy, or --

Lyset. 'Twas to Montigny, Sir,
Your best, and dearest friend, Montigny.

Gram. To Montigny!
Was it to Montigny, that Elvira sent thee
With that Letter at this unseasonable hour?

Lyset It was: But why should that so much disturb you?
A petty quarrel parted 'em in the evening,
When though Montigny humbly sued for pardon,
She would not grant it, till at the last, good Lady,
Repenting her severity, she could not rest,
Till she had given him an assurance, under
Her hand, that what he then so earnestly
Desired, was now as freely granted, and --

Gram. Peace Screech-Owl,
Peace, thou rank messenger of lust:
By heaven, I know not why I do not kill thee,
Hence from my sight I say, away.
Exit Lysette. But which way now, wretched Grammount, will thou
Direct thy wandering steps, where e're thou go,
Destruction, Horror, and Amazament will attend thee.
Thy faithful cares, deaf to all other tales,
Will turn each sound into this one sad story,
Elvira's false, Montigny's false, and now
Grammount's become, the scorn of all the world,
Oh it is too much for mortal man to bear,
By heaven, i will make my sad, and just Revenge
As signally notorious as my wrongs.
But hush, be still y' unruly passions of
My mind, and think Grammount, that to revenge
is but the way to publish thy disgrace.
Patience then, oh patience, grant me just heaven
More patience, or take from me that little
I am yet master of, and in return
Bless me with madness, eternal madness,
Madness without one minutes interval of sense.
Grief, Rage, Despair possess my totur'd mind,
Make me but mad, ye Gods, and you will be kind.

The end of the fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Elvira and Leonora. Elv. NO more, no more; my Grammount is unkind,
Fickle, inconstant, wavering, and false;
Some fatal Beauty has surpised his Heart,
And chased the unfortunate Elvira thence
For ever, as a stranger to his Love.

Leon. Judge not so hardly, Madam, of a Flame
So pure, so exemplary, and so chaste
As his.

Elv. What other Judgment can I make?
In vain I have wept, in vain I have prayed,
In vain all night pursued his flying steps
From place to place, yet cannot get one Look
That may seem kind, nor one poor Word
By which I might but guess at the sad Cause
Of his pretended Grief.

Leon. This his proceeding
Seems to me most strange, I must confess,
But yet --

Elv. Seek not, dear Leonora,
To excuse him, but rather pity me.
Ah! had thou been a Witness of my grief,
And of those rough returns he last night made
To all the softest and engaging Arts
My Love could then invent, or his desire,
Thou would with Tears lament, not doubt his change.

Leon. What strange Unkindness was he guilty of!

Elv. Long had I wished my dear Grammount's return,
With all the impatience of a loving Wife,
Ready to share and sooth his nearest Cares,
And lull his wearied Body in these Arms
To gentle Rest. The Night far spent, at length
He came; but when with open Arms I ran
To meet him, alas! how was I surpised,
When I read naught but Fury in his Face!
Doubting his Health, and vent'ring yet nearer
To him, he frowned, and rudely flung me off:
Yet by degrees his Rage began to waste;
And giving place to some more gentle Thoughts,
A fullen deadly Grief seemed to succeed it:
When I, once more, attempting to draw near,
He gently only put me by, then with
A deep and dismal sigh turned short away,
Leaving me all in tears, and almost dead
With grief. Yet I resolved to follow him;
And so indeed we passed the tedious Night,
He flying still, I still pursuing, though in vain.

Leon. With all my Heart I pity you, and wish
Twere in my power to serve you, Madam.

Elv. Ah, my dear Child, what can thy Kindness do
For miserable me, unless perhaps
It teach thee now to bear me company
In tears, to echo forth my sighs from thy
Compassionate Breast, and kindly share
The sharpest Pangs of a too just Despair?
All this, my Dear, I dare expect from thee,
And from thy Love; and yet even all this
Would but augment, not ease my Misery.

Leon. Yet something more I Will do, I Will to Grammount,
And force that fatal Secret from his Breast,
Which he yet keeps so close.

Elv. But can you think.
That he will hear a Sister, who is deaf
To all the sighs of a once dear-lov'd Wife?
No, no; too much you wrong my dear Grammount*
Were he the Man he was, with Joy he would hear
His dear Elvira; but not being so,
Be yet so just as to believe him deaf
To all the World beside, as well as her.

Leon. Whither will your distempered Fancy lead
You, Madam? Oh, think --

Elv. Alas, I know not.
Ah my Grammount! could thou but guess to what
A wretched state thy cruel usage has
Reduced the poor unfortunate Elvira,
'Twould make thee soon repent, and give new life
To thy expiring Love.

Leon. Madam, once more
I do beseech you give me leave to try
My Fortune with Grammount; I may prevail.

Elv. Never: alas, he will despise thy Sex,
And slight thy tender age. No, were he to be
Prevailed on by Entreaties, Montigny
Best of all the World might hope to do it.
But --

Leon. Despair not, Madam, Friendship, perhaps,
May do what Love at present cannot.

Elv. Ah, tempt me not to entertain a Hope
Which, once deceived, will but increase my Pain.
Yet for thy sake, my Dear, I do submit.
Go to Montigny then, and faithfully
Relate my Story; but leave the rest to him,
Whose Generosity will better teach
Him how to act, than all that we can say.

Leon. Madam, I fly.
Exit Leon.
Elv. And I in the mean time will once more seek
My Dear, my false, ungrateful Fugitive
Grammount.
Exit Elvira. Enter Dampierre and Lysette.
Damp. Well met; what News, my little Fury,
From thy Quarters?

Lys. News, my great Lord of Mischief, worthy of
Thy Ear. In short, I Have played my part
Most rarely well, and now the Devil, I think,
Is playing his.

Damp. As how, I pray? What, is the wise virtuous
Grammount caught at last? Does he begin to powt?

Lys. Oh, extremely.

Damp. And Elvira, what does she? ha!

Lys. Why, she even whines, and pines, and blubbers,
Like any o'ergrown Girl that had been
Newly whipped.

Damp. Good, wondrous good.

Lys. Yes, yes; all yet goes wondrous well indeed;
But what the end will be, for my part,
I cannot guess.

Damp. No matter, let there be no end at all,
But that which puts an end to all things, Death.
Oh, may Confusion, Rage, Despair, and
Everlasting Jealousy attend 'em to their Graves.

Lys. Amen, say I: but yet suppose they should
At last come to a right Understanding,
What would become of me, I pray?
Were it not better, think you, to decamp
In time, and leave them to themselves?

Damp. By no means; that would make 'em presently
Smell out thy Roguery and their own Error:
Rather be more diligent, and more assiduous
In your attendance now than ever:
Consult their Looks, for till you find the weather
Clearing there, you need not fear a Storm;
And then at last it will be time enough to fly.
In the mean time, here; thou have been
Offers a pair of Gloves. Industrious, and do deserve Encouragement.

Lys. A nasty dirty pair of Gloves, I warrant you;
Foh! I Will have none of 'em.

Damp. Away, you are a Fool, and know not what
Thou have refused: they are, I tell thee,
Gloves of the richest scent; besides, each Finger's
Lined with Gold; here, wear 'em for my sake.

Lys. Well, for once I care not if I do, the cordial Gold
Perhaps may keep my Spirits up, and give me
Strength to bear the brunt of all. Adieu, Sir.
Exit Lys.
Damp. Go thy ways, thou art a dainty Girl, and do love
Mischief well, for which I love thee, though I dare not
Trust thee. Thou art indeed a thought too mercenary,
And may at last, for Gold, sell me, as thou already have
Thy Mistress; therefore I can but pity thee. Those Gloves,
How rich soe*er and sweet their scent may seem,
Yet once well heated on the Hand, will cast a strong
And deadly smell, most fatal to the Brain, a Poison
Not only certain, but strangely sudden in its operation,
As I was told, at least, by an Italian famous in that hellish
Art, from whom I had 'em. If it be so, my business is
Completely done, and thou, poor fool, Lysette, have
The Reward of all thy Services.
Exit Damp. Enter Grammount.
Gram. What is that thing called Happiness, which Men
With so much noise and eager zeal pursue
So many several ways, each hoping to
Attain it in the possession of some
Distant longed-for Blessing, though all alike
In vain? For even that darling Blessing
Placed in a nearer light, and once enjoyed,
Loses but too much of its wonted luster;
Or else, encountered with rude Crosses from
Abroad, is lost and buried in a thick
And dismal Cloud of rank uneasy Cares.
There Is no such thing then as a happy man
On this side of the Grave. Look on me, all
You vain Pretenders, look on me, and own
At last this Truth; for all the dearest Joys
Of Life did seem to court and flatter me:
Yet all those Joys are in one moment dampt,
All vanished, all lost to me for ever.
Friendship and Love, which once made up
The sweetest part of 'em, do now conspire
My ruin. Oh Elvira!
Enter Elvira.
Elv. Oh Grammount!
He turns from her. Nay, turn not, turn not, cruel man, away,
But look upon thy poor disconsolate
Elvira, almost drown*d in tears: speak,
Oh speak at last, and let her know wherein
She has been faulty or unfortunate
Enough to merit this hard usage from
Her much-loved Grammount.

Gram. Art thou Elvira?

Elv. Why do thou ask that unkind Question?

Gram. Because Elvira ever loved Grammount,
And so could never be a trouble to him.
But thou, alas! art most importunate;
Prithee be gone, thou art not Elvira,
Not the same Elvira, that I Am sure of.

Elv. Yes, I am the very same I ever was,
The very same Elvira still, on whom
With dearest Transports thou did once bestow
Ten thousand Vows of everlasting Love:
The same unfortunate Elvira*
Who, charmed by thy sweet, soft, bewitching Arts,
Heard with delight those many treacherous Vows
By thee intended for her ruin.
In short, I am the same Elvira that
At last crowned all thy hopes* paying down Love
For Love, as I then thought, though since I find,
With purest Gold I only purchas*d Dross.

Gram. Forbear, forbear Elvira, and recall
Not to my Memory those happy days
In which I dearly loved, and thou were kind;
Too much, alas! 'twill aggravate my Grief,
Since I within this Breast already feel
Torments, to which nothing, I Am sure, can add
New Pains, but a reflection on that Heaven
I once en^oyed in thee and thy dear Love.

(...). If in Elvira's Love thou once were blessed,
Why art thou not so still*

Gram. Oh Elvira!
All things ^^e strangely altered since that time;
Love once was pure, and Friendship sacred held,
Yet now the one is little else but Lust,
The other all design. Virtue is fled,
And Vice Reigns now Triumphant in each sex,
We are all wondrous weak alas, and frail. Oh --

Elv. It Is true, most true my dear Grammount, and yet
What weakness can thou justly tax me with;
Unless perhaps my loving thee too well,
Be an infirmity unpardonable
In the unfortunate Elvira.

Gram. Oh --

Elv. Alas! what means that sad and dismal groan,
By grief extorted from thy manly breast:
Thou can not sure be so unjust, as to
Suspect my Love. Yet if thou art, speak
I conjure thee, but speak plainly then,
And not in un-intelligible groans.
Speak, cruel man, oh speak, do I not love thee?
Am I false? oh may Elvira live no longer,
Than with a passion Innocent and Pure
She loves her dear Grammount.

Gram. What pity it is our hearts are not exposed
To open view, as are our faces, that
So, even our most private thoughts might all
Appear, naked and bear as at their first
Conception, e're dressed up in ornamental
Words, of a much different import.

Elv. Ah, could thou but see into my heart,
Thou there would soon perceive thy error
And my innocence. But since, my dear Grammount,
That cannot be, believe my words, believe
These tears, believe my Actions, oh see,
I am here ready to receive thee still,
Rude and Unkind, Ungrateful and Inhumane
As thou art. Come then, come to these arms,
Never yet stretched out to thee in vain.
Will thou not come, not yet? thou can not sure
Deny me now, when all I beg of thee,
Is, that once more thou would be happy.

Gram. Why should thou desire impossibilities?
Alas! I never can be happy more.

Elv. If thou Grammount can never be happy more,
Then must I be for ever miserable.
Cruel man, show yet some small remainder
Of humanity; be not so rash,
Either accuse, or else acquit me,
But pass not sentence on me e're I Am heard,

Gram. No, fear not too hasty, or too hard
A sentence from my mouth. False as thou art,
I cannot hate, where once I loved so well.
Live then Elvira, live long, but live a
Stranger to Grammount. And that thou may live
Happily, wipe from thy memory the
Dearest passages of some few past years,
And see thou quite forget, there e're was such
A wretch in the world as I am.

Elv. Hold, oh hold!
It is too much, alas! insult not poorly
Over my weakness, nor play the wanton
With my grief: Why do thou bid me live,
I fit must be without Grammount?
Why do thou wish me happy? when all my happiness,
Thou know depends upon thy love,
Yet that thou say is forfeited, is lost
To me for ever, oh my Grammount.
It is emiff thou art unkind,
Be not unjust to thy Elvira.
For pities sake grant something to the dear
Memory of our mutual Love,
And if thou know me false, tell me wherein,
When, or with whom I have offended.

Gram. What satisfaction would it be to thee
Elvira, should I tell thee all: since all
Alas! can be no more, than what thou know,
As well at least, if not much better than
My self. In short, I am convinced thou can not
Clear thy self; and if so, consider that
A weak defense is worse than none at all.
Tempt me not then to speak, since 'twill but add
To thy Confusion, and my Shame:
But I would willingly spare both, as much
As may be with my honor.

Elv. Confusion,
S^^me, Contempt, and everlasting Infamy,
For ever be my Lot, if e're I wronged
Thy Love so much as in one guilty thought.
Oh my Grammount my dear, my Loved Grammount,
See thy Elvira o^ her tender knees,
From whence she never will rise, till she has learnt
The strange and fatal cause of her disgrace.

Gram. Away, this thy affected obstinacy,
Would make me hate thee, were it possible.
Elvira, is it not enough that thou have
Wronged my Honor? but that I my self
Must here repeat the shameful Tale
Only to gratify thy wanton curiosity.
Perhaps indeed, I know not half thy brave
Exploits, so my imperfect tale may yield.
Thee some diversion: But have a care,
The Cuckold yet bears his misfortune
Patiently enough, make him not then thy sport,
For if thou do, by Heaven away, away
Elvira, I would not be provokt, away I say,
Whilst yet I Am Master of my growing Passion.

Elv. Do what thou will, be rude, be cruel,
Be inhuman as thou have been, to the Poor
Elvira, yet whilst she has any strength,
She never will let go this hold, unless
Thou first communicate the fatal secret.

Gram. Away, thou wilt force me to be rude.
Be not so strangely obstinate, alas!
I would be civil, tho I cannot be kind.

Elv. Barbarous man! yet speak, what have I done?

Gram. Will nothing else content thee? then thus
I throw thee off, and force my way.
Strives to get from her, and drags her about the Stage.
Elv. And thus
I cling to thee, close as the tender Ivy
To the sturdy Elm. Do, do merciless
Grammount, do, pull, hale, tear, drag, nay kill me,
Yet I Will not willingly let go: But oh!
His cruel strength prevails.
He breaks from her.
Gram. Farewell thou most importunate of Women.

Elv. Stay, stay my Grammount, give me but one poor
Minute more, and all is done: Fear not,
I will no longer urge my innocence,
It is enough that thou believe me false:
Oh, for thy own repose, may thou for ever
Think me so. Farewell, methinks I feel,
My laboring soul striving, and strug'ling,
With its utmost force, to break it is wretched
Prison, yet something, I know not what, still
Makes resistance and obstructs its passage.
I see Grammount, thou likest not the delay,
I will dispatch then, and for thy sake,
Hasten the slow approaches of my fate.
Art thou then fled, art thou then gone for ever?
Farewell my dear, unkind, Grammount, farewell
And when I Am dead, think what the poor Elvira
Would have done to have kept thy love, who on
Her own tender breast dares thus revenge
The fatal loss.
She pulls out a Dagger and stabs her self.
Gram. Hold, hold, Elvira hold!
By Heaven 'twas boldly done, and nothing could
Have given so sure a blow but Innocence
It self. Yes my Elvira, every drop
Of that dear blood, loudly procliams to all
The world, thy innocence and my sad guilt.
Oh ye just powers above! to what strange fate
Am I at length reserved! see, at thy feet
My dear Elvira, the wretched'st thing alive,
A thing, unworthy of the name of Man,
A Penitent, who dares not hope for pardon
Either from Heaven or thee, tho both alas!
Are infinitely good, and merciful.
Enter Montigny.
Mont. Where is Grammount, where is my dearest Friend?

Gram. Who is it names Grammount, hah!
Starting up.
Mont. Elvira all in blood! Oh Heavens!
I hardly dare believe my Eyes, what wretch
Could have the heart to do so Villainous
A deed?

Gram. See here that miserable wretch,
That bloody Villain thou wast speaking of.
He was thy friend, oh, if thou still art his,
Do him one friendly office, draw, and sheath
Thy Sword in this disloyal Breast; strike home
Be sure, and with one kind obliging blow
At once deliver me, from the too just
Reproaches of the world, from this dear, yet
Killing spectacle, and from my hated self.

Elv. This wound, believe me, came not from his hand,
Elvira's arm, assisted by despair,
Had strength enough to give the fatal blow.

Mont. Oh my Grammount, oh my dear friend,
What a vast Treasure have thou lost.
Alas! what can I do but pity thee,
Thy crime carries its own punishment
Along with it, a punishment beyond
What the severest justice can inflict.

Enter Beaufort Beauf. Tell me what means this general mourning,
A sad confusion seems to reign within
These walls, where e're I go I meet with deep
Despair, and if I chance to ask the cause,
I Am answered only with a sigh, some tears,
And a distracted ghastly look, and that
Is all the intelligence I can get.

Gram. Here be informed then, oh see here a Sight,
Will shake thy generous soul with horror:
A Sight, will make even thee look pale,
And tremble, though long ennured to slaughter,
And brought up in blood. Nay, start not Sir,
It is Elvira welt'ring in her gore,
Elvira fallen by her own hand,
But murdered by Grammount.
Enter Leonora.
Leon. Never did so much joy, as here I bring
Spring from so sad a cause.

Beauf. Hah! who is that unseasonably mentions joy
Here in this place of everlasting Woe.

Leon. Oh heavens! are all my dearest hopes thus dashed?
Oh Madam, who has done this bloody deed?

Elv. 'Twas I, 'twas I my self* my dear, weep not
For me, but rather go, and comfort
If thou can the poor Grammount.

Leon. Oh Grammount!
Unfortunate Grammount, most grossly have
Thou been imposed on, strangely abused
By that prodigious Monster Dampierre.
Know then, that Letter, thought directed
By Elvira to Montigny,
And sent, at that dead guilty time of night,
Was but a trick, a mere device, the whole,
Only a scene contrived by Dampierre,
Acted by Lysette.
This truth, from her own mouth I just now learnt,
And she confirmed it with her latest breath.
For she is dead, poisoned by Dampierre.
This confession was to me, I must confess,
Most welcome, and welcome sure it would have been
To all, had it been made but some few minutes
Sooner.

Gram. Gods! what has this miserable Caitif done.
To draw down all your anger on his head?
What horrid crimes before had stained his Soul
That you should thus, all at one fatal blow,
Oppress the wretch with your severest Judgments?
Oh, that some Mountain now would fall on me,
And in its dreadful ruins hide my head.
But hark methinks the Gods grow loud; hark, how
Their awful thunder grumbles in the Sky,
See how the fiery balls fly whizzing by!
Dealing amazement, and destruction all a round.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
See you old miser, laden with swelling bags
Of ill-got Gold, with how much awkar'd haste,
He limps away to shelter: see how he ducks,
And dives, and dodges with the Gods, and all
Only in hope to avoid, for some few days
Perhaps, the just reward of his accursed extortion.
The hot Adulterer now, all chill and impotent
With fear, leaps from the polluted bed,
And crams himself into a cranny,
Those mighty men of blood, who make a Trade
Of murder, forget their wonted fierceness:
Outnois'd they shrink aside, and shake for fear
Of The louder threatenings of the angry Gods.
Whilst I, I only, though the wickedest wre^ch of all,
with an erected countenance stand to it,
Courting those dangers others seek to avoid.
And yet there is not one dart one ball for me,
Tho I, Heaven knows, deserve 'em all. Oh
He throws himself on the ground.
Elv. Let not the knowledge of my innocence,
My dear Grammount, add to thy grief,
Rather believe me guilty still, alas!
Thy generous easy nature was abused,
Imposed on by a Brothers wicked arts.
Thou still art innocent, and so am I,
Who freely can forgive thy greatest faults.
Come then Grammount, come to thy Elvira,
And with a kiss, a cold and dying kiss,
I Will seal thy pardon.

Gram. My dear Elvira, this thy prodigious
Goodness, does but increase my misery.
Yet I will come, yes my Elvira,
With a down dejected countenance,
Not daring to look up, but creeping thus,
And crawling on the earth, I do approach
Thy feet, here, spurn the vile thing, tread, trample
The miserable insect into nothing.

Elv. Oh my Grammount, yield not too much to grief.
It is a fatal, tho a slow disease.

Gram. I thank thee, dear Elvira, for that hint.
Now thou art kind, and giv'st me good advice.
Whoever would endure an age of pain,
When one such blow as this, might give him present ease?
Stabbs himself.
Beauf. Hold, oh hold Grammount.

Leon. Oh heavens what has he done?

Mont. Too much alas! although no more than what
I apprehended from his just despair.

Gram. Help me, my friend, and place me near that Saint.
So, now it is pretty well, pardon me my dear
Elvira, that so long I have deferred
This piece of Justice, or rather pardon me,
That at last I durst presume to mingle.
My polluted blood, with those pure streams of thine.

Elv. Oh my Grammount!
My Love can pardon thee any thing,
Yet 'twas unkind, to give me thus
A second wound, a wound more grievous
To the poor Elvira, than the first
Which gave her death.

Elv. Where, where art thou my Grammount
A rising mist has on a sudden snatched
Thee from my sight, alas! I faint, I dye,
Death seizes now on every part, and my
Affrighted Soul sits hovering on my pale
And trembling lips, just ready to begin
Its flight.

Gram. Oh stay, Elvira, for thy dear Grammount,
Stay yet, but one poor minute, then,
As we have long lived and loved,
So let us still Love, and lanch together
Into a vast eternity, where we may Love
For ever.

Elv. Oh no, imperious death commands
And I must needs obey. But do thou live,
Live yet, if it be possible, and Love
The memory of the poor Elvira,
Farewell -- Farewell -- my dear Grammount -- For ever
She dies.
Gram. She Is gone, and all my comfort is, that I
Shall quickly follow her. Yes, this sight wounds
Deeper than the sharpest dagger. And yet
How many Charms remain Unconquered still,
As Beauty lies Triumphant over Fate,
And seems to flourish in the arms of death.
Oh let me steal one parting kiss, at least,
From those cold lips.
But e're I go, my Friend
On thee I here bestow all I have left
Of value in the world, this weeping Maid.

Mont. If the fair Leonora will confirm
The gift, I shall be but too happy.
Oh, my Grammount I beg thee to believe
Since Fate deprives me of my dearest Friend,
Naught but so rich a present from his hand
Could bribe me to survive so sensible a loss,

Gram. Here take her then.

Beauf. And with her all my wealth,

Gram. The poor Grammount can only thank you Sir.
Come Leonora --

Leon. For Heavens sake --

Gram. This modesty's unseasonable now.
Deny me not the satisfaction
To see thee e're I die so well bestowed,
Give me thy hand. Take her Montigny.
And may this saithful Wise abundantly
Supply the want of an Unfortunate
But real Friend --
Farewell! a long farewell to all. Hark, hark
Methinks I hear Elvira call. I come,
I come Elvira, my aspiring Soul
Begins to mount, not to overtake, but at
An awful distance to attend and wait
On thine above, in those blessed Regions
Of eternal peace.
He dies
Beauf. Fate now has done its worst, and from me torn
All the delight and comfort of my age.
Who waits there? hah!
Enter Servants at one door, Damp, at the other. But see, just Heaven has sent
him to receive
The due reward of all his crimes. Seize,
Seize on that Villain Dampierre instantly.
they seize him.
Damp. What means this rudeness, hah!

Beauf. Look there, Grammount is dead, Elvira's dead,
And all this mischief is but the effect
Of thy black hellish arts.

Damp. Why, if they are dead,
Let 'em be buried: What is it to me?
They might have longer lived, or sooner died
For ought I know, who is it dares blame me?

Leon. I, tho thy Sister, must accuse thee wretch
Think, think on Lysette, poisoned by thee,
She with her latest breath discovered all
Thy arts.

Damp. Then my Italian was a Rascal,
Away, thou art a Girl, and should be whipped
For prating.

Leon. Ah! was it not enough, that in the Forest
Thou on Elvira's honor made a base
Attempt, but to reward her goodness
In concealing thy black crime,
Thou must Conspire her death too?

Beauf. Hah! how is that, can that be true?

Mont. Mo^^ true, believe me Sir, and had not I,
Directed by her cries, come in by chance,
The Villain had accomplished his design.

Beauf. Heavens I is it possible?

Damp. Yes, employed by thee,
I would have been thy taster Beaufort.
I would have wantoned with her, stroked, and tamed
The virtuous fool, then brought her gentle,
To thy longing arms.
Do thou not Love me for it? yes in thy heart
I know thou do, for who but I, would e're
Have taken so much pains to serve thy Lust?

Beauf. Justly thou do reproach me Dampierre
We are both Villains, and on both I will
My self see speedy Justice done. Thou who
In spite of all my caution, have yet dipped
Thy hands in blood, shall suffer death with the
Most cruel tortures our severest Laws
Inflict on murderers. As for my self,
Here I renounce the world, and all its joys,
Resolved henceforth in some Remote
And Unfrequented Hermitage to spend
The small remainder of my wretched days
At Nature's charge: Where the cold clammy earth
Shall be my bed: homely, but wholesome roots
My daily food, and water from the
Nearest Spring my only drink. There on my
Bended knees I Will try to appease the anger
Of offended Heaven, and with repeated
Earnest vows solicit pardon for all my faults.

Damp Ha ha ha!

Beauf. Can thou laugh wretch?

Damp. Yes heartily, at thee and thy pretended penance.

Beauf. Away with him, and load him well with Irons.

Damp. Do thy worst old man, I fear not thee, nor death.
Damp. is led out
Beauf. Now there is little left for me to do,
But to discharge my duty to the dead.
In sad and solemn pomp I will attend
Them to the earth, and give them both one grave.
There, when in peace their dear lov*d Ashes lie,
From Treacherous ease, from all vain joys i will fly,
And tho I live, yet to the world i will dye.

FINIS
THe Inhuman Cardinal, or Innocence Betrayed. A Novel by Mrs. Mary Pix:

Now in the Press and will suddenly be published, the second part of the
proposal to the Ladies, wherein a Method is offered for the improvement of
their minds. By the Author of the first part, 12o. Printed for R. Wilkin.

OVid Travestie, or a Burlesque on Ovid' s Epistles; by Captain Alexander
Radcliff, of Grayes-Inn.

The Old Bachelor: A Comedy, by Mr. Congreve.

The Family Physician, being a Choice Collection of the best Remedies for the
Cure of all Diseases incident to humane Bodies; very useful in Families, and
serviceable to Country People. To which is added the true English Wine-Cellar,
being the best method to make all English Wines, and Metheglin; with a
Collection of the Choicest Cosmetick Remedies to preserve the Complexion of
Ladies* Published by George Hartman Phylo-Chymist, and Servant to Sir Kenelm
Digby till he Dyed. Price 2 s. 6 d. Printed for Richard Wellington, at the Lute
in St. Paul' s Churchyard.


