ENGLAND'S SOLAR PILL AGAINST THE SCURVEY.
THis Noble Solar Pill, Cures that Inveterate Disease the SCVRVEY, with all its
Symptoms, which are Pains in the Head, Inflammations of the Brain, Frensies,
Madness, Megrims, Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Tremblings and Weakness of the
Sinews, Wandering and Fixed Pains in the Limbs, Rheumatick and Gouty Swellings
in the Joints, Dropsies, Agues, Feavors, Black and Yellow Jaundice;
Obstructions and Pains of the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Womb and Ureters,
Leprosy, Laxative Gripings in the Guts, Costiveness, Drowsiness, Want of Rest,
Black Loose Teeth, Putrid Gums, Pineings and Wastings of the Flesh, Dryness in
the Mouth and Throat, Superfluous Moisture, Weak Rheumatick Eyes, Discolored
Skin, Spots, Scurff, Tetters, or Ring-Worms, Pustles and Blisters on the Skin,
King's Evil, Ulcers, Cancers, Cankers, Fistula's; nay, the Plague it self is but
an high graduated Scurvey, as appeared in our last great Plague; for nothing
was (then) found effectual for prvention or cure, but pure and high exalted
Antiscorbuticks. So also has it been found (by good Experience) that none of
the beforementioned Signs (which some call Original Diseases) can be cured (in
Scorbutic Bodies) but by Medicines (truly good) against the Scurvey.

Therefore, Courteous Reader, where you find any of the Signs beforementioned
(whether they be violent or moderate) conclude you have the Scurvey) more or
less, according to its manifestation. Take 5, 6, or 7 of these Noble Solar
Antiscorbutick Pills every Night; for it is a Potent Purifier of the Body of
Man from Center to Circumference; being pleasant to take, gentle in Operation,
effectual in Curing, and infallibly Safe, etc.

Those that take these Pills, may go abroad without danger of taking Cold by
them, Eat and Drink as at other times.

It is Prepared and Sold by the Author, at his House, the Sun in Gutter-lane
near Cheap Side, Land.

By Mr. J. Sabbarton at the Norwich Coffee-House in Deans Court in St. Martins
Le Grand near Aldersgate.

Mr. Jonathan Wilkins Bookseller, at the Star in Cheapside near Mercers Chapel.

Mr. Davis Linen Draper at the Three Golden Keys in the Little Minories.

Mr. Bridge 's Coffee-House in Popes-Head-Alley in Cornhil.

Mr. Tho. James Printer and Bookseller at the Printing-press in Mincing-lane.

Mr. Kidd at the Amsteridam Coffee-House in Bartholomew-lane.

The whole Box, containing 46 Pills, is 3 s. the half Box, containing 20 Pills,
is 1 s. 6 d. each Box Sealed with Helmont's Head.

London, Printed for the Author at the Sun in Gutter-lane near Cheapside, by
Tho. James.


