An Exact and True RELATION OF A BLOODY FIGHT, Performed against the Earl of
Newcastle and his Forces before Todcaster and Selby in Yorkshire, in his march
toward LONDON:

BY The Lo: Fairfax, Sir Chr: Wray, Sir Henry Foulis, Capt: Hotham, Capt:
Hatcher, Capt: Rhodes, and Capt: Anderson, with their Troops.

With the number of Soldiers that were slain.

Sent in a Letter from Selby, by Sir HENRY FOULIS Baronet, to Mr. T. CHALONER
Esquire, dwelling in Drury Lane, LONDON.

With a List of the Names of all the Commanders and other Gentlemen of note
that were taken prisoners in the late Battle at WINCHESTER.

London, Printed for JOHN FRANK. December. 21. 1642.

An Exact and true Relation of a Bloody Fight, performed against the Earl of
Newcastle and his Forces before Todcaster in Yorkshire, etc.
Dear Cousin,
IF I have not performed my promise in weekly writing to you, pray lay not the
blame on me, but (where it is due) on the troubles of our Country, what we do
here I shall tell you. Cleaveland is turned a Wilderness, my wife and children
sole Governors, not one else left either through fear or malignanty: my goods
at Hull, my self with a Troop of horse here; as for my Regiment of foot, it
lies so under the walls of York, that it is yet impossible to raise it, besides
if I had them up, one Muskets report would make them run away, witness
Cleaveland. Regiment under the Command of Sir Matthew Boynton, when he (with all
the help of his friends) had at Yarum 500 of his Regiment, the enemy giving us
but one Alarm, they all ran away save 200, and those are now run to 80. As for
my part I intend to raise Volunteers, for I may do either by my Commission, I
thank God for it in this seven, weeks service I have not any hurt of my Troop
but one, and that was at Kanuesbrough as we entered the town, where we lost some
men and Officers, yet lay there three days to refresh our men, not being able
to walk in the streets without danger from the Castle, and all we lost was one
common soldier, one Sergeant, one Engine hurt, and some six common soldiers,
what hurt we did them, we know not. When Captain Hotham and I (though we met
first at Yarum, and beat up with our Troops the enemies-Quarters at Darneton)
joined together with Cleavland foot, it was at North-Allerton upon sunday was a
sevnight; that same night that Ever Gallant Hotham beat up their Quarters
again, slew 4. men, one Lieutenant, and took 7 prisoners, we lost but one in
that service, who wilfully cast himself away, falling into the enemies hands,
thinking they had been his friends. On Monday the Earl of Newcastle passed the
Tees with all his Army, and 14 pieces of Ordnance, and lay that night at
Smeeton some four miles from Allerton; some six Alarums we had that night, and
were perpetually in arms on both sides, our Scouts giving fire on one another,
and on each Quarters; we by our Scouts discovered their lodging, which was the
foot, being least regarded in the open fields, the horse we suppose in the
Town, except those that alarmed us. We were then but 300 foot and four Troops
of horse, so held it wisdom to retreat to my Lord Fairfax now (in the absence
of Essex) our General. On Tuesday at two a clock in the morning we marched
from Allerton with bag and baggage, lay that night at Topcliff, the next day
the same time marched away to Knausbrough, where we received the loss before
mentioned; and to satisfy the soldiers gave them free qurrter, or at least
they took it Believes me if ever God enable us to have a revenge, that Town and
Castle shall suffer dearly, for they shot nothing but shawed bullets.

From thence we came to Wetherby where we lay, expecting whether my Lord of
Newcastle would make his pass that way to his Majesty, or by Todcaster where
my Lord Fairfax lay; but he bent his course for Todcaster, and summoned all the
country to be there on. Wednesday last, with their carriages and draughts to
convey his Ammunition and Ordnance. On Tuesday the Earl showed himself before
Todcaster and retreated; then did my Lord Fairfax send for Captain Hotham and
us from Wetherby, to be at Todcaster before day on Wednesday; we obeyed and
marched all night with our Ordnance; when we came to Todcaster we refresht your
selves for an hour, then we had notice that the Enemy was upon the Moor some a
mile from the Town, presently part of the horse which were Sir Christopher
Wrays Troop, Sir Thomas Fair fax's Troop and my own Troop; drew into the field
near the Moore, and remained there till toward 12 a clock, the enemy keeping
themselves on the further part of the moore among the Fenns, and a ditch
between them and us; They advanced not toward us, nor we toward them, but
stood at gaze then my Lord Fairefax commanded us on this side the River with
the rest of the horse, Captain Hothams Troop, Captain Hatchers Troop,
Captain Rhodes Troop, Captain Ardersons Troop to secure the forces. When we
retired the enemy presently fell on: the fight began about one of the clock,
and continued till after four; you cannot immagine how hot service it was, for
I dare well say one both sides above 40000. shot past, besides Ordinance, which
were played as occasion served. Upon us they played with 5. Culverin, we had
but one. Demi Culverin which never shot but once, but our Drakes shot notably,
and did good service; their Ordinance did little hurt, only killed one man,
the rest flew into our horse Troops, but did no hurt because they were spent
before they came at us, one shot of 18. pound fell between Hothams Troop and
mine within 3. yards of my self, and another in the rear of my troop, and
just before Sir Christopher Wray, the bullet was above 19. l. weight.

On our side there was slain but 4.3. Common Soldiers, and one whose memory
shall be ever famous, Colonel Lister; My Lord Fairefax with the rest of the
Commanders laid him in his Grave at Todcaster on Thursday morning, and
presently marched away hither; for the truth is, though my Lord of Newcastle
was before Todcaster himself in person with all his force; and that we beat
him off, yet we were not able to keep the Town, because we wanted victual
and ammunition, for I dare well say that in 48. hours not a Commander cate a
bit, march less a Common Soldier; some Sack we had, but that was not for the
poor Soldiers. What hurt we did the enemy we know not, for we found not above
30. killed, and some 20. taken prisoners, but when on ^horse went out in the
night to discover the fields were full of lamentable groans of dying people,
yet in a galantry New Castle lay with his men in the fields all that night, and
as we are informed some 500. rann from him; We are now and all our Forces at
Cawood and Selby, as well to secure our selves, as refresh our men, we came
hither the last night, and if New Castle advance, we shall fall upon him,
though Sir Hugh Cholmely and Colonel Francis Boynton come not to us; both
which we have not yet seen, though often sent to: And you may believe that
their Regiments with the four Troops of Horse they have, would be a good
recrute to our wearied Forces.

Selby, this 17. of December. Your affectionate Cousin to serve you Henry
Foullis.

FINIS.
The List of the Names of all the Commanders, and other Gentl^men of note that
were taken Prisoners in the late Battle at Winchester, as it was presented to
his Excellency the Earl of Essex at Windsor, December. 17. And sent by Coronet
Sterly to Sergeant Major Alexander, one of the Commanders under his Excellency.
Worthy Sir,
I Was in presence when the news came to my Lord General concerning the fight
at Winchester; And therefore thought good to give you the same intelligence of
it that that was delivered to him. There sallyed out two Regiments of foot,
which were of the Kings life guard upon us, which were all, or the most part of
them cut off: Besides the foot forces, there also sallyed out a Brigade of
horse; but they also finding they were notable to withstand us, retreated into
the Castle, then we scaled the walls, they desired quarter, which we gave them,
only detaining their Commanders, and Officers, whose names are here
underwriten; And for the rest of their forces we stripped and sent them away.
The Inhabitants of the Town of Winchester offers 2000l. to save themselves from
being pillaged by our Regiment.

And thus I rest your Servant to command

John Sterly, Cornett.
Col. L. Grandison Cap. Garret Col. Bennet Sir R. Willis Cap. Honywood Col.
Savage Sir J. Smite Cap. Barty Liev. Williamson Cap. Booth Livet. Rogers Maj,
Hayborne Cap. Brangling Cap. Wren Cap. Beckonhead Livet. Elverton Co. Ruddry.
Lievt. Rodham Lievt. Booth Cor. Gwyn Cor. Bradlines
The Names of the Gentlemen of that County that were taken Prisoners with the
Cavaliers.
Sir J. Mills Sir Tho. Philips Sir Fra. Power Sir H. Knowles Mr. Ranford Mr.
Saunders Mr. Griffin M. Foyl and his son. M. Powlet and his son.


FINIS.

