THE DREAD OF Gods Power, Uttering its VOICE THOROUGH MAN, Unto the HEADS Of
the NATION.

George Fox the younger.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle and
Windmil in Martins Le Grand.

The DREAD of Gods Power, etc.
OH! ye Mighty men who sit upon the THRONE, that are Exalted into power, and
brought into great Authority. Do you indeed know the Hand that brought you up
thither? And do you rightly understand the End of your coming into power again?
and do you certainly know the Work which God requires at your hands? And do you
indeed see the true Leader, which is to Lead in the Way and Work of the Lord?
And do you Feel and Witness that your Hearts are truly Inclined and Prepared
toward the Work of the Lord? Or are you not Ignorant of these Things? And do
you not rather feel your Hearts inclined toward REVENG, and to make your
selves Great, and to get your selves a Name, and to follow that which is
pleasing to your own Eyes, and to Condemn that which God has Justified, and to
Justify that which God has Condemned, and does Condemn?

Let there be an honest search made with the Witness of God in your own hearts,
which will show you the thoughts, and the intents thereof; and think not to
flatter your selves, as other have done before you, by conceiving that you are
safe enough, because the Arm of Flesh is with you, and at your Command: For
verily, verily, Thus says the LORD GOD, I will yet make the Powers of the
Earth to know, that I am GOD, and there is no other; and that I can do
whatsoever I please, and my Purpose and Decree shall stand unalterable; and I
will bring to pass, the thing that is in my Heart, and none shall let it; for
in its season it shall be accomplished.

Oh! Hear ye REBELLIOVS and live; Be not so stiff-necked and wilful, like
those that went before you (who would not hear Reproof) least I make you a
hissing, and scatter you with more dishonor than any, that went before you; for
my Anger is kindled, and my Jealousy is waxed hot against the Man of Sin. My
Decree is to Dis-throne him, and to take the Kingdom my self, and to slay his
Subjects that will not turn at my Reproof, and be subject to my Government,
Therefore seek not your selves, neither follow the Devices and Iniquity of your
own hearts any longer, for I the Lord am coming to plead with all Flesh, and I
will make mine Enemies know that I have Power to accomplish my own Work, though
I should find all the Armed Men, and the Men in Authority against me.

Now this is my DECREE; I will set up Righteousness in the Earth, and I will
establish Equity and Mercy amongst the people; I will remove Oppression from
off the Earth, and I will Search out, and Overthrow the Ground and Foundation
thereof, in whomsoever, or in whatsoever it stands; even, as I overthrew Sodom
in the days of old; and they that will not have out of it, shall certainly be
destroyed, says the Holy One, who will break the Potsherds of the Earth that
withstand him, and Consume the Stubble, the Thorns and the Briars that set
themselves in Battle against him, who is a Consuming Fire.

Therefore, Oh ye HEADS of the People! Consider your Ways, and weigh your
Actions in that equal balance (the Word of God) which will show you the
thoughts and the intents of your hearts: For verily, the Lord God is highly
displeased, and your hearts are seen not to be right before him, Therefore
consider your foundation upon which you build, least your building fall with
great dishonor and loss, when the Storm comes, which shall come to try it.

Mark. Were You, or your Fathers and Friends able to keep your selves in Power,
when the Lord formerly appeared against you, to cast You out before your
Enemies, because of your Rebellion against him? Or were your Enemies able to
keep you out of power, and themselves in, when the Lord appeared against them
to Split and Confound them, and to turn their day into darkness, and to bring
you in as a Flood over them, because of their treacherous dealing with the
Lord, and because they perverted the CAUSE and Power that was put into their
hands, serving themselves and their lusts, and not the Lord? Verily, as they
were not able to stand, no more will you be able to stand and keep your places
(except you Repent) and own that your Enemies had a just Cause put into their
hands against you: And so, put a difference betwixt the CAUSE, and That which
perverted it, and not judge and condemn both together; for if you do, verily I
say unto you, when you have filled up your measures, You will assuredly fall
without recovery, though you were ten thousand times stronger than you are, and
although not one man appeared against you with a Carnal weapon.

Consider. Was it a carnal weapon that brought you in? Were you not brought in
without a stroke outward? And is not the Lord the same? Is his Hand shortened?
has not he the hearts of all Flesh in his Power? And can he not turn them as
he pleases? Can he not Root out, and Overthrow whomsoever he will? And if he
will do it without outward means, Can any resist his Will? Or if he will do it
by outward means, Cannot he provide it himself, contrary to Man's expectation?
Therefore, DREAD ye the MAJESTY and POWER of the LORD, and fear before his
Dreadful Name.

Friends, I must deal plainly with you in the sight of God, who has made me a
Prophet to the Nation, I may not flatter any of you: My life is in the hand of
my Maker, and not one hair of my Head can fall to the ground without his
Providence. He has Redeemed my Soul from Hell, and my Mind from the Earth; and
he has given me his good Spirit to lead me: I am henceforth no more my own,
but I am the Lords, who has Formed me for his Praise, and has brought me
forth, that I may sound forth his powerful Truth amongst the People. Therefore
must I not fear Man, neither must I be afraid of the Sons of Men.

Verily, your Spirits are seen to be too high for the Work, which God will have
to be wrought in the Earth; and you are found in that your selves, which the
Lord will work against. And he is loaded with the pride and excess that ye (and
many in the Nation) are in; and his soul Abhors the Vanity, Music, and
Pleasures which ye delight in.

Oh how has iniquity abounded since ye came into place! and how is Oppression,
and Cruelty, increased and continued, upon them that seek the good of all! Now,
consider this, That which the Lord was wroth with you for, and threw you, and
your friends out for before, he will not own That now, nor that you should
revive, and establish That again: For the Lords Controversy is yet against
those things, (though he has thrown out a treacherous people, who perverted
his Cause:) Therefore, try your FOUNDATION, before you build and settle; for
verily, whatsoever is not founded upon CHRIST JESUS, the Rock of Ages, (whether
it be in things Religious, or in things Civil) the higher it is built, the
greater will its fall be; and every ones work must be tried by fire, what
Foundation soever they build upon, and great will be the Destruction and
Consumation; for nothing but what can abide the fire shall remain: And Verily,
there is exceeding much, both in Governors, and Governments, Laws, Ministry,
Profession, Trades, and in the Constitution of them, as they now stand (and in
the Conversations of the people) which is to be utterly destroyed by the fire
of the Lords Jealousy, and the Day hastens which will try every man's work of
what sort it is; and that which is for the fire, neither high words, nor
outward strength shall be able to save it.

Oh! The Spirit of the Lord is grieved, and pressed, with the Iniquities and
whoredoms of this Generation. Oh! the Waste, and the Spoil, that is made of
the Lords Creatures, excess in Apparel, excess in Diet, and deceitful
Feastings, and Banquetings; and each striving to exceed one another, not scarce
knowing what to invent, to eat and to drink, or to put on; or what Music, or
Images and Vanities to invent to please the Carnal Eye and Ear; and in the
mean time, your own flesh, or them of the same blood, lie, go, sit, or stand in
your streets, crying for a piece of bread; and many of your Lame, and Blind,
and Sick, and others, both in Prisons and other places are ready to Famish.

Oh! Consider these things speedily, and mock not at the Lords Messengers, (as
some before you, have done, when they have been warned, as you now are) lest
your bonds be made strong also, and least the Lord smite you with a Curse, and
send you Famine or Want in the room of your abundance and Superfluite; and
Rags instead of Ribbons, Feathers, Gold, and Silver Lace, and Gorgious attire;
and houling and mourning instead of your Music, Songs and Oaths.

Oh! Its hard to utter the abomination that flows and swells in this Nation; it
is a shame to the Rulers, to suffer these Stage Plays, Mountebanks, and vain
Sports and Shows, whereby the Lord is greatly dishonored, and foolish people
are cheated of their money, and the Creation is devoured and wasted, and Men's
lives sometimes endangered.

Oh! How have men invented mischief, and vanity, to stir up lightness and
vanity one in another. Oh ye Rulers! is not this a horrible wickedness, that a
man who has his right natural senses, should be suffered to fain himself to be
a Natural Fool? and that he should be suffered to speak any light vain words he
pleases, even what he can invent, to stir up lightness, and vain laughter
amongst you? Have you not manifested your selves to be slighters of the
Apostles Doctrine? (read, Ephesians. 4.29. and 5.4.)

This Abomination have I beheld several times out of my Prison window.
And is this an honor for the Chief of you, to have a company of Men and Boys,
dressed up with Ribbons and Bells about their legs, and one acting like a Fool
with a Ladle in his hand, Dancing before you, even like a company of mad
distracted men, making a noise like a company of Carriers Horses?

Oh! the Life of God is grieved with these things, and all that fear his Name
loathes them, and it is a shame that ever such things should be suffered in a
Land.

Therefore, O ye Rulers, let all this ungodliness, and superfluity of
nautinesse be laid aside, and receive with meekness the ingrafted Word which
is able to sa^e your Souls, Jam. 1.21. and that will teach you to love, even
your Enemies, and to forgive them; and to put a difference between the precious
and the vile: And it will keep your hands from blood, or your hearts from
desiring after it, if you will obey it; and it will show you with what Gods
Controversy is, both in your Government, and Worship, and Conversations; and it
will teach you to deny it. Yea, if you will own its Teachings, it will teach
you to deny all ungodliness, and worldly Lu ^s, and to live Godly,
Righteously, and Soberly in this present world, Titus 2.11.12. But if you will
not return to the word, which is nigh in your mouths, and in your hearts that
you may obey it, and do it, (Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.8.) verily this know, that
neither your Strength nor Wisdom, shall be able to deliver you, from the Just
hand of the Lord, which shall find out all his Enemies.

Therefore, if you would escape the overturning hand of the Lord, Repent
speedily, and humble your selves before the Lord, and forgive your enemies;
Love mercy, Compel none to your Worship, nor to uphold your Teachers, and be
willing that the Lord alone should send forth Laborers into his harvest, and
that he may lead them by his own Spirit, that they may speak as that gives them
utterance, and limit or quench it not, but let all have their Freedom to
worship God in the Spirit, (who know it) according to the manifestation of it,
which is given to every man to profit withal, (John 4.23.24. 1 Cor. 12.7.) for
such a Worship the Lord owns.

And take away that grievous oppression of TITHES, and forced maintenance;
which has cost some their lives, and many a great part of their estates, who
for CONSCIENCE SAKE have been made to witness against it. Undo every HEAVY
BVRTHEN, and break every YOKE, and let the oppressed go free; And let CHRIST
JESUS, the everlasting KING, have the pre-eminence in all things, Colos. 1.18.
for these things the Lord will have to be accomplished and brought to pass, And
if you will not submit to him in this his work, he must and will remove you.

And this further consider, Oh! take heed that none of you, upon your Beds, or
elsewhere, devise Cruelty and Oppression, and how to Avenge your selves upon
your Enemies, and then, when you are assembled together, confirm it by a Law,
because you have power so to do; for the Lord abhors that, who is appearing to
give to every man according to the fruit of their doing, and he will not
respect any man's person.

Now if by your Strength you can hinder the Sun from rising and setting in its
season, and if you be able to stop the Thunder and Lightening from having its
operation, or to hinder the Wind from Blowing, and the Rain from Descending,
then may you Hinder the DECREE of the Lord, and by your Strength you may stand
in Power and Peace, and Flourish for a long Season, though you serve and Avenge
your selves to the full, and though you rebel against the Lord, and oppress
his Heritage.

Lambeth house, 28th 5th month, 1660. Written (as moved and given by that
eternal power, which only can preserve, and deliver the Righteous) By a
Prisoner for the Lord, who am given up to his will in all things. G. F.


