CLARIOR E TENEBRIS


BEATAM AETERNA

CAELI SPECTO


ASPERAM AT LEVEM

CHRISTI TRACTO


In verbo tuo Spes mea

MUNDI CALCO

SPLENDIDAM AT GRAVEM

Alij diutius Imperium tenuerunt, nemo tam fortiter reliquit. Tarit, Histor.
Lib. 2. c. 47. p. 417.

portrait of Charles the Second Augustissimi CAROLI Secundi Dei Gratia ANGLIAE
SCOTIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE REX.

Bona agere and mala pati Regium est Page. 1.



The Established Church: OR, A SUBVERSION OF ALL The Romanist's Pleas FOR THE
POPE'S SUPREMACY IN ENGLAND.

Together with A VINDICATION of the present Government of the Church of
England, as allowed by the Laws of the Land, against all Fanatical exceptions;
particularly of Mr. Hickeringill, in His Scandalous Pamphlet, styled NAKED
TRUTH, the 2d. Part.

In Two Books.

By FRAN. FVLLWOOD, D. D. Archdeacon of Totnes in Devon.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most Sacred Majesty,
at the Angel in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXXI.

REVERENDISSIMO In Christo Patri GULIELMO Archiepiscopo CANTUARIENSI, Totius
ANGLIAE PRIMATI, and Regiae Serenissimae Majestatis a Sanctioribus Conciliis.

FRANCISCVS FVLLWOOD, Olim Collegii EMANUEL.

Apud CANTABRIGIENSES, Librum hunc, humillime D. D. D.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in God, GEORGE Lord Bishop of WINTON, Prelate of
the Most Noble Order of the GARTER.
My very good Lord:
BLessed be God, that I have Survived this Labor, which I once feared I should
have sunk under; and that I live to publish my Endeavors once more, in the
Service of the Church of England; and thereby, have obtained my wished
opportunity, to dedicate a Monument of my deep Sense, of your Lordship's
manifold obligations upon me.

In particular, I rejoice in the acknowledgment, that I ow my Public Station,
next under God and His Sacred Majesty, to your Lordship's Assistance and Sole
Interest; though, I cannot think, so much out of kindness to my Person (then,
altogether unknown to your Lordship) as affection and care of the Church;
grounded in a great and pious intention, (however the object be esteemed) truly
worthy of so Renowned a Prelate, and ( many other ways) excellent and admired
Patriot of the Church of England.

If, either my former attempts have been anywise available to the weakening the
Bulworks of Nonconformity; or my present Essay, may succeed, in any measure,
to evince or confirm the Truth in this greater Controversy; I am happy; that,
as God has some glory, and the Church some advantage; so some honor redounds
upon your Lordship; who, with a virtuous design, gave me a Capacity at first,
and ever since, have quickened and animated my Endeavors, in those Services.

I may be permitted to name our Controversy with the Church of Rome, the great
Controversy: For having been exercised, in all the sorts of Controversy with
Adversaries, on the other hand; I have found, that all of them put together,
are not considerable; either, for weight of matter, or copiousness of Learning;
or for Art, Strength, or Number of Adversaries, in comparison of this.

It takes in, the Length of time; the Breadth of place; and is managed, with
the Height of Wit, and Depth of Subtlety; the Hills are covered with the
Shadow of it, and its Boughs are like the goodly Cedars.

My Essay in these Treatises, is, to shorten and clear the way; and therefore,
though I must run with it through all time; I have reduced the place; and
removed the Wit and Subtleties, that would impede our progress.

I have endeavored to lop off luxuriant branches, and swelling excrescencies;
to lay aside all personal reflections, captious advantages, Sophistical and
Sarcastical Wit; and to set the Arguments on both sides, free from the darkness
of all kind of cunning, either of escape or reply, in their plain light and
proper strength; as also, to confine the Controversy, as near as I can, within
the bounds of our own Concern, i. e. our own Church.

And when this is done, the plain and naked truth is; that the meanest of our
other Adversaries (I had almost said the silly Quaker himself) seems to me, to
have better Grounds, and more like Christian, than the glorious Cause of the
Papacy.

But to draw a little nearer to our Point; your Lordship cannot but observe,
that one end of the Roman Compass, is ever fixed upon the same Center; and the
sum of their clamor is, our disobedience to the Sea of Rome. Our defense
stands, upon a twofold Exception: 1. Against the Authority: 2. Against the Laws
of Rome; and if either be justified, we are innocent.

The first Exception (and the defense of our Church, against the Authority of
that See) is the matter of this Treatise; the second, is reserved.

I have determined, that all the Arguments for the Pope's Authority, in
England, are reduceable, to a five-fold Plea: the Right of Conversion as our
Apostle; the Right of a Patriarch; the Right of Infallibility; the Right of
Prescription, and the Right of Universal Pastorship: the Examination of them,
carries us through our Work.

Verily, to my knowledge, I have omitted nothing Argumentative of any one of
these Pleas: yea, I have considered all those little inconsiderable things,
which, I find any Romanists seem to make much of. But, indeed, their pretended
Right of possession in England, and the Universal^ Pastorship, (to which they
adhere, as their surest holds) have my most intended and greatest strength, and
care and diligence; that nothing material, or seemingly so, might escape,
either unobserved, or not fully answered; let not the contrary be said, but
shown.

I have further labored to contract the Controversy, two ways.

1. By a very careful, as well as large, and I hope, as clear state of the
question, in my definition and discourse of Schism, at the beginning: whereby,
mistakes may be prevented, and much of matter disputed by others, excluded.

2. By waving the dispute of such things, as have no influence into the
Conclusion; and (according to my use) giving as many and as large Concessions
to the Adversary, as our Cause will suffer.

Now, my end being favorably understood, I hope, there is no need to ask your
Lordships, or any others, pardon, for that I have chosen not to dispute, two
great things.

1. That, in the Words ( tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram) there is
intended, some respect, peculiar to saint Peter's Person: it is generally
acknowledged, by the most learned Defenders of our Church, that Saint Peter had
a Primacy of Order; and your Lordship well knows, that many of the Ancient
Fathers have expressed as much; and I intend no more.

2. That Tradition may be Infallible, or indefectible, in the delivery of the
Essentials of Religion, for ought we know. By the Essentials, we mean no more,
but the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, the Decalogue, and the two Sacraments: in
this I have my Second, and my Reason too: for then Rushworth's Dialogues, and
the new Methods of Roman opposition, need not trouble us.

My good Lord, it is high time, to beg your Pardon; that I have reason to
conclude with an excuse, for a long Epistle: the truth is, I thought my self
accountable to your Lordship, for a Brief of the Book, that took its being from
your Lordship's Encouragement; and the rather, because it seems unmannerly to
expect, that your good Old Age should perplex it self with Controversy: which
the Good God, continue long and happy, to the honor of his Church on Earth;
and then, crown with the Glory of Heaven. It is the hearty prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obliged and devoted Servant, FR. FULLWOOD.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
OUr Roman Adversaries claim the Subjection of the Church of England by several
Arguments; but insist, chiefly, upon that of possession, and the Universal
Pastorship: if any shall deign to answer me, I think it reasonable to expect,
they should attach me there, where they suppose their greatest strength lies:
otherwise, though, they may seem to have the Advantage, by catching Shadows, if
I am left unanswered in those two main Points, the Substance of their Cause is
lost.

For, if it remain unproved, that the Pope had quiet possession here; and the
contrary proof continue unshaken, the Argument of Possession is on our side.

I doubt not, but you will find, that the Pope had not possession here before;
that he took not possession by Austine the Monk; and that he had no such
possession here, afterward, sufficient to create or evince a Title.

' It Is confessed, that Austine took his Archbishopric of Canterbury, as the
Gift of Saint Gregory; and having recalled many of the People to Christianity,
both the Converts and the Converter, gave great Submission and respect* to
Saint Gregory, then Bishop of Rome; and how far the People were bound to obey
their Parent that had begotten them, or he, his Master, that sent him and gave
him the Primacy, I need not dispute.

But, these things to our purpose, are very certain. 1. That Conversion was
anciently conceived to be the ground of their Obedience to Saint Gregory, which
Plea is now deserted; and that Saint Gregory himself abhorred the very Title of
Universal Bishop, the only thing now insisted on.

2. ' It Is also certain, that the Addition of Authority, which the King' s
Silence, Permission or Connivence gave to Austine, was more than Saint Gregory'
s Grant; and yet, that Connivence of the new Converted King, in the
Circumstances of so great Obligation and Surprise, ( who might not know, or
consider, or be willing to exercise his Royal Power, then, in the Point) could
never give away the Supremacy, inherent in his Crown, from his Successors for
ever.

3. ' It Is likewise certain, that neither Saint Gregory' s Grant, nor that King'
s Permission, did or could obtain Possession for the Pope, by Austine, as the
Primate of Canterbury, over all the British Churches and Bishops: which were
then many, and had not the same Reason from their Conversion by him to own his
Jurisdiction; but did stiffly reject all his Arguments and Pretenses for it.
King Ethelbert, the only Christian King at that time, in England, had not above
the twentieth part of Britain, within his Jurisdiction; how then can it be
imagined, that all the King of England' s Dominions, in England, and Wales, and
Scotland, and Ireland, should be concluded within the Primacy of Canterbury, by
Saint Augustine' s possession of so small a part?

4. ' It Is one thing to claim, another to possess. Saint Augustine' s Commission
was, to subject all Britain: to erect two Arch-Bishopricks, and twelve
Bishoprics, under each of them; but what possession he got for his Master,
appears in that, after the death of that Gregory and Austine, there were left,
but one Archbishop and two Bishops, of the Roman Communion, in all Britain.

5. Moreover, the Succeeding Archbishops of Canterbury, soon after,
discontinued that small possession of England which Augustine had gotten;
acknowledging, they held of the Crown, and not of the Pope; resuming the
Ancient Liberties of the English Church, which before had been, and ought
always to be Independent on any other; and which of Right returned, upon the
Return of their Christianity: and accordingly our Succeeding Kings, with their
Nobles, and Commons, and Clergy, upon all occasions, denied the Papal
Jurisdiction here, as contrary to the King's Natural Supremacy, and the
Customs, Liberties, and Laws of this Kingdom.

And, as Augustine could not give the Miter, so neither could King John give
the Crown of England to the Bishop of Rome. For (as Math. Paris relates) Philip
Augustus answered the Pope's Legate) no King, no Prince, can Alienate or give
away his Kingdom, but by Consent of his Barons ( who, we know, protested
against King John' s endeavor of that kind) bound by Knighs Service to defend
the said Kingdom; and in case the Pope shall stand for the contrary Error, his
Holiness shall give to Kingdoms a most pernicious Example: so far is one
unwarrantable act of a fearful Prince, under great Temptations, from laying a
firm ground for the Pope's Prescription; and it is well known, that both the
preceding and succeeding Kings of England, defended the Rights of the Crown,
and disturbed the Pope's possession, upon stronger grounds of Nature, Custom,
and plain Statutes, and the very Constitution of the Kingdom, from time to
time, in all the main Branches of Supremacy; as, I doubt not, but is made to
appear by full and Authentic Testimony beyond dispute.

2. The other great Plea for the Pope' s Authority in England, is that of
Universal Pastorship: now, if this cannot be claimed by any Right, either
Divine, Civil or Ecclesiastical; but the contrary be evident; and both, the
Scriptures, Emperors, Fathers and Councils, did not only not grant, but deny
and reject the Pope' s Supremacy, as an Usurpation; What Reason has this, or
any other Church to give away their Liberty, upon bold and groundless Claims?

The pretense of Civil Right, by the Grant of Emperors, they are now ashamed
of, for three Reasons; it is too scant, and too mean, and apparently groundless;
and our discourse of the Councils, has beaten out an unanswerable Argument
against the claim by any other Right, whether Ecclesiastical or Divine: for all
the General Councils are found; first, not to make any such Grant to the Pope,
whereby the Claim, by Ecclesiastical Right, is to be maintained: but, secondly,
they are all found, making strict provisions against his pretended Authority;
whereby, they, and the Catholic Church in them, deny his Divine Right.

It Is plainly acknowledged by Stapleton himself, that, before the Council of
Constance, non divino sed humano Jure, and positivis Ecclesiae Decretis,
primatum Romans Pont. niti senserunt, speaking of the Fathers; that is, the
Fathers before that Council, though the Primacy of the Pope, was not of Divine
Right; and that it stood only upon the Positive Decrees of the Church: and yet
he further confesses in the same place, that the Power of the Pope now
contended for (nullo sane decreto publico definita est) is not defined by any
Public Decree, tacito tamen Doctorum Consensu.

Now what can remain, but, that which we find him immediately driven to, viz.
to reject the pretense of humane Right by Positive Decrees of the Church; and
to adhere only (as he himself affirms, they generally now do) to the Divine
Right: Nunc (inquit) autem nemini amplius Catholoco dubium est, prorsus Divino
Jure, and quidem illustribus Evangelii Testimoniis hunc Primatum niti.

Thus, how have they entangled themselves! if they pretend a humane Right, he
acknowledges, they cannot find it, where it ought to be found, in the Public
Decrees of the Church: if a Divine Right, he confesses, the Fathers denied it,
before the Council of Constance; and he knows, that Council condemned it.

Stapleton at length affirms, that, now no Catholic doubts, but the Pope's
Primacy is of Divine Right; whence the heart of the Roman Cause is stabbed, by
these clear and sharp Conclusions.

1. Concl. That, all Catholics of the present Roman Church, do, now hold, a
New Article, touching the Pope's Primacy, not known to the Fathers before the
Council of Constance, An. 1415. and condemned by that Council, as an Error.

2. Concl. That, therein, the Faith of the present Roman Church, stands counter
to the Faith, Decrees, and Practices of all the first General Councils;
consisting of Fathers that flourished therein, long before the Council of
Constance, i. e. in their own sense, the Ancient Catholic Church.

You will find that the Evidence hereof arises, not only from the Words of
Stapleton, but from the Decrees of all the first eight General Councils, every
one of them, one way or other, expressly declaiming that Supremacy, which the
Pope and his present Church would arrogate; and in those Councils, all the
Fathers, and the Catholic Church are confessedly concluded; and consequently,
Antiquity, Infallibility, and Tradition, are not to be found at Rome.

The Sum is, the Church of England, that holds the true, Ancient, Catholic
Faith; and the four first General Councils: and has the Evidence of four more
in the Point; cannot be blamed, for rejecting, or not readmitting, a Novel and
groundless Usurpation, contrary to them all; and contrary also, to the
Profession of the present Roman Church; that pretends to believe, that the
Faith of the eight first general Councils, is the Catholic Faith.

Imprimatur,

GUIL. JANE R. P. D. HEN.
Episc. LAND. a Sacris Domest. Jan. 24. 1678.
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS and SECTIONS.
THe Introduction. The Design. The Controversy contracted into one point, viz.
Schism. Page 1 CHAP. I. The Definition of Schism. Sect. 1. Of the Act of it. p.
3 Sect. 2. The Subject of Schism. p. 4 Sect. 3. The Object of Schism. 1. Faith.
p. 7 2. Worship. p. 9 3. Government. p. 11
Sect. 4. The Conditions. Causeless. Voluntary. p. 14 Sect. 5. The Application
of Schism; it is not applicable to us. p. 16 In the Act. p. 17 Or Cause. p. 19
Sect. 6. The Application of it to the Romanists. p. 20 Sect. 7. The charge
retorted upon them. p. 21 The Controversy broken into two Points. The
Authority. The Cause. p. 23
CHAP. II. An Examination of the Papal Authority in England. Five Arguments
proposed and briefly reflected on. p. 24 1. Conversion. 2. Prescription. 3.
Western Patriarchate. 4. Infallibility. 5. Succession. p. 25
CHAP. III. Of the Pope's claim from our Conversion, by Eleutherius, Gregory.
p. 28
CHAP. IV. His claim as Patriarch. Four Propositions laid down. 1. The Pope was
Patriarch of the West. p. 32 2. He had then a limited Jursdiction. p. 33 3. His
Patriarchate did not include Britain. p. 35 4. A Patriarch and Universal
Bishop inconsistent. p. 37
CHAP. V. The Third Papal claim, Prescription. The Case stated. p. 39 Their
Plea. Our Answer, in three Positions, viz. 1. The Pope never had possession
absolutely. 2. That which he had, could never create a Title. 3. However his
Title extinguished with his possession. p. 40

CHAP. VI. The Papacy of no power here for the first 600 years (Augustine
Dionoth.) in fact, or faith p. 41. etc. Sect. 1. No one part of Papal
Jurisdiction was exercised here, for six hundred years; not Ordination, till
1100 years after Christ, etc. nor any other. p. 46 Sect. 2. No possession of
Belief of his Jurisdiction then, in England or Scotland. p. 52 Sect. 3. This
belief could have no ground in the Ancient Canons. Apostolic. Nicen. Milev.
etc. p. 54 Sect. 4. Of Council. Sardi. Calced. Constantinop. p. 56 Sect. 5.
Arabic Canons forged; not of Nice. p. 60 Sect. 6. Ancient practice interpreted
the Canons against the Pope: Disposing of Patriarchs: S. Cyprian, S.
Augustine's sense, in practice. p. 63 Sect. 7. The Sayings of Ancient Popes,
Agath^, Pelagius, Gregory, Victor, against the pretense of Supremacy. p. 69
Sect. 8. The words of the Imperial Law against him. p. 90 Sect. 9. The
Conclusion, touching possession in the first Ages, vix. six hundred years from
Christ. p. 97
CHAP. VII. The Pope had not full possession here, before Hen. 8. I. Not in St.
Augustine's time, nor after. p. 100 Sect. 1. Not in St. Augustine's time. ibid.
A true State of the question betwixt the Pope and the King of England in seven
particulars. p 102 Sect. 2. No clear or full possession in the Ages after
Austine, till Hen. 8. p 104 In eight distinctions of Supremacy. ibid. The
question stated by them. p. 105
CHAP. VIII. What Supremacy Hen. 8. took from the Pope; the particulars of it;
with Notes upon them. p. 107. etc.
CHAP. IX. Whether the Pope's possession here, was a quiet possession till Hen.
8. as to the Point of Supremacy. p. 109 Sect. 1. Of Appeals to Rome. Three
Notions of Appeal. Appeals to Rome Locally, or by Legates. Wilfrid. Anselm.
ibid. Sect. 2. Of the possession by Legates; the occasion of them here; their
entertainment. p. 117
CHAP. X. Of the Pope's Legislative power here, before Hen. 8. Canons oblige us
not without our Consent: our Kings, Saxon, Danish, Norman, made Ecclesiastical
Laws. p. 126
CHAP. XI. Of the Power of Papal Licenses, etc. in Edw. 1. 3. Rich. 2. Hen. 4.
Hen. 5. Hen. 6. Hen. 7's. time. p. 133
CHAP. XII. The Patronage of this Church; ever in our own Kings; by History; by
Law. p. 140
CHAP. XIII. Of Peter Pence, and other payments to the Pope. p. 149
First Fruits. p. 151 Payments extraordinary. p. 154 Casual. p. 156
CHAP. XIV. The Conclusion of the Argument of Prescription; it is on our side.
p, 158 On their side, of no force. p. 159
CHAP. XV. The Plea from Infallibility; considered, in its Consequence;
Retorted. p. 161 Sect. 1* Scripture Examples for Infallibility. p. 163 High
Priest, not infallible, nothing to the Pope. p. 164 Apostles. p. 166 Sect. 2.
Scripture-promises of Infallibility. p. 167
CHAP. XVI. 2. Argument for Infallibility, viz. Tradition; four Concessions;
three Propositions about Tradition. Arguments. Objections. p. 171 etc.
CHAP. XVII. The third way of Argument for Infallibility, viz. by Reason; three
Reasons answered; the Point argued; Retorted. p, 177
CHAP. XVIII. The Universal Pastorship; its Right, Divine or Humane; this,
Civil or Ecclesiastical; all examined; Constantine; King John; Justinian;
Phocas, etc. p. 182. as to Civil Right.
CHAP. XIX. His Ecclesiastical Right, by General Councils; the eight first, to
which he is sworn. Justinians Sanction of them; Canons Apostol. allowed by the
Council of Nice and Ephesus. p. 190 Sect. 1. Canons of the Apostles. p. 194
Sect. 2. 1. General Council of Nice. Bellarmine's Evasion. p. 195 Sect. 3.
Council. 2 genesis Constantinop, An. 381. p. 196 Sect. 4. Council. Ephesin. 3 genesis
An. 431. p. 197 Sect. 5. Council. Calced. 4 gen An. 451. p. 199 Sect. 6. Council.
Constantin. 2. the fifth genesis Council, An. 553. p. 202 Sect 7. Council.
Constant. 6 genesis An. 681. v. 685. Council. Nic. 7 genesis An. 781. p. 203 Sect. 8
Council. genesis ^ Constant. An. 870. p. 204 Seven Conclusions from Councils. p.
205 Sect. 9. Of the Latin Church; the Councils of Constance; Basil. etc. An.
1415. 1431. p. 206 Sect. 10. The Greek Church; African Canons; Synod. Carthag.
Council* Antiochen. the faith of the Greek Church, since in the Point. p. 208
etc. Sect. 11. The Sardican Canons. No Grant from their matter, manner, or
Authority. No Appendix to the Council of Nice. Zozimus his Forgery; they were
never Ratified, nor received, as Universal; and were contradicted by after
Councils. p. 212
CHAP. XX. The Pope's Title, by Divine Right. The Question. Why not sooner?
It Is their last Refuge. p. 217 Sect. 1. Whether the Government of the Church be
Monarchical, Jure Divino? Bellarmine. Reason. Scripture. p. 218 Promises,
Metaphors*, and Example of the High Priest in Scripture. p 221 Sect. 2. Of St.
Peter's Monarchy. T^^e^ Petrus. p. 223 Fathers Expressions of it. p 228 Fathers
corrupted, and Council of Calcedon, by Thomas. p. 230 etc.
CHAP. XXI.* Of the Pope's Succession. p: 237 Sect. 1. Whether the Primacy
descended to the Bishop of Rome, as such, by Succession from Saint Peter. Neg.
Bellar. 28 Prerogatives of Saint Peter; personal or false. p. 238, 239 etc.
Application of this Section. p. 241 By three great Inferences: the Pope's
Ancient Primacy not that, of Saint Peter: not, Jure Divino; not to descend to
succeeding Popes. Sect. 2. Whether the Pope have Supremacy, as Successor to
Saint Peter. Neg. not Primate, as such: Peter himself not Supreme; the Pope did
not succeed him at all. p. 244 Sect. 3. Arg. 1. Peter Assigned it to the Pope:
answered. p. 245 Sect. 4. Arg. 2. The Bishop of Rome succeeded Peter, because
Antioch did not: answered. p. 246 Sect. 5. Arg. 3. Saint Peter died at Rome;
answered: question de facto, not de fide. p. 247 Sect. 6. Arg. 4. From
Councils, Popes, Fathers, p. 249 Sect. 7. Arg. 5. For prevention of Schism,
Saint Hierom. p. 250 Sect. 8. Arg. 6. The Church committed to his care; Saint
Chrysostom. p. 251 Sect. 9. Arg. 7. One Chair. Optatus, Cyprian, Ambrose,
Acatius. ibid. Sect 10. The Conclusion touching the Fathers. Reasons, why, we
are not more particular about them. A Challenge touching them: there cannot be
a Consent of the the Fathers for the Papacy; as is evident from the General
Councils: Reasons* for it: Rome's contradiction of faith: the Pope's Schism,
Perjury, etc. p. 255 etc. The Sum of the whole matter: a Touch of another
Treatise; the material Cause of Separation. p. 261
THE POSCRIPT: Objections touching the first General Councils; and our
Arguments from them, answered more fully. SECT. 1. THE Argument from Councils
drawn up; it is conclusive of the Fathers, and the Catholic Church. p. 263
SECT. 2. Obj. Touching the Council of Nice answered. p. 267 SECT. 3. Obj.
Touching the Council of Constant. Second General. p. 269 SECT. 4. The third
General Council, viz. Ephesin. p. 272 SECT. 5. Of the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth,
Seventh, Eighth General Councils. Binius his quotations of Ancient Popes,
considered. p. 274
Conclusion. p. 279 AN APPENDIX. A Serious Alarm* to all sorts of Englishmen,
against Popery; from Sense and Conscience; their Oaths and their Interests. p.
281 The Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy. p. 289

ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 7. for and the, read and though, p. 136. l. 13. add, ' it is
observed that, p. 137. l. 23. blot out and the abundant, p. 138. l. 5. add of,
before the grievances, p. 147. l. 17. before the word evacuate, add not, p.
164. l. 24. for is, r. are, p. 175. l. 10. for his messenger, r. the Popes
messenger, p. 177. after Sentence, add with the Fathers, was ever taken, p.
205. l. 22. after the word Faith, add of the Church, p. 213. l. 31. for they r.
these Canons, p. 227. l 34. for Kingdoms, r. the Kingdom, p. 235. l. 1. for
are, r. are not.

The Printer to the Reader.
THe absence of the Author, and his inconvenient distance from London, has
occasioned some lesser escapes in the Impression of this Book. The Printer
thinks it the best instance of pardon, if his Escapes be not laid upon the
Author, and he hopes they are no greater than an ordinary understanding may
amend, and a little charity may forgive.

THE INTRODUCTION.
The Design. The Controversy Contracted into one Point, viz. SCHISM.
THE Church of England has been long possessed, both of her self and the true
Religion; and counts it no necessary part of that Religion to molest or censure
any other Church: Yet she cannot be quiet, but is still vexed and clamoured with
unwearied outcries of Heresy and Schism from the Church of Rome, provoking her
defense.

The Ball has been tossed as well by cunning as learned Hands, ever since the
Reformation; and it is complained, that by weak and impertinent Allegations,
tedious Altercations, unnecessary Excursions, and much Sophistry, needlessly
lengthening and obscuring the controversy, it is in danger to be lost.

After so great and so long exercises of the best Champions on both sides, it is
not to be expected, that any great Advance should be made on either: Yet how
desirable is it, that at length the true difference were clearly stated, and
the Arguments stripped of their said Cumber, and presented to us in their proper
Evidence, and the controversy so reduced, that the World might perceive where
we are: and doubtful inquirers after Truth and the safest Religion, might
satisfy their Consciences and fix their Practice.

This is in some measure the Ambition of the present Essay: In order to it, we*
have observed that the Shop out of which all the Arms, both Offensive and
Defensive, on both sides are fetched, is Schism; and the whole Controversy is
truly contracted into that one Point, which will appear, by two things.

1. By the State of the allowed Nature of Schism. 2. By the Application of it
so explained.
CHAP. I.
The Definition of SCHISM.
SECT. 1.
Of the Act of Schism.
THat we may lie open to their full Charge, we lay the Notion in as great a
Latitude, as, I think, our Adversaries themselves would have it.

Schism is a voluntary division of a Christian Church, in its external
Communion, without sufficient cause.

1. It Is a Division, (...), Divisions or Act. Division in the Church particular.
Rents among you: This division of the Church is made either in the Church or
from it; in it, as it is a particular Church, which the Apostle blames in the
Church of Corinth, c. 11. Though they came together, and did not separate from
the external Communion, but divided in it and about it.

2. Division is made also in the Church as Catholic.
Catholic or Universal, and some charge the Church or Court of Rome (as we
shall observe hereafter) herewith, as the cause of many deplorable Rents and
Convulsions in the bowels of it, and indeed in a true sense, all that are
guilty of dividing either in, or from a particular Church (without just cause)
are guilty of Schism in the Catholic, as the Aggregatum of all particular
Churches.

There is division as well from, as in the Church, and this is either such as
is improperly called Separation, or properly, or more perfectly so.

1. Separation improperly so called, we may term, Negative; which is rather a
recusancy or a denial of Communion, where it is either due or only claimed and
not due, but was never actually given.

2. It Is properly so, where an actual separation is made, and Communion broken
or denied, where it has wont to be paid.

3. Or yet more perfectly, when those that thus separate and withdraw their
Communion from a Church, join themselves in an opposite body, and erect Altar
against Altar.

SECT. II.
Subject of Schism.
THus of the Act of Schism, Division: Let us briefly consider the Subject of
this division, Subject.
which is not a civil or an Infidel Society, but a Christian Church. I do not
express it a true Church; for that is supposed: For if it be a Christian Church
it must be true, otherwise it is not at all.

Some learned of our own side, distinguish here of the truth of the Church
Physically or metaphysically considered; or morally: and acknowledge the Roman
Church to be a true Church, or truly a Church, as some would rather have it,
but deny it to be such morally: and plead for separation from it only in a
moral sense, or as it is not a true Church, i. e. as it is a false and corrupt
Church, not as it is a Church.

But finding this distinction to give offense, and perhaps some advantage to
our Adversaries, at least for the amusing and disturbing the method of
disputation, and being willing to reduce the difference as much as I am able, I
shall not insist upon these distinctions.

I confess ( pace tantorum) I see no danger in, but rather a necessity of
granting the Church of Rome to be a true Church even in a moral sense, largely
speaking; as moral is distinguished from Physical or metaphysical: and the
necessity of this concession arises from the granting or allowing her to be a
true Church in any sense, or, a Church of Christ.

For to say, that a Christian Church is not a true Church morally, yet is so
really, i. e. Physically or Metaphysically, seems to imply that it is a
Christian Church, and it is not a Christian Church; seeing all the being of a
Christian Church depends upon its truth in a moral sense, as I conceive is not
questioned by either side.

And when we grant that the Church of Rome or any other is a true Christian
Church in any sense, we do mean that she retains so much of Christian truth in
a moral sense, as is requisite to the truth and being of a Christian Church.

Indeed the very Essence of a Christian Church seems to be of a Moral nature,
as is evident in all its causes; its Efficient, The preaching of the Gospel
under divine Influence is a Moral cause; the form, living in true faith, and
Religion, is moral; its End and all its formal Actions, in Profession and
Communion, are of a Moral nature, and the Christians as they are Men, are
indeed natural Beings, yet as they are Christians and the matter of the
Christian Church, and more, as they are in a Society, they fall properly under
a Moral Consideration.

But how can a Church be true and not true, and both in a Moral sense? How can
we own the Church of Rome as a true Church, and yet leave her as a false
Church, and true and false be both taken Morally? Very well: And our Learned
Men intend no other, though they speak it not in these terms.

For to be true and false in the same ( Moral) Sense; does not imply the being
so, in the same respects: Thus the Church of Rome may be granted to be a true
Christian Church, with respect to those Fundamentals retained in her Faith and
Profession, wherein the being and truth of such a Church consists; and yet
be, very false, and justly to be deserted, for her gross Errors, in many other
points, believed also and professed by her: as a Bill in Chancery, may be a
true Bill for the substance of it and so admitted; and yet in many things
falsely suggested, it may be very false, and as to them, be rejected.

2. The Church as the Subject of Schism may 1. Catholic.
be further considered as Catholic, i. e. Absolute, Formal, Essential, and as
it lies spread over all the world, but united in one common Faith: From this
Church the Donatists and other ancient Heretics, are said to have separated.

2. As Particular, in a greater or lesser number 2. Particular.
or part of the Catholic: Thus the modern Separatists forsaking the Church of
England are said to be Schismatics.

3. In a Complex and mixed Sense, as the particular 3. Mixed.
Roman Church pretending also to be the Catholic Church, calls her self Roman
Catholic, and her Particular Bishop the universal Pastor. In which sense, the
Church of England is charged with separation from the Catholic Church, for
denying Communion with the particular Church of Rome.

SECT. III.
Object of Schism.
1. Faith.
THe third Point is the Object, about, and External Communion.
in which, Separation is made: Namely, External Communion; in those three great
Means or Bonds of it; Faith, Worship and Government: under that Notion, as they
are bonds of Communion.

The first is Faith or Doctrine: and it must Faith.
be acknowledged, that to renounce the Churches Faith, is a very great Schism:
yet, here, we must admit two exceptions; it must be the Churches Faith: that
is, such Doctrine, as the Church has defined as necessary to be believed; if
we speak of a particular Church: for in other Points, both Authorities allow
Liberty. Again, though the Faith be broken, there is not Schism presently or
necessarily, except the external Communion be also, or thereby disturbed.
Heretical Principles not declared, are Schism in Principle, but not in Act:
Have thou Faith, have it to thy Self. It Is farther agreed, that we may and some
times must differ with a particular Church in Doctrine; wherein She departs
from the Catholic Faith: but here we must take care, not only of Schism, but
Damnation it self, as Athanasius warns us.

Every one should therefore endeavor to satisfy himself in this great
Question; What is Truth? or the true Catholic Faith? To say presently, that it
is the Doctrine of the Roman Church, is to beg a very great Question, that
cannot easily be given. I should think Athanasius is more in the right; when he
says, this is the Catholic Faith, etc. in my opinion, they must stretch
mightily that can believe, that, the Catholic Faith, without which no man can
be saved; and therefore, which every man ought to understand, takes in all the
Doctrines of the Council of Trent.

Till the contrary be made evident; I shall affirm after many great and learned
men, that he that believes the Scriptures in general, and as they are
interpreted by the Eathers of the Primitive Church; the three known Creeds; and
the four first general Councils, and knows and declares himself prepared to
receive any further Truth that he yet knows not, when made appear to be so,
from Reason, Scripture, or Just Tradition, cannot justly be charged with Schism
from the Catholic Faith.

Methinks, those that glory in the Old Religion, should be of this mind; and
indeed, in all reason, they ought to be so; unless they can show an Older and
better means of knowing the Catholic Faith, than this: what is controverted
about it, we shall find hereafter in its due place.

In the mean time, give me leave to Note, that our more Learned and Moderate
Adversaries, do acquit such a man or Church, both from Heresy and Schism; and
indeed come a great deal nearer to us, in putting the issue of the Controversy
very fairly upon this unquestionable Point. They who first Separated themselves
Mr. Knot in fid. unm. c. 7. s. 112. p. 534.
from the Primitive pure Church, and brought in Corruptions, in Faith,
Practice, Lyturgy, and use of Sacraments, may truly be said to have been
Heretics, by departing from the pure Faith; and Schismatics, by dividing
themselves from the external Communion of the true uncorrupted Church.

2. Object. Worship.
A second band of external Communion is 2: Worship.
Public Worship; in which, Separation from the Church, is notorious.

But here ( Public Worship) must be understood, only so far, as it is a bond
of Communion, and no farther; otherwise, there is no breach of Communion,
though there be difference in Worship, and consequently no Schism.

This will appear more plainly, if we distinguish of Worship in its Essentials
or Substantials, and its Modes, Circumstances, Rites and Ceremonies.

It Is well argued by the Bishop of Calcedon, that none may Separate from the
Catholic Church, (or indeed from any particular) in the Essentials or
Substantial Parts of Worship: for these are God's ordinary means of conveying
his Grace for our Salvation; and by these, the whole Church is knit together,
as Christ's visible body for Divine Worship.

But, what are these Essentials of Worship? Surely nothing else but the Divine
Ordinances, whether moral or positive, as abstracted from all particular Modes,
not determined in the Word of God. Such as Prayer, the reading the Holy Canon,
interpreting the same, and the Sacraments: therefore, that Church that worships
God in these Essentials of Worship, cannot be charged, in this particular, with
Schism, or dividing from the Catholic Church.

And, as for the Modes and particular Rites of Worship, until one Public
Liturgy and Rubric be produced, and proved to be the Rule of the Catholic
Church, if not imposed by it, there is no such bond of Union in the
Circumstantial Worship in the Catholic Church; and consequently, no Schism in
this respect.

Much less, may one particular Church, claim from another ( par in parem non
habet imperium) exact Communion in all Rites and Ceremonies, or for want
thereof, to cry out presently, Schism, Schism!

Indeed, our Roman Adversaries do directly and plainly assert; that about Rites
and Ceremonies, the guilt of Schism is not concerned; and that particular
Churches may differ from one another therein, without breach of Communion.

Though, for a Member of a particular Church to forsake the Communion of his
own Church, in the Essentials of Worship, merely out of dislike of some
particular innocent Rites, seems to deserve a greater Censure.

But the Roman Recusants in England, have a greater difficulty upon them, to
excuse their total Separation from us, in the Substantials of our Worship (at
which they can pretend to take no offense; and wherein they held actual
Communion with us many years together, at the beginning of Queen Eliz. Reign)
against the Law of Cohabitation, observed in the Scripture, where a City and a
Church were commensurate, contrary to the Order (as one well observes) which
the Ancient Church took for preserving Unity, and excluding Schism: by no means
suffering such disobedience or division of the Members of any National Church,
where that Church did not divide it self from the Catholic. And lastly,
contrary to the Common right of Government; both of our Civil and
Ecclesiastical Rulers, and the Conscience of Laws, both of Church and State.

But their pretense is, Obedience to the Pope; which leads us to consider the
third great bond of Communion, Government.

3. Object. Government.
Thirdly, The last bond of Ecclesiastical external Government.
Communion, is that of Government; that is, so far as it is lawful in it self,
and exerted in its Public Laws.

This Government can have no influence from one National Church to another, as
such; because, so far they are equal (par in parem) but must be yielded by all
Members of particular Churches, whether National, Provincial, or truly
Patriarchal, to their proper Governors in all lawful things, juridically
required; otherwise, the guilt of Schism is contracted.

But for the Government of the Catholic, we cannot find it wholly in any one
particular Church, without gross Usurpation; as is the plain sense of the
Ancient Church: indeed it is partly found in every Church: it was at first
diffused by our Universal Pastor and Common Lord, into the hands of all the
Apostles; and, for ought has yet appeared, still lies abroad among all the
Pastors and Bishops of particular Churches, under the power, protection and
assistance of Civil Authority. Except, when they are collected by just power
and legal Rules, into Synods or Councils; whether Provincial, National or
General: here, indeed, rests the weight of the Controversy, but, I doubt not,
it will at last be found to make its way, against all contradiction from our
Adversaries.

In the mean time, we do conclude, while we profess and yield all due obedience
to our proper Pastors, Bishops and Governors, when there are no Councils
sitting; and to all free Councils, wherein we are concerned, lawfully convened;
we cannot be justly charged wiih Schism from the Government of the Catholic
Church: though, we stiffly deny obedience to a Foreign Jurisdiction, and will
not rebel against the Government, that God has placed immediately over us.

This fair respect, the Church of England holds to the Communion both of the
Catholic and all particular Churches; both in Doctrine, Worship and
Government: and the main exception against her is, that she denies obedience to
a pretended Power in the Sea of Rome; a Power, not known, as now claimed, to
the Ancient Church; a Power, when once foreseen, warned against, as
Antichristian, by a Pope himself; and when usurped, condemned by a General
Council: And lastly, such a Power, as those that claim it, are not agreed
about, among themselves.

But the charge of Schism falls after another sort, upon our Roman Adversaries;
who have disturbed the Universal, and all particular Churches by manifest
violation of all the three bonds of external Communion.

The Doctrine and Faith, by adding to the Canon of the Scripture, Apocriphal
Books; by adding to the revealed will of God, groundless Traditions: by making
new Creeds without the Consent of the present, and against the Doctrine and
practice of the Ancient Churches: and as for Worship, how have they not
corrupted it? by Substraction, taking away one essential part of a Divine
Ordinance, the Cup from the Laity, etc. by additions infinite, to the Material
and Ceremonial Parts of Worship; and by horrid Alterations of the pure and
Primitive Worship, to childish Superstitions, and some say, dangerous Idolatry.

Lastly, As to Government: they have plainly separated themselves, both from
the Ancient and present Catholic Church, and all other particular Churches; by
usurping a Dominion, condemned by the Ancient, and that cannot be owned,
without betraying the Liberty of the present Church. By exerting this
Usurpation in unlawful and unreasonable Conditions of Communion; and as it is
said, by Excommunicating for Non-obedience to these Impositions, not only the
Church of England, but three Parts of the Christian World: The proof, on both
sides, we are to expect in due place.

SECT. IV.
The Conditions of Schism. Causless. Voluntary.
THe fourth and last thing considerable Condition:
in the Definition, is the Condition; which adds the guilt and formality of
Schism to Separation: which is twofold, it must be Causeless and Voluntary.

1. It must be voluntary Separation, or denial Voluntary.
of Communion: but of this, I shall say nothing; a greater man received a check
from his Romish Adversaries for the proof of it; saying, who knows not that
every sin is voluntary? S. W, Causless.


2. It must be causless, or as it is usually expressed, without sufficient
cause: it is a Rule generally allowed, that the Cause makes the Schism; i. e. if
the Church give cause of Separation, there is the Schism; if not, the cause of
Schism is in the Separatist; and consequently, where the cause is found, there
the charge of Schism rests.

I know, it is said, that there cannot be sufficient cause of Separation from
the true Church; and, therefore, this Condition is needless: but, they ever
mean (by the true Church) the Catholic Church.

It Is granted, the Catholic Church cannot be supposed, to give such cause; she
being the ordinary Pillar of Truth, wherein the means of Salvation can be only
found; therefore, we rarely meet with any such condition, in the Definitions of
Schism, given by the Fathers of the Ancient Church; because they had to deal
with Schisms of that kind, that separated from the whole Church.

But hence to infer, that we cannot have just cause to separate from the Church
of Rome, will be found bad Logic.

However, if we could grant this Condition to be needless, it cannot be denied
to be true. and the lawfulness of Separation for just cause, is an eternal
verity; and if the cause be supposed just, cannot be said to be unjust; seeing
there cannot be supposed a sufficient cause of Sin; the Act is justified while
it is condemned.

Besides it is not questioned by our Adversaries, but there may be sufficient
cause of separation from a particular Church; then if at last we find, that the
Church of Rome is no more, there is more than reason to admit this Condition in
the present Controversy.

But the Cause must not be pretended to effect, beyond its influence or
Sufficiency: Therefore none may be allowed to deny Communion with a Church,
farther than he has cause; for beyond its Activity, that which is said to be a
cause, is no cause.

Hence we admit the distinction of partial and total separation; and that known
Rule, that we may not totally separate from a true Church; and only so far, as
we cannot communicate without sin.

The Reason is evident, because the truth and very being of a Christian Church,
implies something wherein every Christian Church in the very Foundation and
being of it, has an agreement both of Union and Communion.

Far be it from us therefore, to deny all kind of Communion with any Christian
Church, yea we franckly and openly declare, that we still retain Communion, out
of fraternal charity, with the Church of Rome, so far as she is a true Church:
Only protesting against her Usurpations, and reforming our selves from those
corruptions of Faith and Worship, of which Rome is too fond and consequently
the more guilty.

SECT. V.
The Application of Schism. Not to our Church.
IF this definition of Schism be not applicable to the Church of England, she
is unjustly charged with the guilt of Schism. If the Church of England does not
voluntarily divide in or from the Catholic Church, or any particular Church,
either by separation from, or denying Communion with it, much less by setting
another Altar against it without sufficient cause, then the definition of
Schism is not applicable to the Church of England.

But she has not thus divided, whether we respect the Act or the Cause.

With respect to the Act, viz. Division: We 1. In the Act.
argue, if the Church of England be the same for Substance since the
Reformation, that it was before; then by the Reformation we have made no such
Division: for we have divided from no other Church further than we have from
our own, as it was before the Reformation, as our Adversaries grant: And
therefore if we are now the same Church as to Substance that we were before, we
hold the same Communion for substance, or essentials with every other Church
now, that we did before.

But, for Substance, we have the same Faith, the same Worship, the same
Government now, that we had before the Reformation; and indeed from our first
Conversion to Christianity.

Indeed, the Modern Romanists have made new Essentials in the Christian
Religion, and determine their Additions to be such: But so Weeds are of the
essence of a Garden, and Botches of the essence of a Man.

We have the same Creed to a word, and in the same sense, by which all the
Primitive Fathers were saved; which they held to be so sufficient, Con. Ept. p.
2. Act. 6. c. 7.
that in a general Council, they did forbid all persons (under pain of
deposition to Bishops and Clerks, and Anathematization to Laymen) to compose
or obtrude upon any persons converted from Paganism or Judaism.

We retain the same Sacraments and Discipline; we derive our holy Orders by
lineal succession from them. It is not we who have forsaken the essence of the
Modern Church by substraction, or rather Reformation, but they of the Church of
Rome, who have forsaken the essence of the ancient Roman Church, by their
corrupt Additions, as a learned Man observes.

The plain truth is this, the Church of Rome has had long and much Reverence
in the Church of England; and thereby we were by little and little drawn along
with her into many gross errors and superstitions both in Faith and Worship;
and at last had almost lost our liberty, in point of Government. But that
Church refusing to reform, and proceeding still further to usurp upon us, we
threw off the Usurpation first, and afterward very deliberately Reformed our
selves from all the corruptions that had been growing upon us, and had almost
overgrown both our Faith and Worship: If this be to divide the Church, we are,
indeed, guilty, not else.

But we had no power to reform our selves: Here indeed is the main hinge of the
Controversy; but we have some concessions from our worst and fiercest
Adversaries, that a National Church has power of her self, to reform abuses in
lesser matters, provided she alter nothing in the Faith and Sacraments without
the Pope: And we have declared before, that we have made no alteration in the
essentials of Religion.

But we brake our selves off from the Papal Authority, and divided our selves
from our lawful Governors: It Is confessed the Papal Authority we do renounce; but
not as a lawful Power, but a Tyrannical Usurpation; and if that be proved,
where is our Schism.

But this reminds us of the second thing in the Definition of Schism, the
Cause: For, what 2. The Cause.
interpretation soever be put upon the Action, whether Reformation or Division
and Separation, it is not material, if it be found we had sufficient Cause; and
no doubt we had, if we had reason from the lapsed state and nature of our
Corruptions, to Reform; and if we had sufficient Authority without the Pope, to
reform our selves: But we had both, as will be evident at last.

Both these we undertake for satisfaction to the Catholic Church; but in
defense of our own Church against the charge of Schism by and from the Church
of Rome, one of them, yea either of them, is sufficient.

For if the pretended Authority of the Church of Rome over the Church of
England be ill grounded, how can our Actions fall under their censure?
Especially seeing the great and almost only matter of their censure, is plainly
our disobedience to that ill grounded Authority.

Again, however their Claim and Title stand or fall, if we have or had cause to
deny that Communion which the Church of Rome requires, though they have power
to accuse us, our Cause being good will acquit us from the guilt, and
consequently the charge of Schism.

Here then we must join Issue, we deny the pretended Power of the Church of
Rome in England, and plead the justness of our own Reformation, in all the
particulars of it.

SECT. VI.
The Charge, as laid by the Romanists.
THis will the better appear by the indictment of Schism drawn up against us,
by our Adversaries; I shall receive it as it is expressed by one of the
sharpest Pens, and in the fullest and closest manner I bave met with, viz.
Card. Perron against Archbishop Laud, thus.

Protestants have made this Rent or Schism by their obstinate and pertinacious
maintaining erroneneous Doctrines, contrary to the faith of Roman or Catholic
Church; by their rejecting the authority of their lawful Ecclesiastical
Superiors, both immediate and mediate: By aggregating themselves into a
separate Body or company of pretended Christians, independent of any Pastors at
all, that were in lawful and quiet possession of Jurisdiction over them; by
making themselves Pastors and Teachers of others, and administering Sacraments
without Authority given them by any that were lawfully empowered to give it; by
instituting new Rites and Ceremonies of their own in matters of Religion,
contrary to those anciently received throughout all Christendom; by violently
excluding and dispossessing other Prelates of and from their respective Sees,
Cures, and Benefices; and intruding themselves into their places, in every
Nation where they could get footing. A foul Charge indeed, and the fouler
because in many things false. However, at present we have reason only to
observe the foundation of all lies, in our disobedience and denying Communion
with the Church of Rome; all the rest either concerns the grounds, or manner,
or consequences of that.

Therefore if it appear at last, that the Church of England is independent on
the Church of Rome, and owes her no such obedtence as she requires; the Charge
of Schism removes from us and recoyls upon the Church or Court of Rome, from
her unjust Usurpations and Impositions; and that with the aggrevation of
Sedition too in all such whether Prelates or Priests, as then refused to
acknowledge and obey the just Power and Laws of this Land, or that continue in
the same disobedience at this day.

SECT. VII.
The Charge of Schism retorted upon the Romanists. The Controversy to two
Points.
IT is well noted by a learned Man, that while the Papal Authority is under
Contest, the question Dr. Hammond.
is not barely this, whether the Church of England be schismatical or no? (For
a Romanist may cheaply debate that and keep himself safe, whatsoever becomes of
the Vmpirage) but indifferently and equally, whether we, or the Romanist be
thus guilty, or which is the Schismatic that lies under all those severe
Censures of the Scriptures and Fathers, the Church of England or her Revolters,
and the Court of Rome.

Till they have better answered to the Indictment than yet they have done; we
do and shall lay the most horrid Schism at the door of the Church or Court of
Rome: For that they have voluntarily divided the Catholic Church, both in
Faith, Worship, and Government, by their innovations; and excommunicated and
damned, not only the Church of England, but as some account, three parts of the
Christian Church, most uncharitably and without all Authority or just cause, to
the scandal of the whole world.

But we shall lay the charge more particularly, as it is drawn up by
Archbishop Bramhal. The Church, says he, or rather the Court of Rome, are
causally guilty, both of this Schism, and almost all other Schisms in the
Church. 1. By usurping an higer place and power in the Body Ecclesiastical,
than of right is due unto them. 2. By separating, both by their Doctrines and
Censures, three parts of the Christian World from their Communion, and as much
as in them lies, from the Communion of Christ. 3. By rebelling against general
Councils. Lastly, by breaking or taking away all the lines of Apostolical
Succession except their own; and appropriating all Original Jurisdiction to
themselves: And that which draws Sedition and Rebellion, as the great
aggravation of their Schism, they Challenge a temporal Power over Princes,
either directly or indirectly.

Thus their Charge against us, is Disobedience; Our Charge against them is
Usurpation and abuse of Power: If we owe no such Obedience, or if we have cause
not to obey; we are acquitted: If the Pope have both power and reason of his
side; we are guilty: If he fail in either; the whole weight of Schism, with all
its dreadful Consequences, remains upon him or the Court of Rome.

The Conclusion.
TThus, we see, the Controversy is broken into two great points:

1. Touching the Papal Authority in England.

2. Touching the Cause of our denying Communion in some things, with the Church
of Rome, required by that Authority.

Each of these, I design to be the matter of a distinct Treatise.

This first Book, therefore, is to try the Title The Sum of this first Treatise.
betwixt the Pope and the Church of England: Wherein we shall endeavor
impartially to examine all the Pleas and Evidences, produced and urged by
Romanists on their Masters behalf; and show how they are answered: and where
there appears greatest weight and stress of Argument, we shall be sure to give
the greatest diligence: Omitting nothing but vnconcluding impertinencies, and
handling nothing lightly but colors and shadows that will bear no other.

Now to our Work.

CHAP. II.
An Examination of the Papal Authority in England. Five Arguments Proposed, and
briefly reflected on.
THis is their Goliath; and indeed their whole Army: if we rout them here, the
day is our own: and we shall find nothing more to oppose us, but Skirmishes of
Wit, or (when they are at their Wits end) fraud and force; as I am troubled to
observe, their Use has been.

For if the Sea of Rome has no just claim or Title to govern us, we cannot be
obliged to obey it: and consequently these two things stand evident in the
light of the whole world. We are no Schismatics, though we deny obedience to
the Sea of Rome, seeing it cannot justly challenge it. 2dly, Though we were so,
yet the Sea of Rome has no power to consure us, that has no power to govern
us. And hereafter we shall have occasion further to conclude, that the Papal
Authority, that has nothing to do with the English Church, and yet rigorously
exacts our obedience, and censures us for our disobedience; is highly guilty,
both of Ambition in its unjust claim, and of Tyranny in unjust execution of an
usurped power, as well in her Commands as Censures, which is certainly Schism,
and aliquid amplius.

They of the Church of Rome, do therefore, mightily bestir themselves to make
good their claim; without which they know, they can never hope either to gain
us, or secure themselves.

I find five several Titles pretended, though methinks the power of that Church
should be built but upon one Rock.

1. The Pope being the means of our first Conversion, as they say, did thereby
acquire a Right 1. Conversion.
for himself and successors, to govern this Church.

2. England belongs to the Western Patriarohate; 2. Patriarch.
and the Pope is the Patriarch of the West, as they would have it.

3. Others found his Right in Prescription, and 3. Prescription.
long continued possession before the Reformation.

4. Others flee much higher; and derive this 4. Infallibility.
power of Government from the Infallibility of the Governor: and indeed who
would not be led by an unerring Guide?

5. But their strong hold, to which at last resort 5. Succession.
is still made; is the Popes Universal Pastorship, as Successor to St. Peter,
and supreme Governor not of Rome and England only, but of the whole Christian
World.

Before we enter upon trial of these severally, we shall briefly note, that
where there are many Titles pretended, Right is justly suspected, especially if
the Pretenses be inconsistent.

1. Now, how can the Pope, as the Western Patriarcb, or as our first Converter,
pretend to be our Governor; and yet at the same time pretend himself to be
universal Bishop: These some of our suttlest Adversaries know, to imply a
contradiction, and to destroy one another.

2. At first sight therefore, there is a necessity on those that assert the
universal Pastorship, to wave the Arguments, either from the Right of
Conversion, or the Western Patriarchate: or if any of them will be so bold as
to insist on these, he may not think the Chair of St. Peter shall be his
Sanctuary at a dead lift.

3. Also for Possession; what need that be pleaded, if the Right be evident;
Possession of a part if the Right be universal; unless by England, the Pope
took livery and Seisen for the whole world. Besides, if this be a good plea, it
is as good for us, we have it and have had it time out of mind; if ours have
not been quiet, so neither was theirs before the Reformation.

4. For Infallibility, that is but a Qualification, no Commission: Fitness sure
gives no Authority; nor desert, a Title, and that by their own Law: otherwise
they must acknowledge the Bishops of our Church, that are known to be as
learned and holy as theirs, are as good and lawful Bishops, as any the Church
of Rome has.

Thus we see where the Burden will rest at last; and that the Romanists are
forced into one only hold: One great thing concerns them to make sure, or all
is lost; the whole Controversir is tied to St. Peter's Chair, the Supremacy of
the Pope must be maintained, or the Roman and Catholic are severed, as much as
the Church of England and the Church of Rome; and a great breach is made
indeed, but we are not found the Schismatics.

But this is beside my task: Lest we should seem to endeavor an escape at any
breach, all the said five Pleas of the Romanists, shall be particularly
examined, and the main Arguments and Answers on both sides faithfully and
exactly as I can, produced: And where the Controversy sticks, and how it
stands at this day, noted, as before we promised.

CHAP. III.
Of the Popes Claim to England from our Conversion, by Eleutherius, Gregory.
THis Argument is not pressed with much confidence in Print, though with very
much in Discourse, to my own knowledge: Perhaps it is rather popular and
plausible than invincible.

Besides, it stands in bar against the Right of St. Peter, which they say was
good, near six hundred years before; and extends to very many Churches, that
received grace neither by the means of St. Peter or his pretender Successor;
except they plead a right to the whole Church first, and to a part afterward;
or one kind of right to the whole, and another to a part.

The truth is, if any learned Romanist shall insist on this Argument in
earnest, he is strongly suspected, either to deny or question the Right of St.
Peter's Successor, as universal Pastor.

But we leave these advantages to give the argument its full liberty; and we
shall soon see, either its Arms or its Heels.

The Argument must run thus: If the Bishop of Rome was the means of the English
Churches Conversion, then the English Church owes obedience to him and his
Successors.

We deny both propositions: The Minor, that the Pope was the means of our first
Conversion: and the consequence of the Major; that if he had been so, it would
not follow that we now owe obedience to that See.

For the Minor, Bishop Jewel knocked it down so perfectly at first, it was
never able to stand since; he says it is certain, the Church of Britain We
were converted 9 years before Rome. Baron. An. 35. n. 5. and Marg. and An. 39.
n. 23. and Suarez. c. 1. 1* Contr. Angl. Eccl. Error.
now called England, received not first the Faith from Rome.

The Romanists proof, is his bare assertion, that Eleutherius the Pope was the
first Apostle of the Britains, and preached the Faith here by Damianus and
Fugatius within little more than an hundred years after Christ's death. Bishop
Jewel answers, that King Lucius was baptized near 150 years before the Emperor
Constantine; and the same Constantine, the first Christian Emperor, was born in
this Island: and the Faith had been planted here long before, either by Joseph
of Arimathea, or Simon Zelotes, or the Greeks, or some others; which is plain,
because the King being Christian before, requested Pope Eleutherius to send
hither those Persons, Damianus and Fugatius, to Reform the Bishops and Clergy,
which were here before; and to put things into better Order.

They also urged, that, as Pope Elutherius in Britain; So Saint Gregory in
England, first planted the Faith by Austin.

But Bishop Jewel at first dashed this Argument out of Countenance; plainly
proving out An. 210. An. 212. An. 334. An. 360. An. 400. An. 367.
of Tertullian, Origin, Athanasius, Constable. Emp. Chrisost. Theod. that the Faith
was planted in England long before Austin's coming hither. See his Defense of
his Apol. p. 11.

Some would reply, that the Faith was utterly rooted out again, upon the
Invasion of Heathen English: 'twas not so, says he, for Lib. 1. c. 26. and
lib. 2. c. 2.
Beda says, that the Queen of England was christened; and that there were then
in this Realm Seven Bishops, and one Archbishop, with other more great Learned
Christian men: and Galfridus says, there were then in England, Seven Lib. 82.
24.
Bishoprics, and one Arch- Bishopric, possessed with very many godly
Prelates, and many Abbeys in which the Lord's People held the Right Religion.

Yet we gratefully acknowledge that Saint Gregory was a special Instrument of
God, for the further spreading and establishing the Gospel in England: and that
both Elutherius and this Gregory seem to have been very good men, and great
Examples both of Piety and Charity to all their Successors in that See; and
indeed of a truly Apostolical spirit and care, though not of Authority; but if
all History deceive us not, that Austin the Monk, was far enough from being
Saint Augustine.

But, what if it had been otherwise; and we The Consequence.
were indeed, first converted by the means of these Popes; will it therefore
follow, that we ought for ever to be subject to the Papacy? This is certainly,
a Non-sequitur, only fit to be imposed upon easy and prepared Understandings:
it can never bear the stress and brunt of a severe Disputation; and indeed the
Roman Adversaries do more than seem to acknowledge as much.

However, the great Archbishop and Primate of Armach, has slurred that silly
Consequence Bramhall.
with such Arguments as find no answer. I refer the Reader, if need be, to his
Just Vindication, p. 131, 132. Where he has proved beyond dispute that
Conversion gives no Title of Jurisdiction; and more especially to the prejudice
of a former Owner dispossessed by violence; or to the subjecting of a free
Nation to a Foreign Prelate without or beyond their own consent.

Besides, in more probability, the Britains were first converted by the Eastern
Church; (as appeared by our Ancient Customs) yet, never were subject to any
Eastern Patriarch. And sundry of our English and British Bishops, have
converted Foreign Nations, yet never pretended thence to any Jurisdiction over
them.

Lastly, what ever Title Saint Gregory might acquire by his deserts from us,
was merely Personal; and could not descend to his Successors.

But no more of this, for fear of the scoffing rebukes of such as S. W. who
together, with the Catholic Gentleman, do plainly renounce this Plea; asking
Doctor Hammond with some show of Scorn, what Catholic Author ever affirmed it?
There is no doubt (though some other Romanists have insisted upon this Argument
of Conversion) some reason why these should think fit to lay it aside; and we
have no reason to keep it up, having otherwise work enough upon our hands. An
end therefore of this first Plea.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Pope's supposed Claim as Patriarch.
THis Point admits likewise of a quick dispatch, by four Propositions; and the
rather, for a reason you will find in the close of our Discourse, upon the last
of them.

PROP. I.
The Pope was anciently reputed the Western Patriarch.
Pope a Patriarch.
To this Dignity, he proceeded by degrees: the Apostles left no Rule for a
Forreigu jurisdiction from one Nation to another: But according to the 33
Cannon of the Apostles, (if they were indeed theirs) it behoved the Bishops of
every Nation to know him, who is their first (or Primate) and to esteem him as
their Head.

The Adventitious Grandeur which the Ancient Patriarchs afterward obtained, is
judged to arise three ways: by the Canons of the Fathers, the Edicts of
Princes, or Ancient Custom.

Upon the last ground, viz. of Custom, the C. Nice. c. 6.
Council of Nice settled the Privileges of those three Famous Patriarchal Sees,
Rome, Alexandria and Antioch: Saying, let Ancient Custom prevail; which Custom
proceeded from the honor such Churches had, as being founded by the Apostles,
if not rather from the Eminency of the Cities: Therefore the Council of
Calcedon, gives this as a reason of the greatness of the Sees of Rome and
Constantinople, because they were the Seats of the Emperors.

PROP. II.
The Pope, as Patriarch, had but a limited Jurisdiction.

Limited Jurisd.
1. A Patriarchate, as such, is limited; especially, if the Title restrain it
to the West: for East, North, and South, are not the West, in the same respect.

2. It is further evident, from the first Number of Patriarchs; for, if there
were more than one of the same Dignity and Jurisdiction; they must be threfore,
limited: for a Patriarch, as such, could have no Jurisdiction over a Patriarch,
as such; for so they were equal; andpar in parem non etc.

3. But indeed, the first time, we hear of three, and then of five Patriarchs
at once; viz. Five Patriarchs.
of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem: And that these
had all their Jurisdictions limited to them; and no one of them had any thing
like a Universal Monarchy, is evident, both from Canons and History; and also
by this undeniable Observation; that several Parts of the World had their own
Primates independent, and exempt from all these, in the height of their power:
as Africa at Carthage; the rest of Italy at Millain; France at Arles, or Lions;
Germany at Vienna; and Britain also had the same privilege.

4. The sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, C. Nice.
says thus expressly: Let Ancient Custom prevail; according to which, let the
Bishop of Alexandria have power over them of Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis;
because this was likewise the Custom for the Bishop of Rome; and accordingly in
Antioch, and other Provinces, let the privileges be preserved to the Churches.

The occasion of this Canon is said to be this: Miletius a Bishop of Egypt,
ordained Bishops and others in Egypt, without the Consent of the Bishop of
Alexandria: the Case heard in the Council, they pronounce such Ordinations
Null, depose Miletius, and by this Canon (the more venerable because the first
in such Cases) confirm the Ancient Customs of that, and all other Churches.

The Romanists object, the Council did not limits to those Jurisdictions.

But it is fully answered, that the Council supposed allow of them, and to
enjoin the observation of them; and that is so much the more than a present
limitation, as it is a proof of the greater Antiquity of such limitation.

Sure Bellarmine was hard put to it, when the because the Roman Bishop has so
accustomed) must be forced to speak against all Sense of Words, and Scope of
the Matter; thus, i. e. says he, the Roman Bishop has so accustomed to let
the Alexandrian Bishop govern them.

The occasion of the Canon we had before* Words themselves are these, (...)
(...). Who but Bellarmine sees not, that ((...),) imports a like Custom in the
Church of Rome; as the excellent and learned Doctor, Stinlingfleet observes?
The Bishop of Rome had such Jurisdiction over the Churches under him; and
therefore ought the Bishop of Alexandria over the Churches under him: upon this
Consideration the Council concludes, that so it should be.

If it be replied, the Pope had limits as a Metropolitan, but not as Head of
the Church; this grants the thing in present question; that, as a Patriarch,
the Pope's Jurisdiction was limited. What Power he had as Head of the Church,
shall be examined in its due place.

What Power* the Pope had anciently in confirming, deposing and restoring
Patriarchs, will hardly be found so Ancient as the Council of Ephesus; and
indeed, was challenged by him, not as a private Patriarch, but as Head of the
Church; and therefore is to be considered under that Head also.

PROP. III.
The Ancient Patriarchate of Rome did not include Britain excluded.
Britain.
But according to Ruffinus, (a Roman, who Ruffinus.
lived not long after the Council of Nice) it was limited to the Suburbicary
Cities; i. e. a part of Italy, and their Islands, Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica:
much less did it ever pretend to Britain, either by Custom, Canon, or Edict of
any of our Princes.

Consequently, we say, the Papal Power over us, was an after- encroachment and
usurpation, and a plain violation of the general Council of Ephesus.

Our Argument is this; the General Council Par, 2. Act. 7.
of Ephesus declare, that no Bishop should occupy any Province, which before
that Council, and from the Beginning had not been under the Jurisdiction* of
him or his Predecessors; and that if any Patriarch usurped any Jurisdiction
over a free Province, he should quit it; for so it pleased the holy Synod, that
every Province should enjoy its Ancient Rites, pure and inviolate.

But it is evident, the Bishop of Rome had no Power in Britain, from the
Beginning; nor yet before that general Council; nor for the first six hundred
years after Christ (as will appear when we speak of the next claim, viz.
Possession.)

Now, if the Pope had no Patriarchal Power in Britain before the six hundredth
year of Pope Boniface.
Christ, he could not well have any since: for Pope Boniface, three years after
Saint Gregorie's death, disclaimed this Power, by assuring an Higher Title: so
that had we been willing to admit him our Patriarch, contrary to what Augustine
found, time had been wanting to settle his Power, as such, in England.

From the whole, we conclude, either the Pope is none of our Patriarch: or if
such; he stands guilty of Contempt of a general Council, and has done so, many
hundred years; i. e. he is no Patriarch at all, or a Schismatical one.

PROP. IV.
To be a Patriarch and Universal Bishop, in the Inconsistent with Head of the
Church.
Sense of the Romanist, is inconsistent.
Therefore the Pope must let fall his Claim as a Patriarch, if he pretend to be
Universal Bishop: Thus the great Archbishop Bramhall reasons wisely and
strongly; but S. W. gives no answer to it, only that he argues weakly and
sillily.

The Lord Primate proves the inconsistency by Arguments not yet answered: the
Patriarch (says he) professes Humane; the Universal Pastor, challenges
Divine Institution: the one has a limited Jurisdiction over a certain
Province; the other pretends an Universal Jurisdiction over the World: the
one is subject to the Canons of the Fathers, and a mere Executor of them; and
can do nothing either against, or besides them; the other challenges an
absolute Sovereignty above the Canons, to make, abrogate, suspend them at his
pleasure, with a Non-obstante, when, where, and to whom he pleases*

Therefore, the Claim of this absolute Power disclaimeth the limited; and the
donation and acceptance of a limited Power, convinces that there was no such
absolute Power before: had the Pope been unlimited before, by divine donation;
who can imagine, that he would ever have taken gradum Simeonis in this Sense,
by Just. Vind. p. 282.
stooping so low to receive from the hand of man, the narrower dignity of a
Patriarch?

Besides, it is fully proved by Doctor Hammond Patriarchs subject to Civil
Power.
in his Book of Schism, beyond all the little exceptions of the Romanists, (as
more at large hereafter) that, the Sea of a Patriarch is disposable by the
Civil Power: and therefore, what ever Power the Pope may be thought to have had
heretofore in Britain, is now lawfully otherwise disposed of by the Kings of
England; as well as evidently rejected by the Usurpation of an higher, and an
higher kind of Title, inconsistent with it; and justly forfeited many other
ways, as will appear hereafter.

But though our Adversaries would seem to say something in favor of this
Title, they dare not stand to it; as indeed it is not convenient they should,
if they would save their Head whole. Therefore, after much ado to very Schis.
diarm. p. p. 157.
little purpose, S. W. concludes against Doctor Hammond thus. Besides, says
he, were all this granted, what is it to your, or our purpose? Since we accuse
you not of Schism, for breaking from the Pope's Subjection, as a Private
Patriarch, but as the chief Pastor and the Head of the Church.

So there is an end of their Second Plea.
CHAP. V.
The Third Papal Claim, viz. Prescription, or long Possession. Case Stated:
Their Plea; our Answer in three Propositions.
THe true state of the case here, is this: Case stated.
It cannot be denied but the Church of England was heedlesly and gradually
drawn into Communion with the Roman Church, in her additions, superinduced upon
the ancient Faith and Worship: and likewise into some degrees of subjection to
Papal Jurisdiction. And in this Condition we had continued for some
considerable time, before King Henry the Eighth; and that bold King (upon what
Motives is not here material) with the consent of his three Estates in
Parliament, both houses of the Convocation, and both the Universities of the
Land, threw off the Roman Yoke, as a manifest Usurpation, and a very grievous
oppression; and recovered the people and Church of England to their ancient
liberties of being governed by their own domestic Rulers. Afterward, in the
Reigns of Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, and by their proper Authority,
we reformed our selves by throwing off the Roman Additions to our Faith and
Worship.

Had we gone about a Reformation while we acknowledged subjection to the Sea of
Rome, or indeed, before we had renounced it, there had been more color to
charge us with Schism and disobedience: But now the proper question is, first
whether the State of England did then justly reject the Jurisdiction of the
Pope in England; and only consequently, whether we did afterward lawfully
Reform without him: The cause of our Reformation belongs to another Argument,
which we shall meet hereafter.

The papal Plea here, is; the Popes Authority was established here by long
Possession: and therefore Plea.
if nothing else could be pleaded for it, Prescription was a good Title: and
therefore it was injurious and Schismatical, first to dispossess him, and then
to go about to reform without him.

Our Answer is home and plain, in these Three Propositions. 1. The Church of
England was never actually under the Popes Jurisdiction, so absolutely as is
pretended. 2. The Possession which it had obtained here, was not sufficient to
create the Pope a good Title. 3. Or if it were, yet that Title ceased when he
lost his Possession.


CHAP. VI.
Prop. I.
The Papacy had no Power here, for the first Six Hundred Years. St. Aug.
Dionoth.

THe first Proposition is this, that the Church of England was not actually
under the Papal Jurisdiction, so absolutely as is pretended; that is, neither
Primarily for Plenarily.

First not Primarily, in that we were free from 1. Not Primarily.
the Papal Power for the first Six Hundred Years.

This is confirmed beyond all exception, by the entertainment Augustine found
among the sturdy Britains, when he came to obtrude that Jurisdiction upon
them: whence it is evident, that at that time, which was near six hundred In
Fact or Belief.
years after Christ, the Pope had neither actual possession of Government over,
nor of the belief of the Britains, that he ought to have it.

The good Abbot of Bangor, when pressed to submit to the Roman Bishop,
answered, in the name of the Britains; That he knew no Obedience Spel. conc.
an. 601.
due to him, whom they called the Pope, but the Obedience of Love; and adds
those full peremptory exclusive words, that under God, they were to be Governed
by the Bishop of Caerleon: Which the Lord Primate Bramhall says, is a full
demonstrative convincing proof, for the whole time, viz. the first six hundred
years. Vind. p. 84


But it is added, that which follows, strikes the question dead. Augustine, St.
Gregory's Legate, proposing three things to the Britains.

1. That they should submit to the Roman Bishop. 2. That they should conform to
the Roman Customs. 3. Lastly, That they should join with him in Preaching to
the Saxons.
Hereupon, the British Clergy assembled themselves together, Bishops and
Priests in two several Synods one after another; and upon mature deliberation,
they rejected all his propositions Synodically; and refused flatly and
unanimously to have any thing to do with him upon those terms: Insomuch as
Augustine was necessitated to return over Sea to obtain his own Consecration;
and after his return hither, to consecrate the Saxon Bishops alone; without the
assistance of any other Bishop. They refused indeed to their own cost: Twelve
hundred innocent Monks of Bangor, shortly after, lost their lives for it. The
foundation of the Papacy here, was thus laid in Blood.

It Is objected; that the story of the Abbot of Bangor is taken by Sir H.
Spelman, out of an old Welsh Author of suspected credit; but all Objections to
that purpose are removed by my Lord Primate, and Dr* Hammond: Besides, we have
other Authority sufficient for it, and beyond contradiction.

The Story in Bid himself, as vouched by Bed. li. 2. c. 2.
T. H. himself, against Dr. Hammond, puts it beyond all doubt, that the Abbot
and Monks opposed Austin, and would not subject themselves to the Pope of Rome,
but referred themselves only to their own Governors, which is also the general
result of other Authors account of this matter; and if the matter of Fact be
established, it is enough to disprove the Popes Posession at that time; whether
they did well or ill, is not now considered.

Baleus speaking of that Convention, says, Dinoth In Dinoth.
disputed against the Authority of Rome: and defended stoutly ( fortiter) the
Jurisdiction of St. David's, in the affairs of his own Churches.

The same is observed by Geoffrey of Monmouth, and Sigebert and others, for
which Dr. In an. 602.
Hammond refers us to the Collection of the Anglicane Councils, and Mr.
Whelocks Notes on the Saxon Bid. p. 115.

And indeed, the Author of the Appendix written on purpose to weaken this great
instance, confesses as much; when he concludes Austin in the Right, from the
miracles and divine vengeance upon the refusers, continuing still refractory to
his proposals.

Of the right of the cause we now dispute not; and he acknowledges, that
Augustine had not Possession; the thing we contend for. However, this instance
being of great moment in the whole Controversy, let us briefly examine what T.
H. has said against it.

T. H. questions the Authority of the Welsh M. S.

But the account there, is so perfectly agreeable An.
to the general account given by others (most competent Witnesses) and even
Bid himself, that as we have no necessity to insist much upon it; so they have
no reason at all to question it. Besides if the Reader would more fully
satisfy himself, he may see all the exceptions against this by M. S. at large
answered by Dr. Hammond and the Archbishop Bramhall.

But Bid concludes, that the Britains ought miracle wrought by Augustine upon
the blind man; and from that divine vengeance, prophetically foretold by
Augustine.

1. We now know what tricks are used to An.
counterfeit miracles, in the sight of simple people.

2* We know not, but that miracle might be said, but never done, as many in the
Legends are: And Bid might report, from very slight tradition, a thing tending
to the confirming his own Cause.

3. By Bede's own Confession, the miracle did prevail with the Britains, to
acknowledge, that the way of Righteousness Augustine preached, was the true;
yet they added, that they could not renounce their ancient Customs, without the
consent and license of their own Superiors: i. e. they thought the miracle
confirmed his Doctrine, but not the Popes Authority over them: And therefore
lastly, at their second meeting, they deemed his Pride a stronger Argument
against him, than his Miracle for him.

2. And for that latter Argument from the Slaughter, first threatened and then
fulfilled: Bed. Sigisbert.

Sure 'twas no strange thing, that a proud man An.
(as Augustine appeared to be) should threaten Revenge: And a bloody minded
man, to endeavor to execute it, as is evident he did.

Neither is it like a great miracle, that a vast Army should first overcome
unarmed Monks; and then proceed victoriously against other opposers.

Yet the latter part of the Story quite spoils the miracle; or the Argument
from it: For when Edilfred in the heat of his Rage and Victory, proceeded to
destroy the Remainder of those Monks; the avenger of Blood met him: the
British Forces routed his Army, and killed Ten Thousand and Sixty of them.

But the Conclusion for my present turn, stands firm however; that,
notwithstanding these pretensions of Miracles, the British rejected the
Papacy, and adhered to their proper Governors; i. e. the Pope then had not the
Possession of them.

I shall conclude here, with that smart reply of Archbishop Bramhall to S. W.
To demonstrate evidently how vain all his trifling is against the Testimony of
Dionothus: why does he not answer to the corroboratory proof, which I brought
out of Bid and others, of two British Synods, held at the same time, wherein
all the British Clergy did renounce all obedience to the Bishop of Rome, of
which all our Historiographers do bear Witness? Why does he not answer this;
but pass it by in so great silence? He might as well accuse this of forgery as
the other; since it is so well attested, that Dionothus was a great Actor and
disputer in that business.

SECT. I.
That no one Part of Papal Jurisdiction was exercised here, for the first six
hundred years; not Ordination: St. Telaus, etc. till 1100 years after Christ,
etc. nor any other.
IF we consider the Pope's Jurisdiction in its Not plenarily.
particular Acts, we find not so much as any one exercised or acknowledged
here, during the space of the first six hundred years; but, as far as History
gives us any account thereof, all Acts of Jurisdiction were performed by our
own Governors.

First, had the Pope had any Jurisdiction here at all, it would doubtless have
appeared in the Ordination or Consecration of our Bishops. Ordinationis Jus
caetera Jura sequuntur, is a known Rule in Law: but it is evident that our own
Primates were independent themselves, and ordained Not Ordination.
new Bishops, and created new Bishoprics, without license first obtained from,
or giving any account thereof to the Pope. Saint Telaus Consecrated and
ordained Bishops, as he thought fit: he made one Hismael Bishop of Saint
David's; and in like manner advanced many others of the same Order to the same
degree; sending them throughout the Country, and dividing the Parishes for the
best accommodation of the Clergy and the People. Vid. Regl. apud Vsh. prim.
Eccles. Brit. p. 56.

But were not our Primates themselves nominated or elected by the Pope, and
Consecrated by him or had license from him?

The contrary is manifest enough: all our Primates were nominated and elected
by our Princes, with Synods, and ordained by their own Suffragans at home; as
Dubricius, Saint David, Sampson, etc. not only in the Reigns of Aurelius
Ambrosius, and King Arthur; but even until the time of Henry the First, after
the eleven hundredth year of Christ, as Giraldus Cambrensis says; and always
until the first Conquest of Wales they were Consecrated by the Archbishop of
Saint David's; and he was likewise Consecrated by other Bishops, as his
Suffragans, without professing any manner of Subjection to any other Church.
Itinera. Cambr. l. 2. c. 2.

Now is it not fair to expect from our Adversaries one Instance, either of a
Bishop or Archbishop, ordained or Consecrated, during the first six hundred
years, by Papal Authority in Britain from their own, or our British Records?
But this Challenge made by Archbishop Bramhall receives no answer.

Here the Bishop of Calcedon only offers, ^. c.
that few or no Records of British Matters for the first six hundred years,
remain.

This is no Answer (says the Primate) while Roman Registers are extant: yea,
so extant, that Platina, the Pope's Library Keeper, is able out of them, to set
down every Ordination, made by the Primitive Bishops of Rome, and the Persons
Ordained.

He adds, Let them show what Bishops they have Ordained for the first six
hundred years: I have showed plainly (though he please to omit it) out of the
List of the Bishops ordained, three by Saint Peter, eleven by Linus, fifteen by
Clement, six by Anacletus, five by Evarastus, five by Alexander, and four by
Sixtus. etc. that there were few enough for the Roman Province; none to spare
for Britain. Vid. Bramh. Tom. 1. Disc. 3. p. 207.

It is said that Saint Peter ordained here; but St. Peter.
that was before he had been at Rome: therefore not as Pope of Rome. Nor any
other. Eluth.


2. Elutherius sent Fugatius, etc. but what to do? to Baptize King Lucius: upon
the same Errand he sent Victor into Scotland.

3. Palladius and Ninian are instances of men Pallad. etc.
sent to preach to the Picts and Scotland, as Saint Patrick into Ireland: this
was kindly done; but we have not one Syllable of any Jurisdiction all this
while: besides it is remarkable, though there be a dispute about Palladius his
being sent; yet, it is certain, he was rejected, and after Bed. in vit. S, Pat.
l. 1.
died; in whose place, Saint Patrick succeeded, without any Mandate from Rome
that we read of.

Jeffry of Monmouth says, that Dubricius Primate Legates. S. W.
of Britain, was Legate of the Sea Apost: and we say that Jeffry tells many
Fables: and that it is gross Credulity to believe him contrary to the
Authentic History, and more undoubted practices of those Times: we read (says
the Primate) of many Legates; but certainly, they were either no Papal Legates;
or Papal Legates, in those days, were but ordinary Messengers, and pretended
not to any Legantine Power, as it is now understood: for we read so much as any
one act of Jurisdiction done by them, and firmly conclude, thence, that there
Pall.
was none.

But R. C. says St. Sampson had a Pall from Rome.

He had a Pall, but it is not proved that he had Sol.
it from Rome; it is Certain, Archbishops and Patriachs in the Primitive times
had Palls, which they received not from Rome.

Besides, if he did receive that Pall from Rome, in all probability it was
after the first six Irin. Came. p. 1. c. 1.
hundred years: If either, according to Cambrensis, he was the five and
twentieth Archbishop after St. David, or, according to Hoveden, the R. Hoved.
an. 1199.
four and twentieth; and then it is nothing to our present question.

St. Gregory granted to Austin the use of the Pall, says R. C. the proper badg
and sign of Pall.
Archiepiscopal dignity; and gave him liberty to ordain twelve Bishops under
his jurisdiction, as Archbishop of Canterbury.

This was done at the end of the first six hundred years, and therefore not to
our present Sol.
question: However, if the Pagan Saxons had destroyed Christianity among the
Britains, (as they say) it was very Christianly done of St. Gregory, to send
Augustine to convert and re-establish the Church among them; but none can
imagine, that by receiving Augustine and his Bishops, they intended to submit
themselves and Posterity to the Sea of Rome, which when pressed before, the
Britains so unanimously rejected.

Neither indeed, could they do it to the prejudice of the ancient Primacy of
the Britains; existing long before; and confirmed in its independency upon any
foreign power: Forbid himself, as well as all our own Historians, makes it
most evident, that the Britains had Bishops long before: We find the
subscriptions of three of them to the first Council of Arles; Eborius of York
Restitutus of London, and Adelfius de Civitate Coloniae Land. and from the
presence of some of them at the Sardican Synod, and the Council of Ariminum; as
appears by Athanasius and others; and that they had also an Archbishop or
Primate, whose ancient seat had been at Caerleon; who rejected the Papacy; then
possessing and defending the privilege of their freedom from any foreign
Jurisdiction.

This their privilege was secured to them, both by the Nicene, Calcedonian,
and Ephesian Councils. Contrary to these Councils, if the Pope did intend to
give Augustine the primacy over the Britains, it was a plain usurpation.
Certainly the privileges of the Brittannick Church returned with its
Christianity; neither could Gregory dispose of them to Austin, or he to Gregory.

Besides Lastly, it is not possible any sober man can imagine, that that humble
and holy Pope, St. Gregory, who so much detested, if in earnest, the very Title
of Universal Bishop, should actually invade the privilege of the Britains,
and If in earnest.
hazard his own Salvation in his own Judgment, when he so charitably designed
the Conversion of England by sending Austin hither.

T. C. says, it appears that Britain was anciently Rome: For Wilfred,
Archbishop of York, appealed to Rome twice; Wilfred.
and was twice restored to his Bishopric. An, 673.

We see when this was done: Seventy and three Sol. An. 673.
years after the first six hundred.

He appealed indeed, but was still rejected; notwithstanding the sentence of
Rome in his favor, for six years together, during the Reigns of King Egbert
and Alfrid his Son; so far is this instance, from being a proof of the Popes
possession here at that time: Yet this is the most famous, says my Lord
Bramhall, I had almost said, the only Appellant from England to Rome, that we
read of before the Conquest.

Moreover, the Answer of King Alfred to the Alfred. spel. conc. an. 705.
Popes Nuncio, sent hither by the Pope on purpose, is very remarkable: He told
him, he honored them as his Parents for their grave lives and honorable
Aspects; but he could not give any assent to their Legation because it was
against reason, that a Person twice Condemned by the whole Council of the
English, should be restored upon the Popes Letter.

At this time it is apparent, neither the Kings of England, nor the Councils of
English Churchmen (as my Lord Bramhall expresses it, two Kings successively,
and the great Councils of the Kingdom, and the other Archbishop Theodore, with
all the prime Ecclesiastics, and the Flower of the English Clergy, opposing so
many Sentences and Messages from Rome) did believe, that England was under the
Jurisdiction of Rome, or ought to be so.

Yea, the King and the Church, after Alfred's After Alfred.
death, still made good this Conclusion; that it was against Reason, that a
person twice condemned by the whole Council of the English, should be restored
upon the Popes Bull.

Malmsbury would suggest, that the King and the Archbishop Theodore, were
smitten with remorse before their deaths, for the injury done to Wilfred, etc.
But not the King only, but the whole Council; not Theodore alone, but the whole
Clergy opposed the Popes Letter: which is enough both to render the dream of
Malmsbury, a ridiculous Fable; and for ever to confirm this truth, that England
was not then, viz. in the six hundred seventy and third Year of Christ, under
the Jurisdiction of the Pope, either actually or in the belief of the Church or
Kingdom of England.

The Latter, viz. the non-possession of out belief of the Popes universal
Jurisdiction, (which is so much insisted upon by the Romanists) will yet more
evidently appear, by that which follows.

SECT. II.
No Possession of our Belief, ancient.
WE have found the Britains, by the good Abbot, and two several Synods; Not
in England.
we have found the State of England in three successive Kings, their great
Councils and body of the Clergy, refused to yield Obedience both to the Popes
Persuasions, Injunctions, Sentences, and Legates: Therefore it seems impossible
that Britain or England should then believe either the Popes Infallibility, or
their obligation to his Jurisdiction; or that there was any such thing as the
Tradition of either delivered to them by their Ancestors or believed among them.

Indeed, by this one Argument, those four great Characters of the Papacy are
deleted and blotted out for ever, viz. Possession, Tradition, Infallibility,
and Antiquity.

I shall add the practice and belief of Scotland Nor in Scotland.
too; that other great part of our Kings dominions: When the Popes Legate, more
than Math. Par. in H. 3. an. 1238.
twice six hundred years after Christ, viz. about 1238. entered Scotland, to
visit the Churches there; Alexander the second, then King of the Scots, forbad
him so to do. Alleging, That none of his Predecessors had ever admitted any
such, neither would he suffer it: And therefore willed him at his own Peril to
forbear. Hence it is evident, there was neither Tradition nor Belief, either of
the Popes ancient and necessary Government, and therefore not of his
Infallibility; much less that anciently and from the beginning, the Pope had
exercised his Jurisdiction more in Scotland than in England. We have that Kings
word for it, None of his Predecessors had ever admitted any such.

SECT. III.
In Canons, Apost: Nice, Milev, etc. This Belief could have no Ground. Sardia.
What could possibly sway the first Ages to such a belief of the Popes
universal Vid. c. 20.
Jurisdiction? Certainly nothing from the Councils; nor the practice of the
Church in other places, nor indeed the declared Judgment of the Pope himself,
nor the words of the Laws.

1. Nothing to be found in the Canons of the Not Councils. Apostles.
Ancient Councils could invite to such belief. In the Apostles Canons, we find
the quite contrary; (...), the first or primate among the Bishops of every
Nation shall be accounted (...), as their Head; and that every one of those
Primates shall (...) do those things only which belong to his Province and the
Regions under it; and in pursuance of those Canons, the first Nicene Council
decreed (...), ^ic^.
etc. that they that are cast out by some, shall not be received by other
Bishops, and that this must be observed by the Bishops through every Province;
and in further Harmony the Milevetan Council prohibits all appeal from their
Mileve.
own Bishops, but to the African Councils and Primates of their own Provinces;
and that they which shall appeal to any Foreign, whether Bishop or Council
shall not be received into Communion with any in Africa. And lastly, the
Practice of all this is visible in the very Synodical Epistle of the African
Council to Pope Celestine, where Vid. v. Dr. Ham. at larg. dispar. disp. 397
398, 399, etc.
they beseech him for the future, that he will receive none such, because he
may easily find it defined in the Council of Nice. These Canons are all in the
Roman Codex, and cannot be pretended to be invalid; neither can they possibly
oblige any man to believe that the Pope had universal Jurisdiction as is now
pretended.

Moreover, as Dr. Hammond Notes, to some of these Canons the Pope himself makes
Oath, Disp. disp. p. 178. Pope swears to the Canons.
that he will inviolably observe them (see Corp. Juris can. decret. part. 1.
did. 16. c. 8.) and from that Oath, of the Pope, our Bishops made this very
conclusion, that the Popes that Exercised a primacy over any other Bishops but
those of their own province in Italy, transgressed their own profession made in
their Creation: as further appears by the institution of a Christian man in the
year 1538.

But more largly of this in the last Chapters.

Therefore, the Britains could not believe that they then owed Subjection to
the papacy, but they must charge the writers of the Apostolic Cannons (whether
by Apostles or Apostolical men) and the Councills, for enacting Sacriligious
decrees; and the Pope also for swearing the Inviolable observation of them.

These things are plain, and S. W. by pretending in general, that Words admit
of Various interpretations, without applying his Rule to the Case; gives but
too just occasion to Dr. Hammond to expose him as he does. See disp. disp. p.
181 182 183 184.

Eadmer speaks plain and home too; it was p. 58. 43.
inauditum in Britannia, quemlibet hominum super se vices Apostolicas gerere,
nisi solum Archiepiscopum Cantuariae. it was a thing unheard of, no practice of
it, no Tradition for it; therefore no such thing Could be believed, that any
other (not the Pope himself) did Apostolically Govern the affairs of Britain,
but only the Archbishop of Canterbury.

SECT. 4.
Conc. Sard. Calced. Constantinop.
IT may be said, the Britains might hear Vid. Cap. 20. Sict. 9.
of the Canon of the Council of Sardica; where it was decreed that Bishops
grieved, might Sardica.
appeal to the Bishop of Rome.

The words of the Council are these, (...), Sol.
etc. In Case any Bishop thought himself unjustly Condemned; if it seem good to
you, let us honor the Memory of Peter the Apostle; that it be written by those
who have Judged the Cause to Julius the Bishop of Rome; and if it seem good,
let the judgment be renewed, and let them appoint such as may take Cognizance
of of it. hereupon it is plain

1 These Fathers did not acknowledge the Popes Supremacy, who thus laid it at
the feet, and pleasure of others, ( if it seem good to you)

2. Here is no peremptory Order, neither, and it might not Seem good to Civil
Princes, to suffer such Appeals.

3. No absolute appeal it seems was intended: but only the Bishop of Rome might
review the Case: and how much a review differs from Apeal; More of Conc* Sar.
hereafter.
and that nothing but power to revew is here given to the Bishop of Rome, are
both fully manifested by the Archbishop of Paris, Petr. de Maro. de Concord.
l. 7. c. 3. sect. 6, 7. etc.

4. The Decree (such as it is) is not grounded upon any prior right, from
Scripture, tradition, or possession, or any former Council; has no other
Argument but the honor of Saint Peter; and that not in his Authority, but his
Memory; who first sat in that See, where Julius was now Bishop: but we may have
leave to ask, where was the Supremacy of the Church of Rome before? or how
should the Britains dream of it before? or why did not these Canons take
notice of the undoubted Canon of Nice to the contrary, made two and twenty
years before, either to null or explain it?

But that these Sardic Canons, neither established the Pope's Supremacy; nor
were acknowledged to bind the Church afterward; nor could be accounted an
Appendix to the Council of Nice; and what weakness and falsness has been
practiced upon this Argument, is so largly, ingenuously and satisfactorily
manifested by Doctor Sillingfleet, that I shall for his fuller satisfaction
refer the Reader to him, in his Ration. acc. p. 419, 420, 421. etc.

It is strongly argued in the last reasonings of my Lord Bramhall, that after
the Eastern Bishops were departed, this Council of Sardica was no general
Council; because the presence of five great Patriarchs were ever held necessary
to the being of a general Council; as Bellarmine confesses de Conc. Li. c. 17.

If this Council had been general: Why do Saint Gregory, Isiodore, and Bid,
leave it out of the Number of general Councils? Why did Saint Austine, Alipius
and the African Fathers, slight it? and which is more, why does the Eastern
Church not reckon it among their Seven; nor the Western Church among their
Eight first general Councils? Why did the English Church omit it in their
Number in the Synod of Hedifeld Apud Spel. An. 680. l. 169.
in the year 680. and embrace only unto this day the Council of Nice, the first
of Constantinople, the first of Ephesus, and the first and second of Calcedon?

The five first general Councils were therefore incorporated into our English
Laws; but this Council of Sardica never was: Therefore contrary to this Canon
of Appeal, it is the Fundamental Law of England, in that Famous Memorial of
Clarendon: All Appeals in England must proceed Regularly from the Archdeacon
to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and if the Archbishop
failed to do justice, the last Complaint must be to the King to give Order for
redress.

It Is evident, the great Council of Calcedon P. 2. ac. 14. c. 9.
contradicted this Canon for Appeals to Rome: where Appeals from the
Archbishop are directed to be made to every Primate, or the Holy Calcedon.
See of Constantinople, as well as Rome: from which Evidence, we have nothing
but silly Evasions, as that Primate truly observes, v. Sch. guarded p. 374.

Besides, if our Forefathers had heard of the Canons of the Councils truly
general, (as no doubt they had) how could they possibly believe the unlimited
Jurisdiction of Rome, the Council of Calcedon is not denied to give equal
Privileges to the Patriarch of Constantinople, with the Patriarch of Rome. And
the Council of Constantinople conclude thus: for the ( Nicene) Fathers did
justly give Privileges to the Sea of Constantinople.
old Rome, because it was the Imperial City; and the 150 godly Bishops moved
with the same consideration, did give equal Privileges to the Sea of new Rome;
that that City which was the Sear of the Empire and Senate should enjoy equal
Privileges with the Ancient Imperial City of Rome; and be extolled and
magnified in Ecclesiastical Affairs as well as it, being the Second in order
from it: and in the last Sentence of the Judges upon Review of the Cause: the
Archbishop of the Imperial City of Constable. or new Rome, must enjoy the same
Privileges of Honor; and have the same Power out of his own Authority, to
ordain Metropolitans in the Asiatick, Pontick, and Thracian Diocese.

Are these the Words of a General Council? could these Fatbers imagine the Pope
at that time Monarch of the whole Church? or could this be acknowledged by
England at first, and they yet give up their Faith to the Pope's Universal
Power? Can these things consist? Yea, is there not something in all the
Councils allowed by the Ancient Britains, and the Ancient English Church,
sufficient to induce a Faith quite contrary to the Roman Pretensions?

But as to this Canon of Constantinople, S. W. free Act, but voted
Tumultuously, after most of the Fathers were departed.

S. W. had been safer, if he had been wiser: Sol.
for that which he says, is altogether false; and besides such a cluster of
Forgeries, as deserves the Whet-stone to purpose; as my Lord Bramhall manifests
against him, Sch-guard. p. 354.

1. False: the Act was made before the Bishops had license to depart; it had a
Second Hearing; and was debated by the Pope's own Legates on his behalf,
before the most glorious Judges; and maturely Sentenced by them in the Name of
the Council. This was one of those four Councils, which Saint Gregory honored
next to the four Gospels. This is one of those very Councils, which every
succeeding Pope does swear to observe to the least tittle.

2. For his Forgeries about it, he is sufficiently shamed by the Primate in the
place cited: it is pity such shifts should be used; and it is folly to use them;
when the Truth appears, what remains, but, both the Person and the Cause
reproached.

See more of the Councils at the latter end.

SECT. V.
Arabic Canons forged; no Canons of the Council of Nice.
YEt it is a Mavelous thing, that the Romanist Primate, as the late
Archbishop Land; that by the third Canon of the Council of Nice, the Patriarch
is in the same manner over all those that are under his Authority; as he who
holds the Sea of Rome is Head, and Prince of the Patriachs, resembling Saint
Peter, and his Equal in Authority.

When it is most evident to the meanest capacity, that is no Canon of the true
Council of Nice; and that in stead of the third, it is the thirty ninth of the
supposititious and forged Canons; as they are set forth in the Arabic
Editions, both by Pisanus and Turrianus.

In these Editions there are no less than eighty Canons pretended to be Nicene;
whereas the Nicene Council never passed above twenty: as is evident from such
as should know best, the Greek Authors; who all reckon but twenty Hist. Ecl. l.
1. c. 7.
Canons of that Council. Such as Theodoret, Nicephorus Calistus, Gelasius
Cricenus, Alphonsus Ecl. Hist. l. 8. c. 19. Act. Conc. Nic. lib. 2.
Pisanus, and Binnius himself confesses that all the Greeks say there were no
more but twenty Canons, then determined.

Yea, the Latins themselves allowed no more: for although Ruffinus make twenty
two, it is by splitting of two into four.

And in that Epitome of the Canons, which Pope Hadrian sent to Charles the
Great, for the Government of the Western Churches, Anno 773. the same Number
appears: and in Hincmarus's M. S. the same is proved, from the Testimonies of
the Tripartite History, Ruffinus, the Carthaginian Council, the Epistles of
Ciril of Alex. Atticus of Constant. and the twelfth Action of the Council of
Calcedon: and if we may believe a Pope, viz. Stephen, in Gratian, says, the
Roman Church did allow of no more Gra. dis. 16. c. 20.
than twenty.

The truth is put beyond all question, lastly, both by the proceedings of the
African Fathers, in the case of Zosimus about the Nicene Canons, when an early
and diligent search made it evident; and also by the Codex Canonum. Eccl.
Afric. P. 363.
p. 58. where it is expressly said, there was but twenty Canons.

But this matter is more than clear, by the P. 391, 392
elaborate pains of Dr. Still. defense of the late Archbishop Land, to whom, I
must refer my Reader.

Yet Bellarmine and Binius would prove there

But their proofs depend either upon things, Sol.
as suppositions, as the Arabic Canons themselves; such as the Epistles of
Julius and Athanasius ad Marcum: or else they only prove, that some other
things were determined by that Council, viz. Concerning Rebaptization, and the
keeping of Easter, etc. which indeed might be Acts of the Council, without
putting them into the Ad an. 325. P. 108.
Canons; as Baronius himself confesses, and leaves the patronage of them, and
Spondanus, in his contraction of Baronius, relates it as his positive Ad an.
325. n. 42.
Opinion, that he rejected all but twenty, whether Arabic or other, as
spurious.

So that it will bear no further contest, but we may safely conclude, the
Arabic Canons, and consequently this of the Popes Authority, is a mere Forgery
of later times; there being no evidence at all, that they were known to the
Church in all the time of the four first general Councils. Vid. ^. 20.


SECT. VI.
Practice interpreted the Canons to the same Sense against the Pope: Disposing
of Patriarchs. Cyprian. Aug.
WE have found nothing in the Canons of the ancient Councils that might give
occasion to the belief of the Popes Jurisdiction in England, in the Primitive
Ages of the Church; but indeed, very much to the contrary: But the Romanist
affirms against my Lord of Canterbury, that the Practice of the Church is
always the best Expositor and Assertor of the Canons. We are now to examine,
whether the ancient practice of the Church was sufficient to persuade a belief
of the Popes Jurisdiction as is pretended. In the mean time not doubting, but
that it is a thing most evident; that the Pope has practiced contrary to the
Canons; and the Canons have declared, and indeed been practiced against the
Pope.

But what Catholic Practice is found on Record, that can be supposed a
sufficient ground of this Faith, either in England or any part of Christendom?
Certainly not of Ordinations or Appeals, or Visitations. Yea, can it be
imagined, that our English Ancestors, had not heard of the practice of the
Britains in maintaining their liberty when it was assaulted by Austin; and
rejecting his demands of Subjection to the Sea of Rome? No doubt they had heard
of the Cyprian Privilege; and how it was insisted on in bar of the universal
Pastorship, by their friends the Eastern Church: from whom, they in likelihood
received the Faith; and with whom they were found at first in Communion, about
the observation of Easter and Baptism; and in practice, diverse from the Church
of Rome.

But one great point of practice is here pitched Baronius; and after him by T.
C. It is the Popes Confirmation of the Election, deposing and restoring of
Patriarchs: which they say he did, as Head and Prince of all the Patriarchs,
and consequently of the whole Church.

But where has he done these strange feats? Sol.
Certainly not in England: And we shall find the instances not many nor very
early, any where else. But to each Branch.

1. It Is urged, that the Popes Confirmation Confirm. Patriarchs.
is required to all new elected Patriarchs.

Admit it; but the Archbishop of Paris, Petrus Dr. Still.
de Marca, fully answers Baronius (and indeed every body else) that this was no
token of Jurisdiction; but only of receiving into Communion; De conc. l. 6. c.
5. s. 2.
and as a Testimony of Consent to the Consecration. If any force be in this
Argument, then the Bishop of Carthage had power Cypr. Ep. 52. p. 75.
over the Bishop of Rome; because he and other African Bishops, Confirmed the
Bishop of Rome's Ordination.

Baronius insists much upon the Confirmation of Anatolius by Leo I. which very
instance answers it self. Leo himself tells us, that it was Ep. 38.
to manifest, that there was but one entire Communion among them throughout the
World.

Yet it is not to be omitted, that the practice of the Church supposes that
the Validity of the Patriarchs Consecration, depended not upon Consec. depends
not on Confirmation.
the Confirmation, or indeed, Consent of the Pope of Rome. Yea though he did
deny his Comunicatory letters, that did not hinder them, from the Execution of
their Office. Therefore Flavianus the Patriarch of Antloch; though opposed by
three Roman Bishops, successively, who used all importunity with the Emperor,
that he might be displaced; yet because the Churches of the Orient, did approve
of him and Communicate with him, he was allowed; and their consent stood
against the Bishops of Rome. At last, the Bishop of Rome, severely rebuked for
his Pride by the Emperor, yielded; and his Consent was given only by renewing
Communion with him. But where was the Popes power; either to make, or make void
a Patriarch, while this was in Practice?

2. Does Practice better prove the Popes Deposing* Patriarchs.
power, to depose unworthy Patriarchs? The contrary is evident; for both before
and after the Council of Nice; according to that Council, the practice of the
Church placed the power of deposing Patriarchs, in Provincial Councils; and the
Pope had it not, till the Council of Sardica decreed in the case of Athanasius,
as P. de Marca abundantly proves: Vid. de Concord. l. 7. c. 1. Sect. 6. Also,
that the Council of Sardica it self, did not (as is commonly said) decree
Appeals to Rome; but only gave the Bishop of Rome power to review their
Actions; but still reserving to Provincial* Councils, that Authority which the
Nicene Council had established them in.

But T. C. urges, that we read of no less than eight several Patriarchs of
Constantinople deposed by the Bishop of Rome.

Where does he read it? In an Epistle of Pope Sol.
Nicolaus to the Emperor Michael. Well chosen says Doctor Still. a Popes
Testimony in his own Cause. And such a one, as was then in Controversy with
the Patriarch of Constantinople, and so late too, as the Ninth Century is: when
his power was much grown from the Infancy of it.

Yet, for all this, this Pope on such an occasion, and at that time, did not
say, that the Patriarchs mentioned by him, were deposed by the Popes sole
Authority, but not Ejected (Sine Consensu Romani Pontificis) without his
Consent: and his design was, only to show that Ignatius the Patriarch, ought
not to have been deposed without his Consent v. Nic. 1. 8. Mich. Imp. Tom. 6.
Con. p. 506.

Did not Sixtus the third depose Policronius Jerusalem?

No. He only sent eight Persons from a Synod Sol.
at Rome to Jerusalem; who offered not, by the Popes Authority, to depose him,
as should have have been proved: but by their means seventy Neighbor Bishops,
were Called; by whom, he was deposed: besides Binius himself, T^m. 2. Con. p.
685.
Condemns those very acts, that report this story, for Spurious.

3. But have we any better proof of the Restoring Patriarchs.
Popes power, to restore such as were deposed?

The only Instance in this Case, brought by T. C. is of Athanasius and Paulus,
restored by Julius, and indeed to little purpose.

It Is true, Athanasius Cndemned by two Synods, goes to Rome, where he and
Paulus, are received into Communion by Julius; not liking the decree of the
Eastern Bishops. Julius never pleads, his Power to depose Patriarchs; but that
his consent for the sake of Unity, should also have been first desired; and
that so great a Matter in the Church, required a Council both of the Eastern
and Western Bishops. Vid. P. de Marca l. 7. c. 4. s. 6.

But, says Dr. Still. when we consider, with what heat and stomach this was
received by the P. 401. Q. ac.
Eastern Bishops; how they absolutely deny, that the Western Bishops had any
more to do with their proceedings, than they had with theirs: When they say,
that the Pope by this Usurpation, was the cause of all the mischief that
followed: You see what an excellent instance you have made choice of, to prove
the Popes power of Restoring Bishops, to be acknowledged by the whole Church.

Sure, so far the Churches practice abroad, could not prevail to settle his
right of Jurisdion in the English Faith; especially, considering the Practice
of our own Church, in opposing the Letters and Legates of Popes for six years
together, for the Restoring of Archbishop Wilfred by two of our own successive
Kings; and the whole State of England Ecclesiastical and Civil, as appeared
above.

Moreover St. Cyprian professes in the Council of Carthage, neque enim
quisquam, etc. for no one of us has made himself Bishop of Bishops: or driven
his Fellow Bishops to a necessity of Obedience: Particularly relating to
Stephen then Bishop An. 258. n. 24.
of Rome; as Baronius himself resolves.

But upon a matter of Fact, St. August. gave his St. August.
own judgment, both of the Popes Power and Action in that known case of the
Donatists. First, they had leave to be heard by foreign Bishops. 2. Forti non
debuit, yet perhaps Melciades, the Bishop of the Roman Church, ought not to
ufurp to himself this Judgment which had been determined by seventy African
Bishops, Tigisitanus sitting Primate. 3. St. Augustine proceeds, and what will
you say, if he did not usurp this Power? For the Emperor (being desired) sent
Bishops, Judges; which should sit with him, and determine what was just upon
the whole cause: So that upon the whole, it is easily observed, that in St.
Augustines judgment, both the Right and the Power, by which the Pope (as the
rest) proceeded; was to be resolved to the Emperor, as a little before, ad
cujus curam; to whose care it did chiefly belong; de qua, rationem Deo
redditurus est, of which he was to give account to God. Could this consist with
the belief of the Popes universal Pastorship by Divine Right? if there can
possibly, after so clear evidence need Vid. Dr. Ham. disp. p. 398. etc. and
Still. Rationale. p. 405.
more to be said of St. Augustines judgment in this; it is only to refer you to
the Controversies between the African Bishops, and the Bishop of Rome in case
of Appeals.

SECT. VII.
Not the Sayings of Ancient Popes, or Practice. Agatho, Pelagius, Gregory,
Victor.
WE can find nothing in the ancient Canons, or ancient practice, to ground
Popes claimed.
a belief of the Popes Authority in England upon, yet sure Popes themselves
claimed it; and used Expressions to let us know it.

Were it so indeed, experience tells us how little Popes are to be believed in
their own cause; and all reason persuades us not to believe them, against the
Councils and Practice of the Church, and the judgment of the Fathers.

But some of the ancient Popes have been found so honest, as to confess against
themselves; and acknowledge plain truth against their own greatness.

The Popes universal headship, is not to be believed from the words of Pope
Agatho, in his Agatho.
Letter to the Emperor; where St. Paul stands as high as St. Peter, (...), Con.
To. 2. p. 61. B.
both are said by him to be heads or chief of the Apostles: Besides he expressly
claimed only the Western Patriarchate.

But Pope Pelagius the Second, is more plain Pelagius.
and home, to Rome it self. Nec etiam Romanus Pontifex universalis est
appellandus, the Pope of Decret. p. 1. dis. 99. n. 10.
Rome is not to be called universal Bishop: This was the opinion of that Pope
of Rome himself, as it is cited out of his Epistle, and put into the Body of
the Law by Gratian: now, one would think, that the same Law denied the Power,
that denied the Title properly expressing that Power.

How triflingly does S. W. object: these words are not found in the Council of
Carthage, while they are found in the Corpus Juris; the Law, now of as much
force at Rome as that Council.

It Is weaker to say, they are Gratians own Addition, seeing his Addition is now
Law; and also proved to be the Sense of the Pope Pelagius: in his Epistle, he
says, let none of the Patriarchs ever use the name of Universal, applying in
the conclusion to himself, being then Pope, as one of that Number; and so, if
he were either Pontifex Maximus, or a Patriarch, and neither himself nor any
Patriarck might be Dr. Ham. disp. disp. p. 418, 419.
called Vniversalis; then sure nothing was added by him, that said in his Title
to the fourth Chapter as Gratian did; Nec etiam Pontifex, not even the Bishop
of Rome must be called Universal Bishop.

But what shall be said to Saint Gregory: who, Gregory.
in his Epistle to Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria, tells him, that he had
prohibited him to call him Universal Father; that he was not to do Epis. ex
Reg. l. 8. indic. 1. c. 30. etc. 4. ind. 13. c. 72 and 76.
it; that, reason required the contrary; that, it is derogatory to his Brethren;
that this honor had, by a Council, that of Calcedon, been offered to his
Predecessors, but refused, and never used by any.

Again, higher, he tells Mauritius, fidenter dico, who ever calls himself
Universal Priest, or L. 7. Ep. 30.
desires to be so called; is by his pride, a Forerunner of Antichrist; his
pride is an Indication of Antichrist approaching: as he says to the Lib. 4.
Ep. 38.
Empress, l. 4. Ep. 34. Yea, an Imitation of none but the Devil; endeavoring
to break out to the top of Singularity; as he says, to John himself: yea,
elsewhere, he calls this Title, the name of Blasphemy; and says, that, those
that Ibid. Ep 32 and 40.
consent to it do, fidem perdere, destroy the Faith.

A strong Title, that neither Saint Gregory, nor, as he says, any one of his
Predecessors; no Pope, that went before him, would ever accept of: and herein,
says he, I plead not my own Ibid. Ep. 32.
cause, but the cause of God, of the whole Church, of the Laws, the Venerable
Councils, the Commands of Christ; which are all disturbed with the invention of
this proud pompatick style of Universal Bishop.

Now, can any one imagine, except one prejudiced, as S. W. that the Power is
harmless, when the Title that does barely express it, is so develish a thing?
Can any one imagine, that Saint Gregory knew himself to be that indeed, which
in Word he so much abominates? or that he really exercised that Universal
Authority, and Universal Bishopric; though, he so prodigiously lets fly
against the Style of Universal Bishop? yet all this is said, and must be
maintained, lest we should exclude the Universal Pastorship out of the
Primitive Church.

There is a great deal of pitiful stuff used by the Romanist, upon this
Argument; with which I shall not trouble the Reader, yet nothing shall be
omitted that has any show of Argument on their Side: among which the words of
Saint Gregory following in his Argument, are most material.

Saint Gregory says, the care of the whole chief of the Apostles, Saint Peter;
and yet he is not called the Universal Bishop.

It Is confessed that Saint Gregory does say Sol.
that the care of the whole is committed to Saint Peter: again, that he was the
Prince of the Apostles; and yet he was not called Universal Apostle: it is hence
plain, that his being Prince of the Apostles, did not carry in it so much as
Universal Bishop: otherwise, Saint Gregory would not have given the one, and
denied him the other; and it is as plain, that he had the care of all Churches,
and so had Saint Paul; but it is not plain, that he had Power over all Churches.

Doctor Hammond proceeds irrisistibly to prove the contrary from Saint Gregory
himself in the Novels: if any Complaint be made, says he, against a Bishop,
the Cause shall be judged before the Metropolitan, Secundum Regulas Ex Reg.
lib. 11. Ep. 54.
Sanctas and Nostras Leges; if the Party stand not to his Judgment, the Cause
is to be brought to the Archbishop or Patriarch of that Diocese; and he shall
give it a Conclusion, according to the Canons and Laws aforesaid; no place left
for Appeal to Rome.

Yet it must be acknowledged, Saint Gregory si dictum fuerit etc. where there
is no Metropolitan nor Patriarch, the Cause may be heard by the Apostolic
See, which Gregory calls the Head of all Churches.

Now, if this be allowed, what has the Pope Sol.
gained, if perhaps such a Church should be found, as has neither Primate nor
Patriarch? how is he the nearer to the Universal Authority over those Churches
that have Primates of their own; or which way will he by this means extend his
Jurisdiction to us in England, who have ever had more than one Metropolitan?
the Archbishop of Canterbury was once acknowledged by a Pope to be Alterius
Orbis Apostolicus and Patriarch.

But admitting this extraordinary Case; that where there is neither
Metropolitan nor Patriarch there, they are to have recourse to the Sea
Apostolic: it is a greater wonder that the Romanist should insist upon it, then
that his late ( Grace) should mention it; at which A. C. so much admires: for
this one observation with the assistance of that known Rule in Law ( exceptio
confirmat Regulam in non exceptis) puts a plain and speedy end to the whole
Controversy: for if recourse may be had to Rome, from no other place, but
where there is neither Primate nor Patriarch; then not from England, either
when Saint Gregory laid down the Rule, or ever since, and perhaps then from no
other place in the World; and indeed provision was thus made against any such
extraordinary Case that might possibly happen; for it is but reason* that,
where there is no Primate to appeal to, appeal should be received somewhere
else; and where better, than at Rome, which Saint Gregory calls Caput omnium
Ecclesiarum? and this is the utmost advantage, the Romanist can hope to receive
from the Words.

But we see Saint Gregory calls Rome the Head of all Churches.

It Is true, whether he intends a Primacy, of Sol.
Fame or visible Splendour and Dignity, being the Seat of the Emperor, or Order
and Unity, is not certain? but it is certain, he intends nothing less by it,
than, that which just now he denied; a Supremacy of Power and Universal
ordinary Jurisdiction; he having, in the words immediately foregoing,
concluded all ordinary Jurisdiction within every proper Primacy or Patriarchate.

But says S. W. Saint Gregory practiced the thing, though he denied the Word
of Universal.

What Hypocrisy! damn the Title as he Sol.
does, and yet practice the thing! you must have good proof.

His first Instance, is of the Primate of Byzacene; wherein the Emperor first
put forth his Authority, and would have him judged by Gregory: Piissimus
Imperator eum per nos voluit Vid. Ep. 65. l. 7.
judicari, says Gregory: Hence, as Doctor Hammond smartly and soundly
observes, that Appeals from a Primate, lie to none but the Supreme Magistrate.

To which purpose, in the Case of Maximus Bishop of Solana, decreed
excommunicate, Ep. l. 3. Ep. 20.
by Gregory; his Sentence was still with this reserve and submission, nisi
prius: unless I should first understand by my most Serene Lords (the Emperors)
that they commanded it to be done.

Thus, if this perfect instance (as S. W. calls it) have any force in it; his
Cause is gone, what ever advantage he pretends to gain by it.

Besides, the Emperors Command was, that Gregory should judge him, juxta
Statuta Canonica; and Gregory himself pleads, quicquid esset Canonicum
Judicaremus.

Thus S. W's. Cause is killed twice by his own perfect instance: for if Saint
Gregory took the Judgment upon him in obedience to the Emperor; and did
proceed, and was to proceed in judging, according to the Canons; where was then
the Universal Monarchy?

Yet, it is confessed by Dr. Hammond, which is a full answer to all the other,
(not so perfect instances) that in case of injury done to any by a Primate or
Patriarch, (there being no lawful Superior, who had power over him) the injured
person sometimes, made his complaint to the Pope, as being the most Eminent
Person in the Church; and in such case, he questionless might and ought, in all
fraternal Charity, admonish the Primate or Patriarch, or disclaim Communion
with him, unless he reform.

But it ought to be shown that Gregory did formally excommunicate any such
Primate or Patriarch; or juridically and authoritively act, in any such Cause,
without the express license of the Emperor, which not being done, his instances
are answered: besides, Saint Gregory always pleads the Ancient Canons; which is
far from any claim of Universal Pastorship by Divine Right, or Donation of
Christ to Saint Peter. I appeal (says Doctor Hammond) to S. W. whether that
were the Interpretation of secundum Canones; and yet, he knows, that no other
Tenure but that, will stand him in stead.

Indeed, the unhappiness is, as the Doctor Vid. dispat. disp. p. 408. to p 423.
observes, that such Acts at first, but necessary fraternal charity were by
ambitious, men drawn into example, and means of assuming power of Universal
Pastorship; which yet cannot be more vehemently prejudiced by any thing, than
by those Ancient examples, which being rightly considered, pretend no higher
than Ecclesiastical Canons, and the Universal Laws of Charity; but never made
claim to any Supremacy of power over all Bishops, by Divine Institution.

It yet appears not that Saint Gregory practiced, the thing, but to avoid
Arrogance disclaims the name of Universal Bishop.

A. C. against my Lord of Canterbury, goes another way to work: he grants the
Title, and also the thing signified by it, to be both renounced by Saint
Gregory; but distinguishes of the Term Universal Bishop, into Grammatical, to
the exclusion of all other Bishops, from being properly Bishops; and
Metaphorical, whereby the Bishops are secured, as such, in their respective
Diocesses; yet all of them under the Jurisdiction of the Universal Bishop, viz.
of Rome.

This distinction, Doctor Stillingfleet destroys, Sol.
not more elaborately than fully and perfectly: showing, that, 1. it is
impossible Saint Gregory should understand the Term of Universal Bishop Lib. 4.
Ep. 32.
in that strict Grammatical Sense: for the reason, why this Title was refused,
was because it seemed to diminish the honor of other Bishops, when it was
offered the Bishops of Rome in a Council of six hundred and thirty Bishops; who
cannot be imagined to divest themselves, by their kindness, of their very
Office; though they hazarded somewhat of their honor. Can we think the
Council, that gave the same Title to John, intended thus to depose themselves?
how comes it to pass that none of John's or Ciriacus's Successors, did ever
challenge this Title, in that literal sense, if so it was understood.

But to wave many things impertinent; it is evident, Saint Gregory understood
the Title Metaphorically, from the reasons he gives against it; which also
equally serve to prove against S. W. that it was not so much the Title as the
Authority of an Universal Bishop, which he so much opposed.

He argues thus to John the Patriarch: What will thou answer to Christ the
Head of the Universal Lib. 4. Ep. 38.
Church in the day of Judgment, who do endeavor to subject all his Members
to thee, under the name of Universal Bishop?

Again, does he not arise to the height of Singularity, Ibid.
that he is Subject to none, but Rules over all? and can you have a more
perfect description of the present Pope, than is here given? or is it the Title
or the Power, that makes him. Subject to none, that Rules over all?

Again, he imitates the pride of Lucifer, endeavoring Ibid.
to be Head (not sure, in Title, but Power) of the Church Triumphant; as the
Pope of the Church Militant: Exalting his Throne, Ibid.
(not his Name) as Gregory adds, above the Stars of God, viz. the Bishops, and
the height of the Clouds.

Again, Saint Peter was the first Member of the Church: Paul, Andrew, and John,
what are they else but Heads of particular Churches; and yet they are all
Members of the Church under one Head, i. e. Christ; as before he had said: we
see he allows not Peter himself to be Head of the Church. None that was truly
Holy, was ever called by that name of Universal Bishop: which he makes to be
the same with the head of the Church.

But Lastly, suppose St. Gregory did mean, that this Title in its strict
grammatical sense, was to be abhorred, and not as Metaphorically taken, What
has the Pope gained? who at this day bears that Title in the highest and
strictest sense imaginable? as the Dr. proves; and indeed needs no proof, being
evident of it self, and to the observation of the whole world. Thus all the
hard words of St. Gregory uttered so long agon, against such as admitted or
desired that Title, unavoidably fall upon the Modern Roman Bishops, that take
upon them to be the sole Pastors of the Church; and say that they are
Ecumenical Bishops, and that all Jurisdiction is derived from them: They are
Lucifers and Princes of Pride; using a vain, new, rash, foolish, proud,
profane, erroneous, wicked, hypocritical, singular; presumptuous, blasphemous
Name; as that holy Pope inveighed against it. Moreover, as he also adds, they
transgress Gods Laws, violate the Canons, dishonor the Church, despise their
Brethren, and cause Schism. Istud nomen facere L. 6. ep. 30, 31. Obj.
in dissessionem Ecclesiae.

But it is said, that Pope Victor excommunicated the Asian Churches all at
once: Therefore, says A. C. the Pope had of right some Authority over the
Asian Bishops; and by confequence over the whole Church: And this appears in
that, Irenaus in the name of the Gallican Bishops, writes to Victor not to
proceed so rashly in this Action: as appears in Eusebius.

1. We answer, that those Bishops, among Sol.
whom Irenaeus was one, did severely rebuke that Pope for offering to
excommunicate those Asian Vid. Eus. l. 5. c. 24.
Churches: Therefore they did not believe him to be the Supreme, Infallible
Pastor of the whole Church.

2. His Letters declaring that Excommunication, Ibid.
not pleasing all his own Bishops, they countermanded him: Surely not thinking
him to be what Popes would now be esteemed.

3. Hence Card. Perron is angry with Eusebius, and calls him an Arrian; and an
enemy to the Church of Rome; for hinting, that though the Pope did declare them
excommunicate, yet it took no effect, because other Bishops continued still in
Communion with them.

4 But the force of the whole Argument leans upon a plain mistake, of the
Ancient Discipline, both in the Nature and the Root or Ground of it.

For the nature of Ancient Excommunication, Mistake of the nature. Root of
Discipline.
especially when practiced by one Church against another, did not imply a
Positive Act of Authority, but a Negative Act of Charity; or a declaring
against the Communion of such with themselves: And therefore was done by Equals
to Equals; and sometimes by Inferiors to Superiors. In Equals; thus Johannes
Antiochenus in the Ephesine Council, excommunicated Cyril, Patriarch Vict. Tu.
nu. cro. p. 10.
of Alexandria; and in Inferiors (in the sense of our Roman Adversaries) for
the African Bishops excommunicated Pope Vigilius: Hence, also, Acacius the
Patriarch of Constable. expunged the Name of Foelix Bishop of Rome; out of the
Dipticks of the Church: And Hilary anethamatized Pope Liberius, therefore
Victors declaring the Asian Churches to be excommunicate, is no argument of his
power over them.

2. The Root or Ground of the ancient Discipline, is also as plainly mistaken,
which was not Authority always, but Care and Charity. Care, I say, not only of
themselves who used it, but also of the Church that was censured, and indeed of
the whole Church.

It Is here proper to consider, that though Bishops had their peculiar Seats,
and Limits for their Jurisdictions; yet they had all a charitive inspection and
care of that universal Church, and sometimes denominations accordingly.

Hence we deny not that the ancient Bishops of Rome deservedly gained the Title
of Ecumenical Bishops, a thing of so great moment in the Controversy, that if
well considered, might advance very far toward the ending of it: For so the
Title has been given to others, as well as the Bishop of Rome; and therefore,
it could not argue any Authority peculiar to him. Also the same universalcare
of the Church (the occasion of the Title) has been acknowledged in others as
well as in him; and indeed the power; which is the Root of that Care, as the
occasion of that Title, is founded in all Bishops.

Here are three things noted, which may be 3 Notes.
distinctly considered.

1. Power is given to all Bishops with an immediate respect to the good of the
whole Church* So that if it were possible, that every particular Bishop could
take care of the whole Church, they have Authority enough in their Function to
do it; though it be impossible, and indeed inconsistent with peace and order,
that all should undertake it: And therefore they have their bounds and limits
set them; hence their particular Diocesses: therefore, as St. Cyprian, there is
but one Bishopric in the whole World; a part of which is held by every Bishop.

2. Thus we find in the primitive Church, that every Bishop had his particular
Charge, yet they still regarded the common good; extending their care (the
second thing observed) sometimes beyond their own division, by their council
and direction; yea and exercised their functions sometimes in other places: Of
which Dr. Stillingfleet Rat. ac. p. 424, 425.
gives many instancesin Polycarp. Ignatius, Irenaeus, St. Cyprian, Faustus.

Yea upon this very ground, Nazianzen says Or. 18. p. 281.
of St. Cyprian, that he not only governed the Churches of Carthage, but all
the Western parts, and even almost all the Eastern, Southern, and Northern too,
as far as he went.

Arsenius speaks more home to Athanasius; Atha. ap. ad Imp. Constable p. 786, etc.
We embrace (says he) Peace and Unity with the Catholic Church, over which,
Thou, through the Grace of God, do preside. Whence Gregory Or. 21. p. 392.
Naz. says of Athanasius, that he made Laws for the whole Earth: And St. Basil
writes to him, Ep. 52.
that he had care of all the Churches as of his own; and calls him the Head and
Chief of all.

And St. Chrisostom in the praise of Eustathius, Tom. 5. p. 631. Savil.
the Patriarch of Antioch, says, that he was instructed by the divine Spirit;
that he was not only to have care of that Church over which he was set, but of
the whole Church throughout the world.

Now what is this but to say in effect, these great men were universal Bishops;
though indeed, they, none of them, had power of Jurisdiction over any Church
but their own; as, notwithstanding the general care of the ancient good Bishops
of Rome, had of the good of the whole, (and their Influence and Reverence in
order thereunto) the Bishops of Rome had not.

3. Upon the former ground and occasion, some Bishops in the most famous
Churches, had the honor of the Title of Ecumenical or Universal Bishops.

But here we must confess, the Bishops of Rome had the advantage, being the
most famous of all; both by reason of their own primitive merit, and the glory
of the Empire, especially the latter.

The Roman Empire was it self accounted universal; and the greatness of the
Empire advanced the Church to the same Title; and consequently the Bishops of
that Church, above others.

1. That the Roman Empire was so, appears R. ac. p. 425, 426.
by a multitude of Testimonies making orbis Romanus and orbis humanus,
Synonimous; collected by Dr. Still. Hence Am. Marcellinus. calls L. 14. c. 16.
Rome, Caput Mundi, the head of the World: And the Roman Senate, Asylum Mundi
totius: And it was usual then to call, whatever was o^ of the Roman Empire,
Barbaria; as the same Dr. Ibid.
proves at large: Therefore that Empire was called in Greek (...). Act. 11. 28.

2. Some Bishops in the great Churches in the Roman Empire, were called
Ecumenical, as that relates to the (...), viz. the Roman Empire. This appears
because the very ground of the advancement of the Patriarch of Constantinople,
was the greatness of the City; as appears in the Councils of Constantinople and
Calcedon about it; and the privileges of old Rome gave the measure of the
privileges of new Rome.

And in probability, the ground of that Patriarch's usurping the Title of
Ecumenical Patriarch, was but to correspond with the greatness P. 426.
of his City; which was then the Seat of the Empire, as Dr. Still. very
reasonably Conjectures.

Moreover, all the three Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch, and Constantinople,
had expressions given them tantamount to that Title: The government of the
whole World, the care of all R. ac. p. 426.
the Churches, the government as it were of the whole body of the Church: as
Dr. Stillingfleet particularly shows. But most clear and full to that purpose,
Theod. Haer. fab. l. 4. c. 14. p. 245. To. 4. oper.
as he observes, is the Testimony of Theodoret concerning Nestorius, being made
Patriarch of Constantinople: He was entrusted with the Government of the
Catholic Church of the Orthodox at Constantinople; and thereby, of the whole
World.

Where shall we find so illustrious a Testimony for the Bishop of Rome? or if
we could, we see it would prove nothing peculiar to him.

Therefore, if the Council of Calcedon did offer the Title of universal
Patriarch; or if they did not, but as the truth rather is, some Papers received
in that Council, did give him that Title, it signifies nothing to prove the
Popes universal Authority.

Therefore, Sim. Vigorius ingeniously confesses, Comento. ad Res. Syn. Conc.
Bas. p. 36.
that when the Western Fathers call the Roman Bishops, Bishops of the universal
Church, they do it from the custom of their Churches; not that they look on
them as universal Bishops of the whole Church; but in the same sense, that the
Patriarchs of Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, are called so; or
as they are universal over the Churches, under their own Patriarchate; or that
in Ecumenical Councils, they preside over the whole Church: and after
acknowledges, that the Title of universal or ecumenical Bishop, makes nothing
for the Popes Monarchy.

It is too evident, that that humble Pope Gregory seems to glorify himself,
while he so often mentions that offer of the Title of Universal; and his
refusing of it, and inveighing against it; and that these were Engines used by
him to deprive others of the same Title, if not to advance his own See to the
power signified by it; though if he did indeed design any such thing, it is an
argument that he was ashamed openly to claim or own it, while he rails against
the Title, in the effects of it, which depended upon the power it self, as such
an abominable thing.

However, if the Council of Calcedon did indeed offer, (or only record) that
Title to Gregory, it is more than manifest, it could not possibly be intended
to carry in it the Authority of the whole Church; or any more than that
qualified sense of Vigorius before mentioned; because other Patriarchs had the
same Title; and we see no reason to believe, that that Council intended to
subject themselves, and all Patriarchs to the Authority of the Western Pope;
contrary to their great design of advancing the Sea of Constantinople to equal
privileges with that of Rome, as appears by their 16 Sess. Can. 28. and their
Synodical Epistle to Pope Leo.

Thus the bare Title is no Argument; and by what has been said touching the
grandeur of the Roman Empire, and the answerable greatness and renown of the
Roman Church, frequent recourse had unto it from other Churches, for counsel
and assistance; is of no more force to conclude her Supremacy, nor any matter
of wonder at all.

Experience teaches us that it is and will be so in all cases: not only a
renowned Lawyer, Physician, but Divine, shall have great resort, and almost
universal addresses. An honest and prudent Countryman shall be upon all
Commissions: the Church of Rome was then famous both for Learning, Wisdom,
Truth, Piety, and I may add Tradition it self as well as greatness both, in the
eye of the world and all other Churches; and her Zeal and care for general
good, keeping peace and spreading the grace of the Gospel, was sometimes
admirable. And now no wonder that Applications in difficult cases were
frequently and generally made hither, which at first were received and answered
with Love and Charity, though soon after, the Ambition of Popes knew how to
advance, and hence to assume Authority.

From this, we see, it was no great venture, Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
how ever A. C. Term it, for Archbishop Laud to grapple with the Authority of
Irenaeus: who says, to this Church, meaning Rome, propter potentiorem
Principalitatem, for the more powerful Principality of it, it is necessary that
every Church, that is the faithful, undique, should have recourse, in qua
semper ab his qui sunt undique, conservata est^ea quae est ab Apostolis
traditio.

His Lordship seems to grant the whole: Rome being then the Imperial City; and
so a Church of more powerful Authority than any other* yet not the Head of the
Church Universal; this may suffice without the pleasant criticizing about
undique, with which, if you have a mind to be merry, you may entertain your
self in Dr. Still. p. 441. etc.

But, indeed A. C. is guilty of many Mistakes in reasoning, as well as
criticizing: he takes it for granted, that this Principality is attributed by
Irenaeus here to Rome, as the Church, not as the City. 2. That the necessity,
arising hence, was concerning the Faith, and not secular Affairs; neither of
which, is certain, or in likelihood true, vid. Dr. Still. p. 444.

Besides, if both were granted, the necessity is not such as supposes Duty or
Authority in the faithful, or in Rome; but as the sense makes evident, a
necessity of expedience, Rome being most likely to give satisfaction touching
that Tradition about which that dispute was.

Lastly, the Principality here implies not proper Authority, or Power to decide
the Controversy; one kind of Authority it does imply, but not such as A. C.
enquired for: not the Authority of a Governor, but of a Conservator; of a
Conservator of that Truth, that being made known by her, might reasonably end
the quarrel; not of an absolute Governor, that might command the Faith, or the
Agreement of the Dissenters. This is evident: 1. Because the Dispute was about
a matter of Fact, whether there was any such Tradition or not, as the
Valentinians pretended. 2. Because Irenaeus refers them to Rome under this
reason, conservata est, the Apostolical Traditions are kept there; being
brought by the faithful undique thither: and therefore, brought thither,
because of the more Principality of the City, all persons resorted thither.

Lastly, It is acknowledged that Pope Gregory Ephesians. 65. ind. 2.
does say; that, if there be any fault in Bishops, it is subject to the
Apostolical See; but when their fault does not exact it, that then, upon the
account of Humility, all were his Equals.

Indeed, this smells of his ambition and design Sol.
before spoken of; but if there be any truth in it, it must agree with the
Canon Saint Gregory himself records; and suppose the faulty Bishop has no
proper Primate or Patriarch to judge him: also, with the proceeding then before
him; and suppose Complaint to the Emperor; and the Emperor's subjecting the
Cause to the Apostolical See; as that Cause was by Saint Gregory's own
Confession.

However, what he seems here to assume to his own See, he blows away with the
same breath; denying any ordinary Jurisdiction and Authority to be in that See,
over all Bishops, while he supposes a fault necessary to their subjection; and
that, while there is no fault, all are equal: which is not true, where, by a
lawful standing ordinary Government there is an eternal necessity of
Superiority and Inferiority.

But of this, I had spoken before, had I thought (as I yet do not) that there
is any weight or consequence in the words.

Further Evidence, that the Ancient Popes themselves, though they might thirst
after it; did not believe, that they were Universal Bishops and Monarks over
the whole Church; and that they did not pretend to it in any such manner, as to
make the World believe it; I say, further evidence of this, arises from their
acknowledged subjection to the Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastical Affairs.

Pope Leo begged the Emperor Theodosius with tears; that he, (...), that he
would Command (not permit) a Council to be held in Italy: that sure was not to
signify his Authoritative desires.

That Instance of Pope Agatho, in his Epistle to the Emperor, is as pertinent
as the former; (...), etc. with praise we admire your Conc. Tom. 5. p. 60. E. F.
purpose well pleasing to God (not to the Pope) and for these Commands of yours
we are rejoiced, and with groans, give thanks to God; and many such, Doctor
Hammond says, might be afforded.

Pope Gregory received the power of hearing and determining Causes several
times, as he himself confesses, from the Emperor; as we showed before.

Hence Pope Eleutherius, to King Lucius: you are the Vicar of Christ: the same
in effect which is contained in the Laws of Edward the Confessor.

And Pope Urban the Second, entertained our Archbishop Anselm in the Council
of Bar, with the Title of the Pope of another World, or (as some relate it) the
Apostle of another World, and a Patriarch worthy to be reverenced. Malm. pro.
ad lib. de gest. pont. Angl.

Now, when the Bishops of Rome did acknowledge that the Civil Magistrate had
power to command the assembling of general Councils, and to command Popes
themselves to hear and determine Ecclesiastical Causes: when they acknowledged
the King of England to be the Vicar of Christ; and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Pope of another World: we may, I think, safely conclude, that
whatever they thought of the Primacy of dignity, they did not believe
themselves; or, give occasion to others, to believe; that they had then, the
Jurisdiction of England; much less of the whole World.

Indeed, the Powers of Emperors over Popes, Vid. King James's defense, p. 50.
was exercised severely; and continued long in practice, an. 654. Constantius
bound and banished Pope Martin. an. 963. Otho rejected Pope John 13. and made
Leo 8. Pope. and John 14. Gregory 5. and Sylvester 2. were made Popes by the
Otho's an. 1007. Hen. 2. deposed three Popes: this practice is confessed till
Gregory 7. and before An. 679. Popes submitted to Emperors by purchasing their
Investitures of them; by submissive terms, and bowing the knee before them,
Platin. Baron. Segeb.

SECT. VIII.
Nor the Words of the Imperial Law.
IF the Ancient Councils, or practice, or Popes themselves, offered nothing to
persuade our Ancestors to a belief of the Pope's Universal Power or Possession
of England; Certainly, we may despair of finding any such thing in the Ancient
Laws of the Church; which are justly presumed to contain the Sense and Rule of
all: were all other Records of Antiquity silent, says our late Primate, the
Civil Law is proof enough: for, that is a Monument of the Primitive Church: and
not only so; it being the Imperial, as well as Canon Law, it gives us the
reason and Law both of the Church and the whole World.

Now, what says the Law? it first forbids the Title, and then the Practice.

Primae sedis Apostolus, the Patriarch or Bishop Cor. Jur. Can. de pa. 1. did.
99. c. 3. Can. 4.
of the first See, is not to be called Prince of the Priests, or Supreme
Priest; nor, as the African Canon adds, aliquid hujusmodi, any other thing of
that kind.

The practice of any such Power was expressly forbidden; and not the proud Title
only: the very Text of the Law says, a Patriarcha non datur Appellatio: from a
Patriarch there lies no Appeal, Cod. lib. 1. Tit. 4. l. 29. Auth. Collat. 9.
Tit. 15. c. 22.

And this we have found agreeable to the Melivetane Council, where Saint
Augustine was Can. 23.
present, forbidding under pain of Excommunication, any Appeal to any Foreign
Councils or Judicatures: and this is again Consonant to the fifth Canon of
Nice; as that was to the thirty fourth Apostolic, where the Primate in every
Nation is to be accounted their Head.

Now what do our Adversaries say to this? Indeed, they seem to be put to it;
and though their Wits are very pregnant to deliver many Answers, such as they
be, in most Cases, they all seem to join in one poor slight Evasion here;
namely, that the Laws concerning Appeals, did only concern inferior
Clergymen: but Bishops were allowed to appeal to Rome; even by the African
Canon, and acknowledged in that Councils Epistle to Pope Boniface.

Three bold Sayings: first, that the Law concerned not the Appeals of Bishops.
2. The Council of Africa decreed Bishops Appeals to Rome. 3. And acknowledged
it in their Letter to Pope Boniface: but are these things, as truly, as boldly
said? for the first which is their Comment, whereby they would restrain the
sense of the Laws, to the exclusion of the Bishops, we shall consider their
ground for it; and then propose our reason, and the Law expressly against it,
and then their Reasons will need little answer.

They say, the Law reaches not the difference Patriarchs themselves.

But if there should happen a difference betwixt Sol.
a Patriarch and the Pope, who shall decide that? both these inconveniences are
plainly solved by referring all such extraordinary difficulties to a General
Council.

But why should the Law allow Foreign Appeals to Bishops and not to Priests?
Are all Bishops Patriarchs? is not a Patriarch over his Bishops, as well as a
Bishop over his Priests? may not the Gravamen of a Priest be given by his
Bishop? or the difference among Priests, be as Caelestus necessity of Grace.
Milev. Con.
considerable to the Church, sometimes as among Bishops? or has not the
universal Pastor if the Pope be so, power over and care of Priests, as well as
Bishops? or can the Summum imperium receive limits from Canon or Law? to say,
that Priests are forbidden to appeal, but the Pope is not forbidden to receive
their Appeals, is plainly to cripple the Law, and to make it yield to all the
inconveniences of foreign appeals against its true end.

But what if this very Canon, they pretend to allow Appeals from Bishops to
Rome, do expressly forbid that very thing it is brought to allow? Can. 28.
and it does so undeniably, as appears in the Authentic Collection of the
African Canons, non provocent ad transmarina Judicia, sed ad primates suarum
Provinciarum, aut ad universale Concilium, sicut de Episcopis saepe constitutum
est. The same thing had often been determined in the case of Bishops.

Perron, and others say, this clause was not ancient Milevetan Canons.

Have they nothing else but this groundless Sol.
conceit to support their universal Pastorship against express Law, for four
hundred years after Christ? Sure it behoved highly to produce a true Authentic
Copy of those Canons, wherein that clause is omitted; which because they do
not, we conclude they cannot.

However it is manifest, that the same thing against appeals of Bishops to
Rome, had been often determined, by far greater Testimony than the bare
assertion of Perron and his Partners, viz. that general Council of Carthage,
An. D. 419. about three years after that Milevetan; at the end of the first
Session, they reviewed the Canons of the seventeen lesser Councils, which
Justellus mentions; and wherein, no doubt, that point had been often
determined; and out of them all composed that C^dex canonum Ecclesia Africanae,
with that clause inserted, as appears both in the Greek and many ancient latin
Copies; and was so received and pleaded by the Council of Rhemes, as
Hincumarmus proves as well as others.

Gratius confesses it; but adds this Antidote; Nisi forte Romanam Sedem
appellaverit. i. e. None shall appeal to Rome (the main design of the Council)
except they do appeal to Rome; not expounding the Canon, but exposing himself
and that excellent Council.

But A. C. urges the Epistle of that Council to Boniface, as was before noted;
and thence proves that the Council acknowledged, that Bishops had power in
their own cause to appeal to Rome.

It Is true, they do say, that in a Letter written Sol.
a year before to Zosimus, they had granted liberty to Bishops to appeal to
Rome. This is true, but scarce honest; the next words in the Letter spoil the
Argument and the sport too: for they further say, that because the Pope
contended that the appeals of Bishops were contained in the Nicene Canons, they
were contented to yield that it should be so, till the true Canons were
produced.

Now what can the Reader desire, to put an eternal end to this Controversy,
and consequently to the claim of the universal Pastor in this Age; but an
account of the Judgment of this Council, when they had received the Copy of the
Nicene Canons (on which the point depended) out of the East.

This you have in that excellent Epistle of theirs to Pope Celastine, who
succeeded Boniface, and the elaborate Dr. Stillingfleet, who searches R. ac.
p. 410, 411.
all things to the bottom, has transcribed it at large, as a worthy Monument
of Antiquity; and of very great light in the present Controversy: To him I
shall refer the Reader for the whole; and only note some few expressions to the
purpose.

We (say they) humbly beseech you to admit no more into your Communion those
whom we have cast out: For your Reverence will easily perceive that this is
forbid in the Council of Nice. For if this be taken care for, as to the
inferior Clergy and Laity, how much more would it have it to be observed in
Bishops. The Decrees of Nice have subjected both the inferior Clergy and
Bishops to their Metropolitans, for they have most wisely and justly provided,
that every business be determined in the place where it begun. Especially
seeing that it is lawful to every one if he be offended, to appeal to the
Council of the Province, or even to an universal Council. Or how can a Judgment
made beyond the Sea be valid, to which the Persons of necessary Witnesses
cannot be brought by reason, etc. For this sending of men to us from your
Holiness, we do not find it commanded by any Synod of the Fathers. And as for
that Council of Nice, we cannot find it in the truest Copies, sent by holy
Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, and the venerable Atticus Bishop of Constantinople;
which also we sent to your Predecessor Boniface. Take heed also of sending any
of your Clerks for Executors, to those who desire it; lest we seem to bring the
swelling pride of the World into the Church of Christ; and concerning our
brother Faustinus (Apiarius being cast out) we are confident that our brotherly
Love continuing, Africa shall no more be troubled with him.

This is the sum of that famous Epistle, the Pope and the African Fathers
referred the point in difference to the true Canons of the Nicene Council: The
Canons determine against the Pope, and from the whole story it is inferred
evidently.

1. That Pope Boniface himself implies, his Jurisdiction was limited by the
general Council of Nice, and that all the Laity and Clergy too, except Bishops,
that lived beyond the Seas, and consequently in England, were exempted from his
Jurisdiction by that Council.

2. Pope Boniface even then, when he made his claim and stood upon his terms
with the African Fathers, pleads nothing for the appeals of transmarine Bishops
to Rome, but the allowance of the Council of Nice, no tu es Petrus then heard
of.

3. Then it seems the practices of Popes themselves were to be ruled and judged
by the ancient Canons and Laws of the Church.

4. The African Fathers declared the Pope fallible and actually mistaken, both
to his own power and sense of the Council: Proving substantially that neither
Authority from Councils, nor any foundation in Justice, Equity or order of
Government or public Convenience, will allow or suffer such Appeals to Rome;
and that the Pope had no authority to send Legates to hear causes in such cases.

All these things lie so obviously in prejudice both of the Popes Possession
and Title, as universal Pastor at that time, both in his own and the Churches
sense, that to apply them further would be to insult; which I shall forbear,
seeing Baronius is so ingenious as to confess, there are some hard things in
this Epistle: And Perron has hereupon exposed his Wit with so much sweat and
so little purpose, but his own Correction and Reproach, as Dr. Still. notes.

Yet we may modestly conclude from this one plain instance; that the sense of
the Nicene Council was defined by the African Council, to be against the Popes
Supremacy, and consequently they did not submit to it nor believe it; and a
further consequence to our purpose is, that then the Catholic Church did not
universally own it: i. e. the Popes Supremacy then had not Possession of the
faith of the whole Church: For as A. C. p. 191. maintains, the Africans,
notwithstanding the contest in the sixth Council of Carthage, were always in
true Communion with the Roman Church, even during the term of this pretended
Separation: And Caelestine himself says, that St. Augustine one of those
Fathers, lived and dyed in the Communion of the Roman Church.

SECT. IX.
The Conclusion touching Possession Anciently.
WE hope it is now apparent enough, that the Popes Supremacy had no possesion
in England from the beginning, or for the first six hundred years; either de
facto or in fide. Our Ancestors yielded not to it; they unanimously resisted
it, and they had no reason to believe it, either from the Councils or practice
of the Church; or from the Edicts and Rules of the imperial Law, or the very
sayings of the Popes themselves.

Thus Sampson's Hair, the strength and Pomp of their best Plea, is cut off: The
foundation of the Popes Supremacy is subverted, and all other pleas broken with
it.

If according to the Apostles Canons, every Nation had its proper Head in the
beginning, to be ackonwledged by them under God: And according to a general
Council, all such Heads should hold as from the beginning; there can be no
ground afterward, for a lawful possession to the contrary.

If tu es Petrus, and pasce Oves, have any force to maintain the Popes
Supremacy, why did not the ancient Fathers, the Authors of those Canons, see
it? Why was not it shown by the Popes concerned, in bar against them when
nothing else could be pleaded? When both Possession and Tradition were to be
begun, and had not yet laid their Foundation? Yea when actual opposition in
England was made against it: when general Councils abroad, laid restraints upon
it; and the Eastern Church would not acknowledge it.

Indeed both Antiquity, Universality, and Tradition it self, and all color of
Right for ever, fails with possession.

For Possession of Supremacy, afterward, cannot possibly have either a divine
or just T^^; but must lay its Foundation, contrary to Gods Institution and
Ecclesiastical Canon. And the Possessor is a Thief and a Robber, our
Adversaries being Judges. He invades others Provinces; and is bound to Restore:
And long Possession, is but a protracted Rebellion against God and his Church.

However it be with the secular Powers, Christ's Vicar, must certainly derive
from him; must hold the power he gave; must come in it at his door. And S. W.
himself, P. 50 against Dr. Hammond, fiercely affirms, That Possession in this
kind ought to begin ne^ Christ's Time; and he that has begun it later, unless
he can Evidence that he was driven out from an Ancient Possession, is not to be
styled a Possessor but an Usurper, an Intruder, an Invader, Disobedient,
Rebellious, and Schismatical. Good Night, S. W.

Quod ab initio fuit invalidum, tractu temporis non Convalescit, is a Rule in
the Civil Law.

Yea, whatever Possession the Pope got afterward, was not only an illegal
Usurpation, but a manifest Violation of the Canon of Ephesus; and thereby
Condemned as Schismatical.

CHAP. VII.
The Pope had not full Possession here, before Hen. 8. 1. Not in Augustine's
Time. II. Nor After.
It Is boldly pleaded; that the Pope had Possession of the Supremacy in England
for nine hundred years together, from Augustine till Hen. 8. (...) no King on
Earth has so long, and so clear prescription for his Crown.

To which we answer: 1. That he had not such Possession. 2. If he had, it is no
Argument of a just Title.

SECT. I.
Not in Austin's Time. State of Supremacy questioned.
WE shall consider the Popes Supremacy here, as it stood in and near St.
Augustine's time, and in the Ages after him to Hen. 8.

1. We have not found hitherto, that in or about the time of Augustine,
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Pope had any such power in England as is
pretended.

Indeed, he came from Rome; but he brought no Mandate with him; and when he was
come, he did nothing without the King's license: at his arrival, he petitions
(...) King; the King commands him to stay in the Isle Thanet, till his further
pleasure was known: he obeyed; afterward, the King gave him license to preach
to Bed. l. 1. c. 25.
his Subjects; and, when he was himself converted, majorem praedicandi
licentiam, he enlarged his license so to do.

It Is true, Saint Gregory presumed largly, to subject all the Priests of
Britain under Augustine; and to give him power to erect two Arch-Bishopricks,
and twelve Bishoprics under each of them; but it is one thing to claim, another
thing to possess: for Ethelbert was then the only Christian King, who had not
the twentieth part of Britain; and it appears, that after both Saint Gregory
and Austine were dead, there were but one Arch*bishop, and two Bishops,
throughout the British Islands, of the Roman Communion.

Indeed, the British and Scotch Bishops were Bed. l. 2. c. 2 etc. 4.
many, but they renounced all Communion with Rome, as appeared before.

We thankfully acknowledge the Pope's sending over Preachers; his commending,
sometimes Archbishops when desired, to us; his directions to fill up vacant
Sees: all which, and such like, were Acts of Charity, becoming so eminent a
Prelate in the Catholic Church: but sure these were not Marks of Supremacy.

It Is possible, Saint Milet, as is urged, might bring the Decrees of the Roman
Synod hither to be observed; and that they were worthy of our acceptance, and
were accepted accordingly; but it is certain, and will afterward appear to be
so, that such Decrees were never of force here, further that they were allowed
by the King and Kingdom.

It Is not denied, but that sometimes we admitted the Pope's Legates, and Bulls
too; yet the Legantine Courts were not Anciently heard of; neither were the
Legates themselves, or those Bulls, of any Authority without the King's Consent.

Some would argue from the great and flattering Titles that were anciently
given to the Pope; but sure such Titles can never signify Possession or Power,
which at the same time, and perhaps by the very same Persons that gave the
Titles, was really and indeed denied him.

But the great Service the Bishop of Calcedo^ has done his Cause by these
little Instances before mentioned, will best appear, by a true state Vid.
Bramh. p. 189. etc.
of the question touching the Supremacy betwixt the Pope and the King of
England; in which, such things are not all concerned.

The plain question is, who was then the Political Head of the Church of
England? the King or the Pope? or more immediately, whether the Pope then had
possession of the Supremacy here in such things, as was denied him by Hen. 8.
at the beginning of our Reformation? and the Pope still challenges? and they
are such as these.

1. A Legislative Power in Ecclesiastical Causes.

2. A Dispensative Power, above and against the Laws of the Church.

3. A liberty to send Legates, and to hold Legantine Courts in England, without
License.

4. The Right of receiving the last Appeals of the King's Subjects.

5. The Patronage of the English Church, and Investitures of Bishops; with
power to impose Oaths upon them, contrary to their Oath of Allegiance.

6. The First Fruits and Tenths of Ecclesiastical Livings; and a power to
impose upon them what Pensions, or other Burdens, he pleases.

7. The Goods of Clergymen, dying Intestate.

These are the Flowers of that Supremacy which the Pope claims in England,
and our Kings, and Laws, and Customs deny him; as will appear afterward in due
place: for this place, it is enough to observe, that we find no footsteps of
such possession of the Pope's Power in England, in or about Augustine's time.

As for that one instance of Saint Wilfred's Appeals, it has appeared before;
that it being rejected by two Kings successively, by the other Archbishop, and
by the whole Body of the English Clergy, sure, it is no full instance of the
Pope's Possession of the Supremacy here at that time; and needs no further
answer.

SECT. II.
No clear or full possession in the Ages after Austine, till Hen. 8. Eight
Distinctions; the Question stated.
IT may be thought that though the things mentioned were not in the Pope's
possession so early; yet, for many Ages together they were found in his
Possession, and so continued, without interruption, till Hen. 8. ejected the
Pope, and possessed himself and his Successors, of them.

Whether it were so or not, we are now to examine; and least we should be
deceived with Colors and generalities, we must distinguish carefully.

1. Betwixt a Primacy of Order and Dignity and Unity; and Supremacy of Power,
the only thing disputed.

2. Betwixt a Judgment of direction resulting from the said Primacy; and a
Judgment of Jurisdiction depending upon Supremacy.

3. Betwixt things claimed; and things granted and possessed.

4. Betwixt things possessed continually; or for some time only.

5. Betwixt Possession partial, and of some lesser Branches; and plenary or of
the main body of Jurisdiction.

6. Betwixt things permitted of courtesy; and things granted out of duty.

7. Betwixt incroachment through craft, or power or interest, or the temporary
Ossitancy of the People; and Power, grounded in the Laws, enjoyed with the
consent of the States of the Kingdom in times of peace.

8. Lastly, betwixt quiet possession; and interrupted.

These Distinctions, may receive a flout from some capricious Adversary; but, I
find, there is need of them all, if we deal with a subtle one.

For the Question is not, touching Primacy in the Bishop of Rome; or an
acknowledged Judgment of direction flowing from it; or a claim of Jurisdiction,
which is no Possession; or a partial possession of power in some lesser things;
or a larger power in greater matters, yielded out of courtesy, ossitancy, or
fear, or surprise; and held only for a time, while things were unsettled; or by
power, craft or interest; but soon after disclaimed, and frequently
interrupted: for, this is not such a Possession as our Adversaries plead for;
or, indeed, will stand them in stead.

But the Question in short, is this; whether the Pope had a quiet and
uninterrupted possession of the Supreme Power over the Church of England in
those great Branches of Supremacy denied him by Henry the Eighth, for nine
hundred years together, or for many Ages together before that time?

This, strictly, must be the Question: for the Complaint is; that Hen. 8.
disposessed the Pope of the Supremacy which he had enjoyed for so many Ages;
and made himself Head of the Church of England: therefore, those very things
which that King then denied to the Pope, or took from him, must be those
Flowers of the Supremacy, which the Papists pretend, the Pope had possession
of, for so many Ages together before his time.

Two things, therefore, and those only, are needful to be sought here: what
those Branches of Power are, which Henry the Eighth denied to the Pope, and
resumed to himself and his Successors? and whether the Pope and quietly, and
without plain interruption, possessed the same for so many Ages before his time?
and in order thereunto, when and how he got it?

CHAP. VIII.
What the Supremacy was, which Henry the Eighth took from the Pope: the
Particulars of it, with Notes.
It Is true, Henry the Eighth resumed the Title of the only Supreme Head in
Earth, of the Church of England; and denied this Title to the Pope: but it is
plain, the Controversy was not so much about the Title as the Power; the
Honors, Dignities, Jurisdictions, Authorities, Profits, etc. belonging or
appertaining to the said Dignity of Supreme Head of the Church of England: as
is evident by the Statute, Hen. 8. 26. c. 1.

The Particulars of that Power were such as these.

1. Henry the Eighth prohibited all Appeals to the Pope, An. 24. c. 12. and
Legates from Rome.

2. He also forbad all payments of money, upon any pretense, to the Pope, An.
25. c. 12.

3. He denied the Pope the Nomination and Consecration of Archbishops and
Bishops, and Presentations, An. 25. 20.

4. He prohibited all Suits for Bulls etc. to be made to the Pope, or the Sea
of Rome, 25. c. 21.

5. He prohibited any Canons to be executed here, without the King's License,
An. 25. 19.

I have perused the Statutes of King Henry the Eighth; and I cannot find any
thing which he took away from the Pope, but it is reducible to these five
Heads: touching which, by the way, we note.

1. The Controversy was not about a Primacy of Order, or the beginning of
Unity; but a Supremacy of Power.

2. All these things were then denied him, not by the King alone; but by all
the States of the Kingdom, in many Statutes.

3. The denial of all these Branches of Supremacy to the Pope, were grounded
upon the Ancient Laws and Customs of the Realm, as is usually noted in the
Preamble of the said Statutes: and if, that one thing shall be made to appear;
we must conclude, that the Pope might be guilty of an Usurpation, but could
never have a Legal Possession of that Supremacy, that is in the question.

4. Note, that the States of the Kingdom in the Reign of Queen Mary, (when by
means of Cardinal Pool, they recognized the Pope's Supremacy) An. 1. 11. Mar.
c. 8.
it was with this careful and express Limitation; that nothing therein should
be understood to diminish any the Liberties of the Imperial Crown of this
Realm; which did belong unto it in the Twentieth year of Hen. 8. -- without
deminution or enlargment of the Pope's Supremacy in England as it was in the
Twentieth year of Hen. 8. So that Queen Mary, and her Parliament, added nothing
to the Pope, but only restored what he had before; and when and how that was
obtained, is next to be examined.

CHAP. IX.
Whether the Pope's Supremacy here, was in quiet Possession till Henry the
Eighth?
WE have found, what Branches of the Pope's Power, were cut off by Hen. 8.

The Question is, whether the Pope had Possession of them, without
interruption, before that time? and, that we may proceed dictinctly, and
clearly; we shall consider each of the former Branches by themselves: and first
we begin with the Pope's Power of receiving Appeals from hence; which carries a
very considerable part of his pretended Jurisdiction.

SECT. I.
Of Appeals to Rome. Three Notions of Appeal. Appeals to Rome Locally, or by
Legates. Wilfrid. Anselm.
Appeals to Rome, we have found among these things which were prohibited by
Henry the Eighth: Therefore no doubt the Pope claimed, and in some sort
possessed the power of receiving such Appeals before. But what kind of
Possession, how free, and how long, is worthy to be enquired.

Appeal, is a word taken several ways: Sometimes it is only to accuse; so we
find it in the 3 Senses of Appeal.
Statutes of the 11 and 21 Rich. 2. Sometimes to refer our selves for judgment,
to some worthy person; so Francfort, etc. appealed to John Calvin. 3. But now
it is chiefly used for a removing a cause from an inferior to a Superior Court,
that has power of disanulling what the other did.

In this last sense, Historians tell us, that Appeals to Rome were not in use
with us, till about five hundred years agon, or a little more, viz. the year
1140.

These Appeals to Rome were received and judged either in the Popes Court at
Rome; or by his Legates in England. A word or two of each.

For Appeals to the Pope at Rome, the two famous instances of Wilfred and
Anselm, take up much ^. Locally.
of our History.

But they both seem, at least at first, to have Wilfred.
appealed to the Pope, under the second notion Anselm.
of appeal: Not to him as a proper or legal Judge; but as a great and venerable
Prelate.

But not to stick there; it is well known what effect they obtained: As for
Wilfred, his account was of elder date; and has appeared before, to the great
prejudice of the Popes Possession in England at that time.

But Anselm is the great monument of Papal Obedience; Anselm.
and, as a learned man observes, the first promoter of Papal Authority in
England. He began his Enterprise with a pretense, that he ought not to be
barred of visiting the Vicar of St. Peter, causa Regiminis Ecclesiae; but he
was not suffered to do that: So far was the Pope then, from having the power of
receiving appeals, that he might not receive the visit of a person of Anselm's
quality, without the Kings leave.

First, he was told by the Bishops, as well as Lay-Lords, that it was a thing
unheard of, and altogether against the use of the Realm, for any of the great
men, especially himself to presume any such thing, without the Kings License.

Notwithstanding, he would, and did go; but what followed? His Bishopric was
seized into the Kings hand: And the Pope durst not, or thought not good, to
give him either Consilium or Auxilium, as Sir Rog. Twisd. p. 11. and 12. makes
appear out Eadmer, p. 20, 26, 38, 39, 53.

In the dispute, the King told Anselm, the Pope had not to do with his Rights;
and wrote that free Letter, we find in Jorvalensis Col. 999, 30. and upon the
ambiguous answer of the Pope, the King sent another letter by Anselm himself to
Rome, who spoke plainly, his Master, nec amissione Eadem. 73. 13.
Regni, etc. for the loss of his Kingdom, he would not lose the investiture of
his Churches.

But Anselm, as Archbishop, took the Oath, Pope to be taken at the receiving
of the Pall, which allowed his Power to receive Appeals.

It Is true; but Pope Paschalis himself, who Oath, acknowledges, that it was as
Anselm signified to him, not admitted; but wondered at; and looked on as a
strange innovation both by the King and the great men of the Kingdom. Baron.
an. 1102. nu. 8.
The King pleaded the Fundamental Laws and customs of the Land against it; it
is a custom of my Kingdom instituted by my Father, that no Pope may be appealed
unto, without the Kings license. He that takes away the customs of the Kingdom,
does violate the Power and Crown of the King. And it is well noted by
Archbishop Bramhall, Malms. l. 1. degest. Pont. Ang.
that the Laws established by his Father, viz. William the Conqueror, were no
other than the Laws of Edward the Confessor; that is to say, the old Saxon
Laws, who had before yielded to the ^^ Hen. 2.
request of his Barons (as Hoveden notes) to confirm those Laws.

But, though Anselm had obliged himself by the said Oath to the Pope, yet the
rest of the Bishops refused the Yoke; and thereupon, Malms^, tells us, in his
etc. that, in the execution of these Malm. ibid.
things, all the Bishops of England did deny their Suffrage to their Primate.

Consequently, the Unanimity of the whole Realm, appeared in the same Point, in
the Reign of this Kings Grandchild, in the Statute of Clarendon; confirming the
former British, Math. Par. 1164. Hoved. in Hen. 2.
English custom, not only by their consents, but their Oaths: wherein generally
every man is interdicted to appeal to Rome.

This Statute of Clarendon was made, when Popery seemed to be at the height in
England: It was made to confirm the Customs and Liberties of Henry the Seconds
Predecessors; that is to say, as the words of the Statute are, his Grandfather
Henry the first, Son of the Conqveror, and other Kings. Now the Customs of
England are our common Laws, and the customs of his Predecessors were the
Saxon, Danish, and Norman Laws; P. 73.
and therefore ought to be observed of all, as my Lord Bramhall reasons.

What these customs were, I may show more largely hereafter; at present this
one is pertinent. All appeals in England must proceed regularly, from the
Archdeacon to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the Arch*Bishop; and if the
Archbishop fail to do his duty, the last must be to the King, to give order
for redress, that is, by fit delegates.

In Ed. the Thirds time, we have a plain Law to 27 Ed. 3. c. 1.
the same purpose in these words; Whosoever should draw any of the Kings
Subjects out of the Realm in plea about any caufe, whereof the Cognizance
belongs to the Kings Court, or should sue in any foreign Court to defeat any
Judgment given in the Kings Court, (viz. by appealing to Rome) they should
incur the same penalties; and upon the same ground, the body of the Kingdom
would not suffer Edward the First, to to be cited before the Pope.

It Is confessed, that in the Laws of Hen. 1. it is granted, that in case a Bishop
erring in Faith; and Admonition, appearing incorrigible, ad summos Pontifices
(the Archbishops) vel sedem Apostolicam, accusetur: which passage, as Sir To*
Twisden guesses, was inserted afterward; or the grant gotten by the
importunity of the then Pope.

But the same learned Man's Note upon it, is, P. 32.
that, this is the only Cause wherein I find any English Law approve a foreign
Judicature.

It Is plain, Anselm's Appeal (now on foot) was disapproved by the whole
Kingdom: it is evident, that this Clause was directly repugnant to the Liberties
and Customs of the Realm; upon which Anselm's Appeal was so ill resented.

It Is manifest in those days, and after, appeals to Rome were not common: yea
this very Pope Paschalis complains to this King, Vos oppressis Apostolicae
sedis appellationem substrahitis, Eadm. p. 113 3.
which was an. 1115. and that they were held, a cruel intrusion on the Churches
Liberty; so as at the Assize at Clarendon, 1164. this Law, if it were so, was
annulled and declared to be contrary to the liberties and customs of the Realm;
the eighth Chapter whereof, is wholly spent in showing the Right of the Kingdom
in this point, quod non appellaretur, for any Cause, ad sedem Apostolicam,
without leave had first, from the King and his Officials, as Joh. Sarisb.
interprets, Ep. 159. p. 254.

Indeed, the King did personally yield afterward, an. 1172. not to hinder such
appeals in Ecclesiastical Causes.

But the whole Kingdom four years after, would renew the assize of Clarendon,
1176. using this close expression. Justitiae faciant quaerere per consuetudinem
Hoved. f. 314. b. 3.
terrae illos qui a regno recesserunt, and nisi redire voluerint, and stare in
curia domini Regis, ^ legentur, etc. as Gervase also notes. au. 1176. Col.
1433. 19.

Accordingly, was the practice, during K. Rich. the seconds time: Geffrey
Archbishop of York, was complained of; that he did not only refuse Appeals to
Rome, but imprisoned those that made them: and though upon that complaint, a
time was assigned to make his defense to the Pope, yet he refused to go;
because of the Kings Prohibition and the indisposition of the Air.

After this, upon a difference with the King, the Archbishop went to Rome; and
made his peace with the Pope, and returns; but the King offended with it,
committed the care even of the spirituals of his Archbishopric to others,
till he had reconciled himself to the Crown, which was nere two years after,
about 1198.

After this, again, he received complaint from Innocentius III. non excusare te
potes, etc. Thou can not excuse thy self as thou ought, that Hov. an. 1201.
thou art ignorant of the privilege of Appeals to us; seeing thou thy self has
sometimes done the same.

And near about the same time (as Twisden observes) Robert Abbot of Thorney,
deposed by Hubert Archbishop, was kept in Prison a year and an half, without
any regard had to his appeal Hov. f. 430. b. 37.
made to the Pope.

Indeed, that Pope Innocent the Third and his Magna Charta from that Prince,
had got that clause inserted, liceat unicuique, it is lawful for any one to go
out of our Kingdom, and to return, nisi in tempore Guerrae, per aliquod breve
tempus. After which, says Twisden, it is scarce imaginable how every petty
cause was by appeals removed to Rome; which did not only cause Jealousy at
Rome, that the grievance would not long be born; and put the Pope, in prudence
to study and effect a mitigation, by some favorable privileges, granted to
the Archbishopric: but it did also awaken the King and Kingdom, to stand
upon, and recover their ancient liberty in that point.

Hereupon, the Body of the Kingdom, in their Matthew. Par. p. 668. 3.
querelous Letter to Innocent the fourth, 1245. or rather to the Council at
Lions, claim, that no Legate ought to come here, but on the King's desire, and
ne quis extra Regnum trahatur in Causam: which Math. Par. left out; but is
found in Mr. Roper's M. S. and Mr. Dugdale's; as Sir Roger Twisden observes;
agreeable to one of the Gravamina Angliae, sent to the same Pope 1246. viz.
quod Anglici extra Regnum in Causis, Apostolica Authoritate trahuntur.

Therefore, it is most remarkable, that at the revising of Magna Charta by Edw.
1. the former clause, liceat unicuique etc. was left out. Since which time,
none of the Clergy might Reg. 193. Coke Inst. 3. p. 179. 12 R. 2. c. 15.
go beyond Seas, but with the King's leave; as the Writs in the Register, and
the Acts of Parliament assure us; and which is more, if any were in the Court
of Rome, the King called them home.

The Rich Cardinal, and Bishop of Winchester, knew the Law in this case; and
that no man was so great, but he might need pardon for the offense: and
therefore, about 1429. caused a Petition to be exhibited in Parliament, that
neither himself, nor any other, should be troubled by the King etc. for cause
of any provision or offense done by the said Cardinal against Rot. Parl. 10
Hen. 6. n. 16.
any Statute of Provisions etc. this was in the Eighth of Henry the Sixth, and
we have a plain Statute making such Appeals a praemunire in Edward 9 Ed. 4. 3.
the Fourth. Sir Roger Twisden observes, the truth of this barring Appeals, is
so constantly P. 37.
averred, by all the Ancient Monuments of this Nation, as Philip Scot, not
finding how to deny it, falls upon another way; that, if the Right of Appeals
were abrogated, it concludes not the Sea of Rome had no Jurisdiction over this
Church: the Concession gives countenance to our present enquiry; the
consequence shall be considered in its proper place.

What can be further said, in pretense of a quiet possession of Appeals, for
nine hundred years together? since it has been found to be interrupted all
along, till within one hundred years before Hen. 8.

Especially seeing my Lord Bramhall has made it evident by clear Instances,
that it is the Unanimous Judgment of all Christendom, that, not the Pope, but
their own Sovereigns in their Councils, are the last Judges of their National
Liberties, vid Bramh. p. 106. to 118.

SECT. II.
Of the Pope's Possession here by his Legates; Occasion of them; Entertainment
of them.
IT is acknowledged by some, that citing Englishmen to appear at Rome, was very
inconvenient; therefore the Pope had his Legates here, to execute his Power
without that inconvenience to us.

How the Pope had possession of this Legantine Power, is now to be enquired.

The Correspondence betwixt us and Rome, at first, gave rise to this Power; the
Messengers from Rome, were sometimes called Legati; though at other times
Nuncii.

After the Erection of Canterbury into an Archbishopric: the Archbishop, was
held, quasi Alterius Orbis Papa, as, Urban. 2. styled him: he exercising Vices
Apostolicas in Anglia; Malms. f. 127. 15.
that is, used the same Power, within this Island, the Pope did in other Parts.

Consequently, if any question did arise, the determination was in Council; as
the deposing Wigorn. An. 1070.
Stygand, and the settling the precedence betwixt Canterbury and York. The
Instructions mentioned of Henry the First, say, the Right of the Realm is, that
none should be drawn out of it, Authoritate Apostolica, and do assure us, that
our Ancient Applications to the Pope were Acts of Brotherly Confidence in the
Wisdom, Piety and Kindness of that Church; that it was able and willing to
advise and assist us in any difficulty; and not of obedience, or acknowledgment
of Jurisdiction; as appear, by that Letter of Kenulphus etc. to Pope Leo the
Third, An. ^797. Malms. de Reg. l. 1. f. 16.
quibus Sapientiae Clavis, the Key of Wisdom, not Authority, was acknowledged
therein.

Much less can we imagine, that the Pope's Messengers, brought hither any other
Power, than that of Direction and Counsel at first, either to the King or
Archbishop; the Archbishop was, nullius unquam Legati ditioni addictus:
Therefore, none were suffered to wear a Miter, within his Province; or had the
Crecier carried; nor laid any Excommunication, upon this ground; in Diaecesi
Archiepiscopi Apostolicam non tenere Sententiam, Gervas. Col. 1663. 55. and An.
1187. Col. 1531. 38. The Church of Cant. being then esteemed, omnium nostrum
Matter Communis sub sponsi Jesu Christi dispositione, ibid.

True, the Pope did praecipere; but, that did not argue the acknowledgment of
his Power; so John Calvin commanded Knox: the question Knox Hist. Scot. 93.
is, how he was obeyed? it is certain, his Precepts, if disliked, were
questioned, Eadm. p. 92. 40. opposed Gervas. Col. 1315. 66. and those he sent
not permitted, to meddle with those things they came about, ibid. Col. 1558. 54.

But Historians observe, that we might be Occasion of Legates.
wrought to better temper, some Persons were admitted into the Kingdom, that
might by degrees, raise the Papacy to its designed height: these were called
Legates; but we find not any Courts kept by them, or any Power exercised with
effect, beyond what the King and Kingdom pleased, which indeed was very little.

The Pope's Legate was at the Council touching the precedence of the
Archbishops; but he subscribed the sixteenth, after all the English Bishops,
and not like the Pope's Person, or Proctor; as Sir Roger Twisden proves, p. 20.

The first Council, wherein the Pope's Legate preceded Archbishops, was that
of Vienna, a little more than three hundred years agon, viz. 1311. as the same
Author observes; wherein he looked like the Legate of his Holiness indeed.

But let us examine what entertainment the Power of a Legate found here: the
Archbishop Math. Par. p. 440. 17. An. 1237.
was jealous that a Legate residing here, would prove in suae dignitatis
praejudicium: and the King himself, was not without suspicions; and therefore,
would suffer none, so much as to be taken for Pope, but whom he approved; nor
any to receive so much as a Letter from Rome, without acquainting him with it;
and held it an undoubted Right of the Crown, that, ut neminem Eadm. p. 125. 53.
p. 6. 25. p. 113. 1.
etc. none shauld be admitted to do the office of a Legate here, if he himself
did not desire it.

Things standing thus in 1100. the Archbishop of Vienna, coming over, reported
himself that he had the Legantine Power of all Britain committed no him; but,
finding no encouragement Eadm. p. 58. 41.
to use his Commission, departed, ( a nemine etc.) by none received as Legate,
nor doing any part of that office.

Fourteen years after, Paschalis the Second, by Letters, expostulates, with the
King about Eadm. p. 113. p. 116.
several things; in particular, his non-admitting either Messenger or Letter*
without his leave.

A year after, addressed Anselm, Nephew to the late Archbishop; showing his
Commission Vices gerere Apostolicas in Anglia: this made known; the Clergy and
Nobility, in Council at London, sent the Archbishop to the King in Normandy,
to make known unto him, the Ancient Custom of Eadm. p. 118. 120.
the Realm; and, by his advice to Rome, ut haec nova annihilaret.

After this, An. 1119. the King sent his Bishops to a Council held by Calixtus
the Eleventh, at Rhemes, with Instructions, among other things, that they
should humbly hear the Pope's Precepts, but bring no superfluas adinventiones
into his Kingdom.

In November following, the Pope and King had a meeting at Gisors in Normandy;
where Calixtus confirmed unto him his Father's Usages; in special, that of
sending no Legate hither, but on the King's desire: and when the same Pope, not
full two years after his Grant to the contrary, addressed another Legate to these
parts; Eadm. p. 137, 46. p. 138. 21.
the Kings wisdom so ordered it, that ( qui Legati etc.) he which came to do
the office of a Legate in all Britain, was sent as he came, without doing any
part of that Office.

But it is said that Calixtus confirmed unto the King, his Fathers usages:
Therefore, it was in the Popes power originally and by delegation, and not in
the King. Accordingly in our best Authors, and in particular, Eadmer, we find
these words; Collata, Concessa, Impetrata, Permissa; as is urged in answer to
my Lord Cook.

These words indeed intimate the Popes kindness viz. that he will not disturb,
but allow our enjoyment of our ancient privileges: Concessa, fungi permissa;
the same Eadm. calls Antiqua Angliae consuetudo, libertas Regni p. 118. 33, 40.

2. The words do seem also to intimate, the Popes claim at that time; but the
true question is, about his Possession; which in placing Legates there, was
ever denied him not as a thing granted formerly by the Pope, but as one of the
dignitates, usus, and consuetudines, as Hen. 1. claimed and defended.

3. Lastly, they rather intimated the Popes want of power, than proved his
Authority here: and what our Princes did in their own right, he would continue
to them as a Privilege: for no other reason but because he could not take it
from them; or durst not deny it to them; so he dealt with Edw. the Confessor.
Vobis Regibus Angliae committimus advocationem ejusdem loci; but long before
that, our Kings looked upon it as their Office, regere populum Domini and
Ecclesiam Baron. an. 1059. n. 23.
ejus; which the Pope knew well enough* Therefore, a Legate landing in England
in Ed. 4. time, was obliged to take Oath, that he would attempt nothing to the
derogation of the Rights of the King or Crown.

In Hen. 4's Nonage, his Uncle was sent Legate Edw. 4. 16.
by Martin. 5. Rich. Cawdry the Kings Attorney, made protestation; that None
was to come as Legate from the Pope, or enter the Kingdom without the Kings
appointment: a Right enjoyed from all memory.

In the Reign of Hen. 5. the design of sending a Legate from Rome, though it
were the Kings own Brother, was opposed; the enterprise took no effect during
that Kings Reign: Vit. Arch. chic. p. 78, 80. And in the eleventh of the same
King, the Judges unanimously pronounce, that the Statutes mentioned were only
declaratory of the common custom of England. fol. 69, 76.

It was in the Year 1242. when the whole Matthew. par. 1245, 1246.
State of England complained of the Popes infamous Messenger, ( non obstante)
by which Oaths, Customs etc. were not only weakened but made void: And unless
the grievances were removed, Opportebit nos ponere Murum pro domo Domini, and
liberate Regni.

Yea long after this, in the year 1343. Edw. 3. made his Addresses likewise to
Rome, which the Pope branded with the Title of Rebellion: But to requite him,
that wise and stout Prince, made the Statutes of Proviso's and Praemunire,
directly opposed to the Encroachments and Usurpations Walsing. p. 161.
of the Court of Rome; whereby he so abated their power in England for sundry
Ages following, that a Dean and Chapter was able to deal Bramhall p. 99.
with the Pope in England, and to foil him too. an. 1420.

The Sum is, during the Reigns of all the British and Saxon Kings, until the
Norman Conquest, Legations from Rome were seldom, and but Messengers: A
Legantine or Nuncio's Court we find not. Gregory, Bishop of Ostium, the Popes
Spel. conc. an. 784.
own Legate, did confess, that he was the first Roman Priest that was sent into
those parts of Britain, from the time of St. Austin.

When these Legates multiplied, and usurped Authority over us, the Kingdom
would not bear it; as appears by the Statute of Clarendon, confirming the
ancient British English Custom, with the consent and Oaths of all the Prelates
and Peers of the Realm: and upon this custom was the Law grounded, Si quis
inventus, etc. If any one be found bringing in the Popes Letter or Mandate, let
him be apprehended, let justice pass upon him without delay, as a Traitor to
the King and Kingdom. Math. Par. an. 1164. Hoved. in Hen. 2.

And all along afterward we have found, that still as occasion required, the
same custom was maintained and vindicated both by the Church and State of the
Realm till within an hundred years before Hen. 8.

So that the rejection of the Popes Legate is founded in the ancient Right, the
common and Statute Laws of the Realm; and the Legantine power is a plain
Usurpation contrary thereunto; and was ever looked upon as such, it never having
any real possession among us by Law, or quiet possession in Fact, for any
considerable time together; but was still interrupted by the whole Kingdom, by
new declaratory Laws against it.

Thus, we have seen how the Popes Possession of the formal branch of
Jurisdiction, by Appeals and Legates, stood here, from St. Austin to Hen. 8.
and that it was quiet and uninterrupted for nine hundred together, passes away
as a Vapor. The Contrary being evident by as Authentic Testimonies as can be
desired: and now what can he imagined to enervate them?

If it be urged that it was once in the body of Laws, viz. In Magna Charta;
liceat unicuique de caetero exire de Regno nostro, and redire salvo and secure
per terram and per aquam, salva fide nostra, nisi in tempore Guerrae per
aliquod breve Tempus; it is confessed.

But here is no expression, that plainly and in terms, gives license of Appeals
to Rome: It Is indeed said, that it is lawful for any to go out of the Kingdom
and to return safe: But mark the Conditions following, Nisi in etc. It Is
likely, these words were inserted in favor of Appeals, but it may be the
Authors were timorous to word it in a more plain contradiction to our ancient
Liberties.

2. The very form of words as they are, would seem to intimate that the Custom
of England was otherwise.

3. Lastly, If it be considered, how soon after, and with what unanimity and
courage our ancient Liberty to the contrary, was redeemed and vindicated; and
that clause left out of Magna Charta ever since, though revised and confirmed
by so many Kings and Parliaments successively, it is only an argument of a
sudden and violent torrent of Papal Power in King John's time, etc. not of any
grounded or well settled Authority in the English Laws, as our English
Liberties have. I Conclude, with those weighty words of the Statute of Ed. 3.
an. 27. c. 1. Having regard to the said Statute made in the time of his said
Grandfathers, which Statute holds always in force, which was never annulled
or defeated in any point: And for as much as he is bound by his Oath to do the
same, to be kept as the Law of the Realm, though, that by sufferance and
negligence it has been since attempted to the contrary. Vid. Preamble of the
Statute.

Whereupon, it is well observed, that Queen Acts and Mon.
Mary her self denied Cardinal Pelow to appear as the Popes Legate in England,
in her time: And caused all the Seaports to be stopped, and all Letters,
Briefs, and Bulls to be intercepted and brought to her.

CHAP. X.
The Pope's Legislative Power in England before Hen. 8. No Canons of the Pope
oblige us without our Consent; our Kings, Saxons, Danes, Normans, made Laws
Ecclesiastical.
WE have found possession of the Executive Power otherwise than was pretended;
we now come to consider how it stood with the Legislative: the Pope, indeed
claimed a Power of making and imposing Canons upon this Church: but Henry the
Eighth denied him any such Power; and prohibited any Canons whatsoever to be
executed here, without the King's License, An. 25. 19.

The question now is, whether the Pope enjoyed that Power of making and
imposing Canons effectually and quietly here, from the time of Saint Augustine
to Henry the Eighth, or indeed any considerable time together? and this would
invite us to a greater Debate, who was Supreme in the English Church (the Pope
or the King) during that time; or rather who had the exercise of the Supremacy:
for the Power of making Laws, is the chief Flower or Branch of the Supremacy;
and he that freely, and without interruption, enjoyed this Power, was
doubtless, in the Possession of the Supremacy.

That the Pope had it not, so long and so quietly, as is pleaded by some; and
that our Kings have generally enjoyed it, will both together appear with
evidence enough by the Particulars following.

1. If none were to be taken for Pope but by the King's Appointment: Sure his
Laws were not to be received, but with the King's Allowance.

2. If not so much as a Letter could be received from the Pope without the
King's Knowledge, who caused words prejudicial to the Crown to be renounced:
Sure, neither his Laws.

Both the Antecedents we find in E^dm. p. 626. p. 131. 1.

3. If no Canons could be made here without the King's Authority; or being
made, could have any force, but by the King's Allowance and Confirmation, where
was the Pope's Supremacy? that Canons could not be made here without
Convocations by Kings.
the King's Authority, is evident; because the Convocations themselves, always
were, and ought to be Assembled by the King's Writ, Eadm. p. 24. 5. 11.
Besides, the King caused some to sit therein, to Supervise the Actions:
andLegato ex part Regis and Regni inhiberent, ne ibi contra Regiam Coronam and
dignitates aliquid statuere attentaret; and when any did otherwise, he was
forced to retract what he had done; as did Peckham: or were, in paucis
Servatae; as those of Boniface, Math. Par. An. 1237. p. 447. 51. Lindwood. c.
1. Glos. 1.

If Canons were made, though the Popes Legate, and consequently all his power,
was at Can. confir. by Kings.
the making of them; yet had they no force at all, as Laws over us, without the
Kings allowance and confirmation: The King having first heard what was decreed,
Consensum praebuit authoritate Regia and potestate confirmavit Statuta
concilii, by his Kingly power he confirmed the Statutes of the Council of
William Archbishop of Cant. and the Legate of the holy Church, celebrated at
Westminster -- by the Assent of the King, and primorum omnium Regni: the
Chapters subscribed were promulged. Eadm. p. 6. 29. Flor. Wigorn. an. 1127. p.
505. Gervase an. 1175. Col. 1429. 18.

Twisden Concludes, as for Councils, it is certain, none were here called from
Rome, till 1127. P. 19, 20.
If they did come to any, as to Calcuith, the King, upon the advice of the
Archbishop, Statuit diem appointed the day of the Council: So when William the
first, held one at Winchester, 1070. for deposing Stygand; though there came to
it three sent from Alexan. 2. Yet it was held, Jubente and present Rege; who
was President of it; wherein, as before was noted, the Popes Legate subscribed
the sixteenth after all the English Bishops. Vita Lanfranci. c. 7. p. 7. Col.
1. d.

All our Canons are therefore (as they are justly) Canons Kings Laws.
called, the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, because no Canons have the power of
Laws, but such as he allows and confirms: and whatsoever Canons he confirmed of
old, that had their original from a foreign power, he allowed for the sake of
their Piety or Equity, or as a means of Communion with the Church from whence
they came, but his allowance or eonfirmation gave them all the Authority they
had in England.

It Is a point so plain in History, that it is beyond Before Conquest.
question, that during all the time from St. Gregory to the Conquest, the
British, Saxon, and Danish Kings (without any dependence on the Pope) did
usually make Ecclesiastical Laws. Witness, the laws of Excombert, Ina, Withred,
Alfrede, Edward Athelstan, Edmond Edgar, Athelred, Canutus, and Edward the
Confessor; among which Laws, one makes it the Office of a King, to Govern the
Church as the Vicar of God.

Indeed, at last the Pope was officiously kind, and did bestow after a very
formal way, upon the last of those Kings, Edward the Confessor, a Privilege,
which all his Predecessors had enjoyed as their own undoubted Right before,
viz. the Protection of all the Churches of England, and power to him and his
Successors the Kings of England for ever; in his stead, to make just
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, with the advice of their Bishops and Abbots. But
with thanks to his Holiness, our Kings still continued their ancient custom
which they had enjoyed from the beginning, in the right of the Crown, without
respect to his courtesy in that matter.

After the Conquest, our Norman Kings did After Conquest.
also exercise the same Legislative power in Ecclesiastical Causes over
Ecclesiastical Persons from time to time, with the consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal. Hence all those Statutes concerning Benefices, Tithes,
Advowsons, Lands given in Mortmain, Prohibitions, Consultations, Praemunires,
quare impedits, Privilege of the Clergy, Extortions of Ecclesiastical Courts
or Officers, Regulation of Fees, Wages of Priests, Mortuaries, Sanctuaries,
Appropriations; and in sum, as Bishop Bramhall adds, All things which did
belong to the external subsistence, Regiment, and regulating of the Church; and
this in the Reigns of our best Norman Kings before the Reformation. Arch Bishop
Bramh. p. 73.

But what Laws do we find of the Popes making in England? or what English Law
has he ever effectually abrogated? It Is true many of the Canons of the Church
of Rome were here observed; but before they became obliging, or had the force
of Laws, the King had power in his great Council to receive them, if they were
judged convenient, or if otherwise to reject them.

It Is a notable instance that we have of this, 20 Ed. 3. c. 9.
in Ed. 3. time: When some Bishops proposed in Parliament, the reception of the
Ecclesiastical Canon, for the legitimation of Children, born before Marriage;
all the Peers of the Realm stood up, and cried out with one voice, Nolumus
leges Angliae mutari; we will not have the Laws of England to be changed: A
clear evidence, that the Popes Canons were not English Laws, and that the
Popish Bishops knew they could not be so, without the Parliament.

Likewise, the King and Parliament made a legislative exposition, of the Canon
of the Council of Lions, concerning Bigamy, which they would 4 Ed. 1. c. 5.
not have done had they not thought they had power according to the fundamental
Laws of England, either to receive it or reject it.

These are plain and undeniable evidences, that when Popery was at highest, the
Popes Supremacy in making Laws for the English Church was very ineffectual,
without the countenance of a greater and more powerful, viz. the Supremacy of
our own Kings.

Now, admit that during some little space, impose, and England did consent to
the authority of his Canons; as indeed the very Consent admitted.
rejecting of that authority, intimates: yet that is very short of the
Possession of it, without interruption, for nine hundred years together; the
contrary being more than evident.

However, this Consent was given either by By Permission.
Permission or Grant: If only by Permission, whether through Fear or Reverence,
or Convenience, it signifies nothing, when the King and Kingdom see cause to
vindicate our ancient Liberties, and resolve to endure it no longer.

If a Grant be pretended, 'twas either from Or by Grant.
the King alone; or joined with his Parliament. If from the King alone, he
could grant it for his time only, and the power of resuming any part of the
prerogative granted away by the Predecessors, accompanies the Crown of the
Successor; and fidelity to his Office and Kingdom, obliges him in Justice to
retrieve and recover it

I believe none will undertake to affirm, that the Grant was made by the Law;
or the King, with his Parliament: Yet if this should be said and proved too; it
would argue very little to the purpose; for this is to establish Iniquity by a
Law: The Kings Prerogative, as Head of this Church, lies too deep in the very
constitution of the Kingdom, the foundation of our common Law, and in the very
Law of Nature; and is no more at the will of the Parliament, than the
fundamental liberties of the Subject.

Lastly, the same Power that makes, can repeal a Law: if the Authority of Papal
Canons had been acknowledged; and ratified by Parliament, which cannot be said;
it is most certain, it was revoked, and renounced, by an equal Power, viz. of
Henry the Eighth, and the whole Body of the Kingdom, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical.

It is the Resolution both of Reason and Law, that no Prescription of time can
be a bar to the Supreme Power; but, that, for the Public good it may revoke,
any Concessions, Permissions or Privileges: thus it was declared in Parliament
in Edward the Third his Reign, when reciting the Statute of Edward the First;
they say, the Statute holds always his force; and that the King is bound by
Oath, to cause the same to be kept, (and consequently, if taken away, to be
restored to its Observation) as the Law of the Land: that is, the Common,
Fundamental, unalterable, Law of the Land.

Besides, the Case is most clear, that when Henry the Eighth began his Reign,
the Laws asserting the Supreme Authority in Causes, and over Persons
Ecclesiastical, were not altered or repealed; and Henry the Eight used his
Authority against Papal Encroachments, and not against, but according to the
Statute; as well as the Common Law of the Land: witness all those Noble Laws of
Provisors and praemunire, which, as my Lord Bramhall says, we may truly call,
25 Ed. 1. 27 Ed. 3. 2 Hen. 4. c. 3, 4. 7 Hen. 4. c. 6.
the Palladium which preserved it from being swallowed up in that vast gulf of
the Roman Court made by Edw. 1. Edw. 3. Rich. 2. Hen. 4.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Power of Licenses etc. here; in Edw. 3. Rich. 2. Hen. 4. Hen. 5. Hen.
6. Hen. 7.
THough, the Pope be denied the Legislative and Judiciary or Executive Power in
England; yet, if he be allowed his Dispensatory Power, that will have the
effect of Laws; and fully supersede or impede the Execution of Laws, in
Ecclesiastical Causes, and upon Ecclesiastical Persons.

It Is confessed, the Pope did usurp and exercise this strange Power, after a
wonderful manner in England before Henry the Eighth; by his Licenses,
Dispensations, Impositions, Faculties, Grants, Rescripts, Delegacies, and other
such kind of Instruments, as the Statute 25 Hen. 8. 21. mentions; and that this
Power was denied or taken from him by the same Statute; as also by another, 28
Hen. 8. 16. and placed in, or rather, reduced to the Jurisdiction of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, saving the Rights of the Sea of York, in all Causes
convenient and necessary for the Honor and Safety of the King; the Wealth and
Profit of the Realm; and not repugnant to the Laws of Almighty God.

The Grounds of removing this Power from the Pope, as they are expressed in
that excellent Preamble to the said Statute, 25 Hen. 8. are worthy our
Reflection: they are.

1. The Pope's Usurpation in the Premises.

2. His having obtained an Opinion in many of the people, that he had full
Power to dispense with all humane Laws, Uses, and Customs, in all Causes
Spiritual.

3. He had practiced this strange Usurpation for many years.

4. This his practice was in great derogation of the Imperial Crown of this
Realm.

5. England recognizeth no Superior, under God, but the King only; and is free
from Subjection to any Laws, but such as are ordained within this Realm; or
admitted Customs by our own Consent and Usage, and not as Laws of any Foreign
Power.

6. And lastly, that according to Natural Equity, the whole State of our Realm
in Parliament, has this Power in it, and peculiar to it; to dispense with,
alter, Abrogate etc. our own Laws and Customs, for Public good; which Power
appears by wholesome Acts of Parliament, made before the Reign of Henry the
Eighth, in the time of his Progenitors.

For these Reasons, it was Enacted in those Statutes of Henry the Eighth. That
no Subject of England should sue for Licenses etc. henceforth to the Pope, but
to the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Now, it is confessed before, and in the Preamble to the Statute, that the Pope
had used this Power for many years: but this is noted as an Aggravation of the
Grievance, and one Reason for Redress; but whether he enjoyed it from the time
of Saint Austine, or how long quietly is the proper question; especially seeing
the Laws of the Land, made by King Henry's Predecessors, are pleaded by him in
contradiction to it.

Yea, who will come forth, and show us one Instance No Instance 1110 years
after Christ.
of a Papal Dispensation in England for the first eleven hundred years after
Christ? if not, five hundred, of the nine hundred years Prescription, and the
first five hundred too, as well as the first eleven hundred of the fifteen, are
lost, to the Popes, and gained to the Prescription of the Church of England:
But,

Did not the Church of England, without any reference to the Court of Rome, use
this Power during the first eleven hundred years; what man is so hardy as to
deny it, against the multitude of plain Instances in History?

Did not our Bishops relax the Rigor of Ecclesiastical Canons? did not all
Bishops, all over the Christian World, do the like before the Monopoly was
usurped?

In the Laws of Alured alone, and in the conjoynt Gervis Dorober. p. 1648.
Laws of Alured and Gunthrun, how many sorts of Ecclesiastical Crimes were
dispensed with, by the Sole Authority of the King and Church of England, and
the like we find in the Laws of Spel. Conc. p. 364. etc.
some other Saxon Kings.

Dunstan the Arch Bishop, had Excommunicated a great Count; he made his peace
at Rome; the Pope commands his Restitution: Dunstan answered, I will obey the
Pope willingly, when I Ibid. p. 481.
see him penitent; but it is not God's will that he should lie in his sin, free
from Ecclesiastical Discipline, to insult over us. God forbid that I should
relinquish the Law of Christ for the Cause of any Mortal man: this great
Instance does two things at once; justifies the Archbishops, and destroys
the Pope's Authority in the Point.

The Church of England dispensed with those irreligious Nuns, in the days of
Lanfrank with the Council of the King; and with Queen Maud; the Wife of Henry
the First, in the like Case, in the days of Anselm, without any Suit to Rome,
or Foreign Dispensation, Lanfr. Ep. 32. Eadm. l. 3. p. 57. These are great and
notorious and certain Instances; and when the Pope had usurped this Power
afterward.

As the Selected Cardinals Style the avaritious Dispensations of the Pope,
Sacrilegious and Vulnera Legum; so our Statutes of Provisors expressly 27 Ed. 3.
say, they are the undoing and Destruction of the Common Law of the Land:
accordingly.

The King, Lords and Commons, complained of this abuse, as a Mighty Grievance;
of the frequent coming among them, of this Infamous Math. Par. Au. 1245.
Messenger the Pope's non-obstante, that is, his Dispensations; by which,
Oaths, Customs, Writings, Grants, Statutes, Rights, Privileges, were not only
weakened, but made void.

Sometimes these dispensative Bulls came to legal Trials: Boniface the Eighth
dispensed with the law where the Archbishop of Canterbury was Visitor of the
University of Oxford; and by his Bull exempted the University from his
Jurisdiction, and that Bull was decreed void in Parliament by two Successive
Kings; as being obtained to the prejudice of the Crown, the weakening of the
Laws and Customs of the Kingdom, and the probable Ruin of the said University,
Ex Arch. Tur. Londini. Ex Antiq. Acad. Cantab. p. 91.

In interruption of this Papal Usurpation, were those many Laws made in 25 Edw.
1. and 35 Et 12 Rich. 2.
Edw. 1. 25 Edw. 3. and 27 and 28 Edw. 3. and afterward more expressly in the
sixteenth of Richard the Second, where complaining of Processes and Censures
upon Bishops of England, because they executed the King's Comandments, in his
Courts; they express the mischiefs to be the Disinherison of the Crown; the
Destruction of the King, Laws, and Realm: that the Crown of England is subject
to none under God; and both the Clergy and Laity severally and severely protest
to defend it, against the Pope; and the same King contested the Point himself
with him, and would not yield it.

An Excommunication by the Archbishop, albeit Lord Coke. Cawdrie's Case.
it be disanulled by the Pope, is to be allowed by the Judges against the
Sentence of the Pope, according to the 16 Edw. 3. Titl. Excom. 4.

For the Pope's Bulls in special, our Laws have abundantly provided against
them; as well in case of Excommunication, as Exemption. vid. 30 Edw. 3. lib.
Ass. pl. 19. and the abundant, as is evidenced by my Lord Coke out of our
English Laws, in Cawd. Case p. 15. he mentions a particular Case, wherein the
Bull was pleaded for Evidence, that a Person stood Excommunicate by the Pope;
but it was not allowed; because no Certificate appeared from any Bishop of
England, 31 Edw. 3. Title Excom. 6. The same again, 8 Hen. 6. fol. 3. and 12
Edw. 4. fol. 16. and R. 3. and 1 Hen. 7. fol. 20.

So late as Henry the Fourth, if any Person of Stat. 2 Hen. 4. c. 3.
Religion, obtain of the Bishop of Rome to be Exempt from Obedience, Regular or
Ordinary, he is in case of a praemunire; which is an offense contra Regem,
Coronam and dignitatem suam.

Again, more plain to our purpose, in Henry Hen. 5.
the Fifth's time, after great Complaint in Parliament, the Grievances, by
reason of the Pope's licenses to the contrary, it was enacted that the King,
willing to avoid such Mischiefs, has ordained and established, that all
Incumbents by the Patronage of Spiritual Persons, might quietly 3 Hen. 5. c. 4.
enjoy their Benefices without being inquieted, by any color of Provisions,
Licenses and Acceptations by the Pope: and that all such Licenses and Pardons
upon, and by such Provisions made in any manner, should be void and of no
valor; aod that the Malefactors by virtue thereof incur the punishments
contained in the Statutes of Provisors before that time made.

The King only may grant or license, to found a 9 Hen. 6. fol. 16.
Spiritual Corporation as it is concluded by our Law, even in Henry the Sixth's
time.

Further, in Edward the Fourth's Reign, the Pope granted to the Prior of Saint
John's to have 1 Hen. 7. fol. 20.
a Sanctuary within his Priory; and this was pleaded and claimed by the Prior;
but it was resolved by the Judges, that the Pope had no power to grant any
Sanctuary within this Realm; and by Judgment of the Law it was disallowed.

We have thus, fully I hope, justified the words of the Statute of Henry the
Eighth; that the Laws made in the times of his Predecessors, did in effect the
same things: Especially those of Edw. 1. Edw. 3. Rich. 2. Hen. 4. which that
Parliament, 24 Hen. 8. c. 12. refer us to, expressly and particularly; and how
small time is left, for the Pope's Prescription (if any at all for his quiet
possession) of the power of licenses in England. Yet it is confessed, he had
usurped, and by several instances been heedlesly, or timerously permitted, to
exercise such a Power, for many years together, as the Parliament
acknowledges; though, contrary to the Ancient Liberty, the Common Law; and so
many plain Decrees of our Judges, and Statutes of the Land from Age to Age, as
have appeared.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Patronage of the English Church, in our Kings, by History. Law.
THis Flower of the Crown was derived from our ancient English and British
Kings to William the Conqueror, William Rufus, and Hen. 1. who enjoyed the
Right of placing in vacant Sees, by the Tradition of a Ring and a Crocier
Staff, without further Approbation, Ordination, or Confirmation from Rome; for
the first eleven hundred years. Indeed, then Hildebrand, and after Calixtus did
condemn and prohibit all Investitures taken from a Lay-hand.

That, before Hildebrand, this was the undoubted right of the Crown, is evident
both by History and Law.

For History, we find Malms. notes, that King Edgar did grant to the Monks of
Glastenbury the free Election of their Abbot for ever: But he reserved to
himself and his Heirs, the power to invest the Brother elected by the Tradition
of a Pastoral Staff. Malms. de gest. R. l. 2. c. 8.

Therefore Ingulf the Abbot of Crowland, in the time of the Conqueror, says,
for many years, Ibid.
(he might have said Ages) past, there has been no free Election of Prelates;
but the Kings Court did confer all dignities, by a Ring and a Crocier Staff.

Lanfrank desired of William the Conqueror, the Patronage of the Abbey of St.
Austin; but the King answered, se velle, etc. that he would keep all the
Crociers Staffs (i. e. Investitures) in his own hand. The same is testified of
Anselm himself by Eadm. He after the manner and example of his Predecessor, was
instructed according to the custom of the Land; and did homage to the King; as
Lanfrank his Predecessor, in the Sea of Canterbury, in his time had done; and
William the Agent of Hen. 1. protested openly to Pope Paschal, -- I would have
all men here to know, that my Lord the King of England will not suffer the loss
of his Investitures, for the loss of his Kingdom. Indeed Pope Paschal was as
resolute, though it be said, not so just in his answer. I speak it before God,
Eadm. l. 3. p. 73.
Paschal the Pope will not suffer him to keep them without punishment; no not
for the Redemption of his Head.

Here was indeed a demand made, with confidence and courage; but, had that Pope
no better Title than that of Possession to claim by, he had certainly none at
all: For, as Eadm. concludes, the case seemed a new thing (or Innovation) to
this our Age; and unheard of, to the English, from the time that the Normans
began to Reign, (that, I say not sooner) for from the time that William the
Norman conquered the Land, no Bishop or Abbot was made, (before Anselm) who
Eadm. ^er. in Praef. p. 2.
did not first do homage to the King; and from his hand by the gift of a
Crocier Staff, receive the investiture to his Bishopric or Abbacy, except two
Bishops of Rochester, who were Surrogates to the Archbishop; and inducted by
him by the Kings leave.

Indeed, now the Pope began to take upon him in earnest; and to require an Oath
of Fidelity of the Archbishop when he gave him the Pall; and to deny that Pall
if he would not take it. A new Oath never before heard of, or practiced: An
Oath of Obedience to himself; as it it is expressly called, in the Edition of
Gregory 13. An Oath not established by any Council; but only by Papal
Authority, by Paschalis himself, as Gregory the Ninth records.

This Oath, at first, though new, was modest; bounding the Obedience of the
Archbishops only by the Rules of the holy Fathers; as we find in the old Roman
Pontifical; But it was quickly changed from Regulas Sanctorum Patrum, to
Regalia Sancti Pet^i: The change, as my Lord Bramhall observes, not great in
words, but in Sense, abominable. P. 320. Twisd. p. 47:


Bellarmine would persuade us, that the like Oath was given, in Gregory the
firsts time; but that was nothing like an Oath of Obedience, and was only an
Oath of Abjuration of Heresy; not imposed but taken freely, no common Oath of
Bishops, nor any thing touching the Royalties of St. Peter, as may be seen
Greg. Epist. 1. 10. Ep. 30. Indic. 5.

About an hundred years after, in the time of Gregory the Ninth, they extended
the subjects of the Oath, as well as the matter; enlarging it from Archbishops
to all Prelates, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and now they cry up the Canons above
all Imperial Laws.

But to decide this point of swearing Allegiance to the Pope; which could not
be done without going in person to Rome; it is sufficient that by all our Laws,
no Clergyman could go to Rome without the Kings License; and that by an ancient
Brittannick Law; if any subject enter into League with another (Prince)
professing Fidelity Hect. Bottle. Hist.
and obedience to any one (besides the King) let him loose his head.

But, let us admit, that the Pope eleven hundred years after Christ, got
possession of the English Church, and the Conscience of the Bishops by
Investiture and Oaths; who will show us that he had it sooner? who will
maintain that he kept it quietly till Hen. 8?

This last point will be clear, by examining 2. Law.
our Laws, the second Topic propounded at the beginning of this discourse: For
if his Possession were good, it was settled in Law; and if quiet, the Laws were
not made to oppose it, by the great States of the Kingdom.

My Lord Bramhall has produced three great Laws, as sufficient to determine
this Controversy; 1. Clarendon.
whether the King or the Pope be Patron of the English Church; the Assize of
Clarendon, Statute of Carlisle, and of Provisors. The first tells us plainly,
that the Election of an Archbishop, Bishop, Abbot and Prior was to be made by
the respective dignitaries upon the Kings calling them together to that
purpose; and with the Kings consent. And then the Person elected, was presently
to do homage to the King as his Liege Lord.

And that this method was exclusive of the In Ed. 1.
Pope, that of Carlisle is very distinct: The King is the founder of all
Bishoprics, and ought to 2. Carlisle.
have the custody of them in the Vacances, and the Right of Patronage to
present to them; and that the Bishop of Rome usurping the right of Patronage,
gives them to Aliens. That this tends to Annullation of the State of holy
Church; to the disinheriting of Kings; and the destruction of the Realm. This
is an Oppression, and shall not be Suffered.

The Statute of Provisors. 15. Ed- 3. affirms, that Elections were first
granted by Kings Progenitors, Provisors.
upon Condition to demand License of the King to Choose, and, after the
Election, to have the Royal Assent. Which Conditions not being kept; the thing
ought by reason to return to its first Nature. And therefore they conclude,
that in Case, Reservation, Collation or Provision be made by the Court of Rome,
of any Archbishopric etc. The King and his Heirs shall have the Collations
for the same time, such as his Progenitors had before the free Elections were
granted.

And they tell the King plainly, that the Right of the Crown is such, and the
Law of the Land too, that the King is bound to make Remidies and Laws, against
such Mischiefs. And acknowledge that he is Advower Paramont, immediate of all
Churches, Prebends, and other Benefices, which are of the Advowrie of holy
Church. i. e. Sovereign patron of it.

My Lord Coke, more abundantly, adds, the Will. 1.
Resolutions and Decrees of the Law, to confirm 7. Ed. 3. tit. qu. i. e. p. 19.
us in the Point. In the time of William the first, it is agreed that no man
only can make any Appropriation of any Church having cure of Souls, but he that
has Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: but William the first did make such
Appropriations, of himself without any other.

Edward the first presented his Clerk; who was refused by the Archbishop; for
that the Ed. 1.
Pope by way of Provision, had conferred it on another. The King brought his
quare non admisit, the Archbishop pleaded the Supremacy of the Pope; and that
he durst not, nor had power to put him out, which was by the Popes Bull in
Possession, for which -- by judgment of the Common Law, the Lands of his whole
Bishopric were seized into the Kings hands, and lost during his life: And my
Lord Coke's Note upon it is, that this Judgment was before any Statute was made
in that Case.

In the Reign of Edw. 3. it is often resolved, Ed. 3.
that all the Bishoprics within England, were founded by the Kings
Progenitors; and therefore, the Advowsons of them all belong to the King; and
at the first they were Donative: And that if any Incumbent dye, the Lapse comes
to the Bishop* then to the Archbishop; and lastly, by the common Law to the
King, as to the Supreme within his own Kingdom, and not to the Bishop of Rome.

This King presented to a Benefice, his Presentee 21 Ed. 3. 40. s. 40.
was disturbed by one that had obtained Bulls from Rome; for which offense he
was condemned to perpetual Imprisonment.

It is no small spice of the Kings Ecclesiastical Patronage, that we find, the
King made Canons secular to be Regular; and that he made the Prior and Covent
of Westminster, a distinct Corporation from the Abbot. 38. li. Ass. pl. 22. 49.
Ed. 3. l. Ass. pl. 8.

But more full is the case of Abbot Moris, who sent to Rome to be confirmed by
the Pope; who 46 Ed. 3. Tit. praem. 6.
by his Bull slighted the Election of Moris; but gave him the Abbey, of his
spiritual Grace, and at the request (as he feigned) of the King of England.
This Bull was read and considered of in Council, that is, before all the Judges
of England; and it was resolved by them all; that this Bull was against the
Laws of England; and that the Abbot for obtaining the same, was fallen into the
Kings mercy: whereupon all his Possessions were seized into the Kings hands.

In the Reign of Richard the Second; one sued 12 Rich. 2. Tit. Juris. 18.
a provision in the Court of Rome, against an Incumbent, recovered the Church;
brought an action of account for Oblations, etc. but the whole Court was of
opinion against the Plaintiff; and thereupon he was nonsuit. Vid. Stat. 16.
Rich. 2. c. 5. against all Papal Usurpations; and this in particular; the pain
is a praemunire.

In Hen. 4s Reign, the Judges say that the Statutes 11 H. 4. f. 69, 76.
which restrain the Popes Provisions to the Benefices of the Advowsons of
spiritual men, were made; for that the spiritualty durst not in their just
cause say against the Popes Provisions; so as those Statutes were made but in
affirmance of the common Laws.

Now what remains to be pleaded in behalf of the Popes Patronage of our Church,
at least as to his possession of it, against so many plain and great Evidences
both of Law and Deed?

All pretenses touching the Popes giving the Pall are more than anticipated:
For it is not to be denied, but that was not held necessary, either to the
consecration, confirmation, or investiture of the very Archbishop before
Anselm's time: Yea it is manifest that Lanfrank, Anselm, and Raulf did dedicate
Churches, consecrate Bishops and Abbots, and were called Archbishops, while
they had no Pall, as Twisden proves out of Eadmer. P. 47.


We never read, that either Laurentius or Milletus received the Pall from Rome,
who, no doubt, were as lawful Archbishops as Austin. Girald and Hoveden both
give us an account, that Sampson of St. David's had a Pall, but do not say from
Rome; and, though in the time of infection, he carried it away with him. After
Paulinus, there are five in the Catalogue of York, expressly said to have wanted
it (and Wilfred was one of them) yet are reputed both Vid. Twisd. ibid.
Archbishops and Saints; and of others in that series, it is not easy to
prove they ever used it; nor Adilbaldus, till the fourth year after his
Investiture. And Gregory the Great says, that it ought not to be given, nisi
fortiter Postulanti. What this Honorary was anciently, seems uncertain; but
it is most certain, it could evacuate the Kings Legal and natural Patronage of
our Church; or discharge the Bishops from their dependence on, and Allegiance
to his Crown.

It Is true indeed, when Pope Nicolaus could not deny it, he was graciously
pleased to grant this Patronage to Edward the Confessor: Vobis and posteris,
etc. committimus advocationem, etc. We Baron. an. 1059. n. 23.
commit the Advowson of all the Churches of England to you and your Successors,
Kings of England: It might have been replied, Nicolaus Papa hoc domino meo
privilegium, quod ex Paterno jure susceperat praebuit, as the Emperors Advocate
said.

This is too mean as well as too remote a spring of our Kingly power in the
Church of England, though it might, ad hominem, sufficiently supersede (one
would think) all Papal practices against so plain and full a grant: if any
thing passed by it, certainly it must be that very power of Advowson, that the
Popes afterward so much pretended, and our Laws (mentioned) were made on
purpose to oppose them in.

We see no reason therefore, against the Statute of Hen. 8. so agreeable to the
ancient Rights and Laws of this Realm: Be it enacted, that no person shall be
Presented, Nominated, or Commended to the Pope, to or for the dignity of an
Archbishop or Bishop within this Realm, nor shall send or procure thence for
any manner of Bulls, Briefs, Palls, or other things requisite for an
Archbishop or Bishop. -- all such, viz. Applications and Instruments, shall
utterly cease and no longer be used within this Realm; and such as do contrary
to this Act, shall run in danger of the Statutes of Provision and Praemunire.
H. 8. 25, 20.


CHAP. XIII.
Of Peter- Pence, and other Moneys formerly paid to the Pope.
UPon Complaint, by Parliament in 25 Hen. 8. 21.
Henry the Eighth's Reign, of intolerable exactions of great Sums of money by
the Pope; as well in Pensions, Censes, Peter Pence, Procurations, etc. and for
infinite sorts of Bulls, etc. otherwise than by the Laws and Customs of the
Realm should be permitted; It was enacted, that no Person should thence-forth
pay any such Pensions, Peter- pence, etc. but that all such payments should
thence-forth clearly surcease, and never more be levied, taken, or paid; and
all Annates, or First Fruits and Tenths of 25 Hen. 8. 20.
Archbishops and Bishops were taken away, and forbidden to be paid to the
Pope, the year before.

Our Payments to the Court of Rome, seem to have been of four sorts;
Peter Pence, First Fruits and Tenths; Casual, for Palls, Bulls, etc. and
extraordinary Taxations: briefly, of each.

1. For Peter Pence; (the only Ancient payment) Peter Pence.
it was, at first, given and received as an Alms; Eleemosina Beati Petri, says
Paschalis, 2. Ep. Hen. 1. apud Eadm. p. 113. 27. Perhaps, rendered out of
Gratitude and Reverence to the Sea of Rome; to which England was, no doubt,
frequently obliged, for their care and Council, and other assistances; and by
continuance, this Alms and gratitude, obtained the name of Rent: and was
Metaphorically called, sometimes, Tributum, but never anciently understood Vid.
Twisd. p. 75.
to acknowledge the Pope as Superior Lord of a Lay-fee.

But, when the Pope changed Advice into Precept, and Counsel into Law and
Empire; and required Additions, with other grievous Exactions, unto his
Peter Pence; it was a proper time to be better advised of our selves, and not
to encourage such a wild Usurpation with the continuance of our Alms or
gratitude.

This Alms was first given by a Saxon King; but by whom, it is not agreed; but
that there was no other payment besides this, made to Rome before the year
1246. appears: for that, though there was much complaint and controversy about
our payments, we find the omission of no payment instanced in, but of that duty
only; neither do the Body of our Kingdom in their Remonstrance to Innocent the
Fourth 1246. mention any other, as claimed from hence to Rome.

Yet this payment, as it was not from the beginning, and as it was, at first,
but an Alms; so it was not continued without some interruptions, when Rome had
given Arguments of sufficient provocation, both in the times of William the
First, and Henry his Son, and Henry the Second* this latter, during the Dispute
with Becket and Alex. 3. commanded the Sheriffs through England, that
Peter Pence should be gathered and kept, quousque inde Dominus Rex voluntatem
suam praeceperit.

Historians observe that Edward the Third, during the French war gave command,
that no Peter Pence should be gathered or paid to Rome; Stow An. 1365.
and the Restraint continued all that Prince's time, for his Successor Richard
the Second, at the beginning of his Reign, caused John Wickliff to consider the
Point, who concludes, those payments being no other than Alms, the Kingdom was
not obliged to continue them longer, Vid. Twisden. p. 76.
than it stood with its Convenience, and not to its detriment or Ruin,
according to the Rule in Divinity, extra Casus Necessitatis and Superfluitatis
Eleemosyna non est in praecepto.

Indeed, in the Parliament, held the same year, the question was made, and a
Petition preferred (which surely was some kind of disturbance of the payment)
against them, with no effect: the King restored them, and the payment of them
continued till Hen. 8.

So much for Peter Pence; for the other payments, 2. First Fruits.
viz. First Fruits aend Tenths, and the Casual payments, for Bulls, etc. they
so evidently depend on the Pope's Supremacy for Legislation, Jurisdiction, and
Dispensation, that they are justly denied with it; however, we shall briefly
examine the Rise and the Possession of them.

For the Annates and Tenths, which the Pope Clemang. Platina. Pol. Virg.
received from our Archbishops and Bishops, the Historians agree, that
England, of all Nations, never submitted to the full extent of the Papal
Commands or Expectations; which no doubt, was occasioned by the good Laws made
here against them.

There is difference amongst Writers, in De Scysm. 6. lib. 2. c. 9.
whose time the First Fruits began to be taken Theodoricus a Niem says,
Boniface 9. about the Tenth year of his Government was the first that reserved
them; with whom Platina agrees, In vit. Bon. 9. de inven. Rer. l. 8. c. 2.
and Polid. Virgil, and many others, as Twisden notes; and Walsingham reduces
them but to 1316. Hist. An. 1316. p. 84, 85.

But the question is, how long the Pope quietly enjoyed them? the Kingdom was
so intolerably burdened with Papal Taxes, before (of which we shall speak
hereafter) and these, First Fruits and Tenths, being a Remembrance of those
extraordinary Taxes, and a way devised to settle and continue them upon us,
they were presently felt and complained of. The Parliament complained in
general of such oppressions, 25 Edw. 3. An. 1351. and again more particularly,
among other things of First Fruits in the fiftieth of Edward the Third, and
desire Rot. Parl. n. 105, 106.
his Majesty, no Collector of the Pope may reside in England.

The King not complying, they, again, instance the year following, that the
Pope's Collector Rot. Parl. 51 Edw. 3. n. 78, 79.
was as very an enemy to this State as the French themselves: that he Annually
sent away 20000 Marks; and sometimes 20000 Pounds; and that, he now raised for
the Pope, the First Fruits of all Dignities, which, in the very beginning,
ought to be crushed.

Yet they prevailed not to their minds; and in the next Parliaement, the
Commons preferred three Petitions: First, touching the payment of Rot. Parl. 1
R. 2. n. 66, 67, 68:
First Fruits, not used in the Realm before these times. Secondly, Reservation
of Benefices. Thirdly, Bestowing them on Aliens, etc. praying Remedy; as also,
that the Petitions of the two last Parliaments, might be considered, and
convenient Remedies ordained: the King hereupon, refers the matters for Remedy
to his grand or Privy Council.

But neither yet was full satisfaction obtained as appears; for that the
Commons renewed Rot. Parl. Rich. 2. n. 37.
in effect the same Suits in the third and fifth of Rich. 2. the inconveniences
still continuing: after which the next Parliament obtained the Statute 13 Ri.
2. c. 2.
of Praemunire; which, as Pol. Virgil observes, was a Confining the Papal
Authority within the Ocean. To which Law three years after, some 16 R. 2. c. 5.
Additions were made, and none of these Laws were repealed by Queen Mary.

To say, the Bishops were pressed by the Laity to pass that last Act, is so
much otherwise, as that it is enrolled, as Twisden observes, on the desire of
the Archbishop of Canterbury. Rot. Parli. 16. Rich. 2. n. 20. in fine. Neither
would Answer to Sir Edward Cook.
the Pope tolerate (as one insinuates) any thing so exceedingly prejudicial to
him, upon any reasonable pretense whatsoever.

In the same Parliament, the Commons Petition that the Popes Collector may have
forty days for his Removal out of the Kingdom; the King considers.

But in the Sixth of Hen. 4. upon grievous 6 Hen. c. 1.
complaints made by the Commons to the King; of the horrible mischiefs and
damnable Customs which are introduced of new by the Church of Rome, that none
could have provision for an Archbishopric or Bishopric, until he had
compounded with the Popes Chamber, to pay great excessive Sums of Money, as
well for the first fruits as other lesser fees -- it was Enacted, that
whosoever shall pay such Sums shall forfeit all they had. This Statute was made
about an hundred years before Hen. 8. an inconsiderable time for so
considerable a Prescription.

3. We have noted, that the Clergy of England were not free from Roman
Taxations before Payments extraordinary.
the payment of Annates and Tenths, as they were afterward stated: For there
were occasional charges exacted from us by the Pope, which afterward
terminated in those constant payments, as before was intimated.

The first extraordinary contribution raised by allowance for the Popes use in
this Kingdom, Twisden observes to have been an. 1183. far enough Hoved. an.
1183. f. 354. b. 43.
off from the time of St. Austin. When Lucius the third (at odds with the
Citizens of Rome) sent to Hen. 2. Postulans auxilium of him and his Clergy,
whereupon two things considerable are observed. 1. The King in this point
concerning the Pope, consulted his own Clergy, and followed their advice. 2.
The great care the Clergy took to avoid ill presidents, for they advised the
King, that he would receive the moneys as given by them to him, and not to the
Pope, leaving the King to dispose it as he thought fit.

This wariness being perceived, the Pope did not suddenly attempt the like
again: We do not find any considerable sum raised from the Body of the Clergy
for the support of the Papal designs, till Gregory 9. demanded a Tenth of all
the movables both of them and the Laity, an. 1229. The Temporal Lords refused;
and the Clergy unwillingly were induced to the Contribution, for it was no
other.

The Pope ventured no more upon the Laity, but eleven years after, he demanded
of the Clergy a fifth part of their goods: And after many Math. par. an. 1240.
p. 526. 20. p. 534. 8. 39.
Contests and struglings, and notwithstanding all the arguments of the poor
Clergy, by the Kings and Archbishops means, they were forced to pay it.

But neither that Reluctance, nor the Remonstrance of the Kingdom at the
Council of Lions, 1245. nor that to the Pope himself the year following, could
prevail then to change the Shoulder or the method of Oppression: For Innocent
4. 1246. invents a new way, by charging every Religious house with finding of
Soldiers for his Service, for one year, etc. which amounted to eleven thousand
Marks for that year; with many devices for his advantage: but did he Rot. Parl.
50. Ed. 3. n. 107.
go on more quietly than he began? No certainly. See the Petition of the
Commons in Parliament, 1376.

The two Cardinals Priests Agents, were not suffered to provide for them a
thousand marks a year apiece: But the State chased them out of the Kingdom; and
the King sent through every County, that none henceforth should be admitted per
Bullam, without the special License of the King.

And a while after, the Parliament held the 20 Ed. 3. 1346. Petition more
plainly; and mention the matter of the two Cardinals, as an intolerable To.
Par. n. 33, 35.
grievance, in which the King gave them satisfaction.

However, the Usurpation grows against all opposition, and it is no longer a Tax
for one year only as at first; but for six years successively, pretending war
with Infidels, so dealt John 21. an. 1277. and Clement 5. in the Council of
Vienna 1311.

Exactions of this kind were so abominable, that Martin 5 at the Council of
Constance, 1417. Sess. 43.
was constrained to make that Remedy; Nullatenus imponantur, etc. upon which
decree a supply of the Tenth being twice demanded, viz. 1515, and 1518. by Leo
10. against the Turk, the English Clergy denied them both times.

Thus the Papacy by little and little, and through great opposition, at length
brought the Taxes to that we now call Tenths: and Annates proceeded gradually,
but by milder measures, to a like Settlement; yet neither continued without the
disturbances before mentioned.

4. There is nothing remains under the head of Money, but the casual and
accidental profits, accrewing by Bulls and Licenses and lesser ways Casual
Payments.
and conditions of Advantage, which did much help the rest to drain us of our
wealth: but these obtained upon private persons, and many times in methods not
cognizable by Law; neither were the people so apt to complain in such cases,
because they had something (which they unaccountably valued) for their money:
and the possession of a false opinion in the Vulgar, as Juglers and Cheats may
equally glory in, can never be soberly interpreted to be a good and sufficient
Title to the Supremacy of the Church of England: Yet it is not amiss to
remember, that the Popes Messenger, Jo. Opizanus, for acting against the Kings
Laws in getting money for his Master, was cast into Prison as we find it, Vit.
Hen. Chich. p. 86.

Neither can we reasonably imagine, but that much of that vast Sum was gathered
by those ways, which in the Reign of Hen. 3. the Lords and Commons complain of,
viz. that above four hundred thousand pounds yearly was carried hence into
Italy.

It was some disturbance of such kind of Receipts, Stat. de 7. H. 1. c. 6.
that the Law forbids any such Bulls to be purchased for the time to come upon
pain of praemunire: And that 'twas decreed, that the Popes Collector, though he
have a Bull for the purpose, Hen. 4. fol. 9.
has no Jurisdiction within this Realm.

And if the ancient Law of the Realm says, that the Pope cannot alter the Laws
of England, that Law condemns his raising money upon the people in any kind,
without special Law to that purpose; a Prerogative the Kings of England
themselves do not claim. Therefore, that standing Fundamental Law of England,
always lay in bar against, and was a continual, real, and legal disturbance of
the Popes possession of power to impose Taxes; or by any devices to collect
money from the English, either Laity or Clergy.

CHAP. XIV.
The Conclusion of the Argument from Prescription. It Is on our side: No force
for the Pope.
WE have seen what the Argument from Prescription is come to; how far short of
Nine Hundred years, and how unsettled, both in Law and Practice it ever was;
both as to Jurisdiction in the Popes Court at Rome, and by his Legates here;
and as to Legislation by the force of his Canons, and his dispensation by
Faculties, Licenses, and any sort of Bulls, etc. and as to his Patronage of, or
Profits from the English Church.

If a just Computation were made, I believe the Argument from Possession would
really appear to be on our side: Our Kings having enjoyed and flourished in the
exercise of Supremacy over us, ever since the Act of Hen. 8. extinguishing the
Popes Usurpation here, with far more quiet and less interruption, than ever the
Pope did for so long a time.

Besides, other qualifications of our Kings possession, do mightily strengthen
the Plea above any thing that can be alleged on the Popes behalf.

1. Our Kings had possession from the beginning Nice. Ephe.
according to the Canon; and therefore could never be lawfully divested:
Ancient Histories are evident for us; and Baronius determines well, what is
said by a Modern concerning ancient Tom. 1. an. 1. n. 12.
affairs, without the Authority of any more ancient, is contemned.

This ancient Possession of our Kings, has ever been continued and declared
and confirmed by our Laws; and the consent of the whole Kingdom signified
thereby: And these Laws have still been insisted on, and repeated when there
has been any great occasion, and fit opportunity to vindicate our ancient
Liberties. But the Pope could never obtain any legal settlement of his Power
here, before Queen Mary's Reign; nor by Her neither in the main branches of it,
though indeed she courted him with the dignity of a great name and a verbal
Title.

Indeed, the subject of the Question being a spiritual Right, our Adversaries
themselves agree, that Possession sufficient to prove it, ought to begin near
Christ's time: And he that has begun it later (as certainly the Pope did)
unless he can evidence that he was driven out from an ancienter Possession (as
the Pope can never do) is not to be styled a Possessor, but an Usurper, an
Intruder, an Invader, Disobedient, Rebellious, and Schismatical; as, no doubt,
by S. W's Logic, the Pope is as before was noted.

I shall conclude, with the grave and considerate Concession of Father Barnes
(noted by Dr. Stillingfleet) who after his through study of the point, upon
clear Conviction determined it positively for us in these words.

The Britanick Church may plead the Cyprian Dr. Still. p. 398.
Privilege, that it was subject to no Patriarch, and although this privilege
was taken away by Force and Tumult, yet being restored, in Henry the Eighth's
time, and quietly enjoyed since, it ought to be retained for peace sake,
without prejudice of Catholicism, and the brand of Schism; by which he grants
all that is pertinent to our Cause, that the Pope had not possession here, from
the beginning, nor ought to have had. 2. That he took advantage, bellorum
tumultibus and vi, for his Usurpation. 3. That our Ancient Cyprian privilege
was restored by Henry the Eighth, totius Regni Consensu, with the Consent of
the whole Kingdom. 4. That never since it has been peaceably prescribed
(pacifice praescriptum) or quietly enjoyed. 5. And that therefore, it still
ought to be retained, sine Schismatis ullius Nota, without the brand or charge
of Schism, which is the only thing contended for.

CHAP. XV.
The Argument from Infallibility, Considered; in its Consequence, retorted.
THe two last Arguments, for proof of the Pope's Authority, are general, and
not limited to the Church of England, as the three former were; and are his
Infallibility and his Universal Pastorship, which remain to be examined.

From his Infallibility it may be argued thus: Pope were the means of our
Conversion, or have a Patriarchal Right over us, or have had possession of the
Government of the English Church heretofore or not; if he be really and
absolutely Infallible, he has thereby a right to govern us; and we are bound
to be ruled and directed by him; but the Pope is really and absolutely
Infallible: Ergo.

The Consequence would tempt a denial: indeed, Consequence.
Infallibility is an excellent qualification for an Universal Rector; but are
not, qualification and Commission two things? has God given Authority to every
man, equal to his Parts? to his Natural, acquired, or infused abilities? if
not; what necessity is there, that he has, to the Pope? if all Power, as well
as all Wisdom is from God; the prime fountain of them both; and if we pretend
to both, need we evidence only one?

Indeed, we ought to be guided by one that is Infallible (if such a one there
be) but the Necessity arises from Prudence, not immediately from Conscience;
Unless by some other way of Authority, God has given him power to govern us,
as well as ability; otherwise, we ought to submit our selves to the guidance of
the Pope, as a good and wise man, or as a Friend, as our Ancestors did, and not
as our Lord.

The true Question is, whether God has given the power of Government to the
Pope; and directly appointed him to be the Universal Pastor of his Church on
Earth? so that the Controversy will bear us down to the last Chapter, what
ever can be said here; and Infallibility is such a Medium, as infallibly runs
upon that Solicism of Argument, obscurum per obscurius: and indeed, if there be
any inseparable Connection, betwixt Infallibility and the Universal Pastorship,
as is pretended, the contrary is a lawfuller way of concluding: viz. if there
be no one man appointed to govern the Church as Supreme Pastor under Christ,
then there is no necessity that any one man should be qualified for it, with
this wonderful grace of Infallibility. But it does not appear, that God has
invested any one man with that Power; therefore, not with that Grace.

But least this Great Roman Argument should suffer too much; let us at present,
allow the Consequence; but then we must expect very fair Evidence of the
Assumption; viz. that the Pope is indeed, Infallible.

I am aware that there are some vexing Questions about the Manner and Subject
of this Infallibility; but if we will put them out of the way, then the
Evidence of the Pope's or Church of Rome's Infallibility breaks out from three
of the greatest Topics we can desire: Scripture, Tradition, and Reason; let
them be heard in their Order.

SECT. I.
Argument from Scripture for Infallibility, viz. Example. High Priest of the
Jews. Apostles.
Whether it be an excess or defect of Charity in me, I know not; but I cannot
bring my self to believe, that the fiercest Bigot of Popery alive, can
seriously think the Pope Infallible, in the Popish Sense of the Word;
especially that the holy Scriptures prove it.

I know, that some fly the Absurdity, by hiding the Pope, in the Church: but,
if the Church be Infallible; it is so, as it is Representative in General
Councils; or diffusive, in the whole Body of Christians: and then what is
Infallibility to the Church of Rome, more than to any other? and how shall that
which is Common to all, give power to one over all? or what is it to the Pope,
above another Bishop or Patriarch?

But the Pope is the Head and Universal Bishop, as he is Bishop of Rome: that
is begging a great question indeed; for the proof of the Pope's Infallibility,
which his Infallibility ought to prove; and to prove the Medium by the thing in
question, after a new Logic.

Besides, if the proper Seat of Infallibility be the Church, in either of the
Senses, it concerns our Adversaries to solve Divine Providence; who use to
argue for this wonderful gift in the Church: if there be no Infallibility, God
has not sufficiently provided for the safety of Souls, and the Government of
his Church; for seeing the Church diffusive, cannot be imagined to govern it
self, but as Collected; and seeing, as the Christian World is now
circumstantiated, it is next to impossible, we should have a General and free
Council; how shall this so necessary Infallible Grace in the Church be exerted,
upon all occasions, for the Ends aforesaid?

It is therefore most Consonant to the Papal Interest and Reason, to lodge this
Infallible gift in the Pope, or Court of Rome: however, let us attend their
Arguments for the evidence of it, either in the Pope, or Court, or Church of
Rome, in any acception: which is first drawn from Scripture; both Examples and
Promises.

1. From Scripture- Examples they reason, High Priest with his Clergy, in the
time of the Low, were Infallible; therefore the Pope and his Clergy, are so
now: the High Priest with his Clergy, in the time of the Law were so; as
appears Deuteronomy. 17. 8. where, in doubts, the people were bound to submit and
stand to their Judgment; which supposes them Infallible in it; as A. C. argues
with Archbishop Lawd. p. 97. n. 1.

Dr. Stillingfleet with others, has exposed this Consequence of it supposes
what is to be proved for the proof of Infallibility, viz. That the Pope is
High Priest of the Christian Church: and we must still expect an Argument for
the Popes Headship, if this must be granted, that we may prove him Infallible,
to the end we may prove his Headship. Were it said to the Christian Church,
when any Controversy of Faith arises, go to Rome, and there enquire the
judgment of the Bishop, and believe his determinations to be Infallible, there
had been no need of this consequence, but seeing we read no such thing, the
consequence is worth nothing.

Besides, the minor affirming the Infallibility Minor.
of the High Priest from that Law of Appeal in Deuteronomy. 17. 8. is justly
questioned. There was indeed an obligation on the Jews to submit and stand to
the judgment of that high Court; but no obligation nor ground to believe the
judgment Infallible: The same obligation lies upon Christians, in all judiciary
Causes, especially upon the last Appeal to submit in our practices, though not
in our judgment or Conscience, to believe that what is determined to be
Infallibly true: A violence that neither the whole world nor a man's self, can
sometimes do to the Reason of a man.

The Text is so plain, not to concern matters of Doctrine, to be decided
whether true or false; but matters of Justice to be determined, whether right
or wrong; that one would think the very reading of it, should put an end for
ever to this debate about it. The words are, viz. If there arise a matter too
hard for thee in judgment, between Blood and Blood, between Plea and Plea, and
between Stroke and Stroke, being matters of Controversy within thy Gates; Then
shall thou arise and get thee up into the Place which the Lord thy God shall
choose, etc. Thus God established a Court of Appeals, a Supreme Court of
Judicature, to which the last application was to be made, both in case of
Injury and in case of Difficulty, called the great Sanhedrin: But note, here is
no direction for address to this Court, but when the case had been first heard
in the lower Courts, held in the Gates of the Cities: Therefore the Law
concerned not the momentous Controversies in Religion, which never came under
the Cognizance of those inferior Courts.

Therefore it is not said, whosoever does not Deuteronomy. 17. ^2.
believe the Judgment given, to be true; but whosoever acts contumaciously in
opposition to it: And the man that will not hearken -- but do presumptuously,
even that man shall die.

Besides, God still supposes, a possibility of Error in the whole Congregation
of Israel, Lev. 4. 15. and charge the Priests with Ignorance, and forsaking
his way, frequently by the Prophets.

But alas! where was the Infallibility of the High Priest, etc. when our
blessed Savior was condemned by him, and by this very Court of the Sanhedrin:
And when Israel had been for a long season, without the true God, without a 2
Cr. 15. 3.
Teaching Priest, and without Law. Vid. Dr. Still. p. 239, etc.

2. It is also argued, from that Example of Ar. 2. Example N. T.
the Apostles under the New Testament; that they were assisted with an
Infallible Spirit, and there is the same reason for the Pope. But this Wisdom
by our own Reason: The Apostles Infallibility attested with Miracles, was
necessary to the first Plantation and State of the Church; and it no more
follows, that therefore the succeeding Bishops must be infallible, because
they were so; than that because Moses wrought miracles for the confirmation of
the Law, therefore the Sanhedrin should work Miracles for the ordinary
Government of Israel, according to the Law.

Besides, what reason can be given, why this privilege of Infallibility should
be entailed upon the Bishops of Rome more than other Bishops, who succeeded the
Infallible Apostles, as well as the Pope? What ground has he to claim it more
than they? Or if they have all an interest in it, what becomes of the Argument
that the Pope is the universal Head and Governor of the Church, because he is
Infallible?

SECT. II
Arg. 2. From the Promises of Infallibility.
GOd has promised that his Church shall be preserved; which Promise engages
his Infallible Ar. 2.
Assistance. Therefore the Church by that assistance is always Infallible: To
this mighty purpose A. C. reasons with A. B. Laud.

God will certainly and Infallibly have a Church, therefore that Church shall
not only be, but be Infallible in all her decrees de fide: Is not this strong
Reason? God is Infallible, therefore his Church is so; a Church shall continue,
therefore it shall not Err?

Pray what Security does the promise of the Churches Perpetuity, or
Infallibility as to Fundamentals, give to any single Person or particular
Church, that they shall continue in the Christian Faith, more than it did to
seven Churches in Asia? And where are they now?

The Argument will conclude as well: God has promised his Church shall ever
exist upon Earth; therefore Christians, of which the Church consists, shall
never dye, as well as never fall away: For if the Promise be made to the
Present Church in the Romanists sense, it is made to the Individuals, that make
the Church. 2. And that every particular Christian, as well as every particular
Church, having an equal and common interest in the promise of assistance, is
infallible.

If we should grant the Universal Church to be Infallible; not only as to her
Perpetuity but her Testimony, which the Argument reaches not; yet it rests to
be proved, that the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church; and then that the
Pope is the Church of Rome in the same sense that the Church of Rome is the
Catholic Church, and that in the same consideration, as the Catholic Church
is Infallible.

But if we consider the particular Promises, the Argument thence is so wide and
inconclusive, that one would think no considerate man could be abused by it.

These promises are such as concern the Apostles and Church in general; or such
as are pretended General to Apostles.
to dignifie St. Peter in special, and above the rest.

Such as concern the Apostles and the Church Luc. 10. 16. Math. 28. 20.
in general are these three. He that hears you hears me, etc: True; while
you teach me, that is my Doctrine. I am with you always to the end of the
world: True; while you are faithful, and teach whatsoever I command. The
Comforter, Joh. 14. 16.
the Holy Ghost, shall abide with you for ever: True also, while you love me,
and keep my Commandments. As the Condition is just before the Promise.

Now what are these Texts to the Pope or the Church of Rome in special? They
certainly that plead the Promise, should not neglect the duty; it were well if
that was thought on.

The Popes special Friends insist on other promises more peculiarly designed;
as they would have them for St. Peter's Prerogative: They are St. Peter.
these.

1. The First is Math. 16. 18. Thou art Peter, Text.
and upon this Rock will I build my Church; and the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it.

But what is this to St. Peter's Infallibility? An.
The Church shall not be overthrown, therefore St. Peter is Infallible: What Is
this to the Popes Infallibility? The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
the Church, therefore the Pope is Infallible? Can God find no other way to
preserve the Church, but St. Peter's Infallibility, and the Popes Infallibility?

Is this promise made to secure the Church under St. Peter and his Successors,
absolutely from all error? How came St. Peter himself to Act. 1. 6.
fall then, by denying his Master; and to err about the Temporal Kingdom of
Christ? And Popes to be Blasphemers, Heretical, Atheistical? How came so many
particular Churches, that were under the Apostolic Chair (if all were so at
first) to miscarry, as those first Churches in Asia did?

But whatever is here promised to St. Peter, is nothing to the Pope; unless the
Pope be indeed St. Peter's Successor, and sit in his Chair; the great point
reserved for the last Refuge, and shall there at large be examined.

The next Promise is, Joh. 21. Peter, feed my Text. 2.
Sheep; therefore the Pope is Infallible: But must not others feed Christ's
Sheep; and are they Infallible too? It Is acutely said, that Peter was to feed
the Sheep as ordinary Pastor, the rest of the Apostles as extraordinary
Ambassadors. But does this Text say so, or any other Text? How came it to pass,
that the ordinary Pastor should be greater than the extraordinary Ambassadors?
How is it proved, that this power of Feeding is Infallible, only as in St.
Peter? or as such, is transmitted to St. Peter's Successor in a more peculiar
manner, than to the Successors of other Apostles? And that the Pope is this
Successor? this must be considered hereafter, their proof is not yet ready.

Another is Luke 22. 31. Simon, Simon, Satan Text. 3.
has desired to winnow thee, but I have prayed that thy Faith fail not: (Viz.
that thou perish not in Apostasy) not that thou be absolutely secured from
error, nor thy pretended Successors: And had not others the Prayer of Christ
also? Joh. 17. even all that should believe on him? In a word, what is this to
the Pope, that Peter should not utterly miscarry in the Highpriests Hall?
Unless it fignifie that the Pope may err grievously as St. Peter did, though he
has no more the security of not failing in the Faith, than every ordinary
Christian has.

But this trifling with holy Scripture provokes Rebuke; and deserves no answer.

If any desire further satisfaction, either upon these, or other like
Scriptures urged for the P. 254. etc.
Popes or the Churches Infallibility; let them peruse Dr. Stillingfleet in
defense of my Lord of Canterbury, and Mr. Pool's Treatise written on purpose
upon this Subject.

CHAP. XVI.
II. Arg. For Infallibility, viz. Tradition. Concessions 4. Propositions 3.
Arguments. Objections Answered.
THat the difference may not seem wider than indeed it is, we shall make way
for our discussion of this Argument by a few, but considerable Concessions.

1. We yield that Tradition truly Catholic is Apostolical. Truly Catholic,
that is in all the three known Conditions, ab omnibus, semper, and ubique: For
we cannot imagine that any thing should be believed or practiced by all Learned
Christians at all times and in all places, as a point of Christian Religion,
that was not received as such either from Christ himself or his Apostles.

2. We grant, that Tradition has been and ever will be both useful and
necessary for the delivering down to the Faith of the Church, in all succeeding
Ages, both the Canon of the Scripture and the Fundamentals of the Christian
Religion: The necessity hereof arises from the distance of Time and Place; and
must be supposed, upon the Succession of Generations in the Church, after the
removal of the first Preachers and Writers, and consequently the first
deliverers thereof.

3. We need not stick to agree, that Tradition is Infallible, (if we abuse not
the term too rigidly) in conveying and preserving the substance of Religion,
which I was much inclined to believe before; and am now much encouraged to
express, after I had read the learned and ingenious book of the Several ways of
resolving Faith; (he concludes p. 129.) the Necessaries to Salvation should
ever fail to be practically transmitted from Generation to Generation, is alike
impossible; as that multitudes of People should not in every Age be truly
desirous of their own, and their Posterities everlasting happiness; seeing it
is a thing both so easy to be done, and so necessary to Salvation. By the
substance of Christian Religion, I mean the Credenda and the Agenda, or as he
does, the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and the Two Sacraments.

4. We may, for ought I see to the contrary, Gratify the Author of Rushworth's
Dialogues, and the Abettors of that late new found Tradition of the present
Church of Rome: For every Church of Christ, as such, has possession of the
substance of Christian Religion, and without it cannot be a Church: And I am
sure by this Concession, the great Argument for Tradition is allowed; and we
are so far agreed in a main point.

I am troubled we must now differ; but our Propositions shall be such, as none
that have weighed Antiquity can well doubt of them.

We affirm, that whatsoever matter of Faith 1 Prop.
or Practice, is not derived from the first hands by Tradition Catholic, as
explained in the first Concession, is not necessary to Salvation: For it is
agreed, if it were, it would have been preserved by Tradition.

But, it is against all Sense, to believe, that 2 Prop.
Tradition is sufficient to secure us from all Additions to the first Faith; or
Additions and Alterations, in Ceremonies and Worship, or any thing that is not
necessary to Salvation: and herein, indeed, lies the Controversy: for if
Midwifes, Nurses, Parents and Tutors have, as it is said, Tradition in their
hands; and hold themselves obliged not to poison little Babes as soon as they
can receive Instructions accordingly; and Tradition could not possibly admit or
deliver any thing but what is necessary to salvation; it were not possible for
any Error to obtain in the Church, or with any one Party, or even Member of it;
but truth would be equally Catholic with Tradition: and then, Charity will not
suffer us to believe, that the Jews, that kept the Law, should be guilty of any
vain Traditions, contrary to our Savior's Reproofs; or that there should be
any such Parties as Hugonites and Protestants in the World; or such various
Sects in the Church of Rome it self; or so many Successive Additions to the
Faith and Worship of that Church, as none may have the confidence to deny, have
happened.

Vincentius speaks very truly (says Rigaltius) Observe. in Cyp. p. 147.
and prudently, if nothing were delivered by our Ancestors, but what they had
from the Apostles; but under the pretense of our Ancestors, silly or
counterfeit things may by Fools or Knaves be delivered us, for Apostolical
Traditions: and we add, by zealously superstitious men; or by men tempted (as
is evident they were about the time of Easter and Rebaptization in the
beginning) to pretend Tradition to defend their Opinions when put to it in
Controversy.

It further follows, that the Infallibility of 3 Prop.
the Pope, or Court of Rome, or Church, in Matters of Faith, is no necessary
Point of Faith; because it is not delivered down to us, as such, by lawful, i.
e. Catholic Tradition: this is the Point.

Now here we justly except against the Testimony of the present Oral Tradition
of the Roman Church, or Tradition reversed; because it cannot secure us against
additions to the Faith: It is no evidence that Tradition was always the same in
that point; it cannot bear against all Authentic History to the contrary.

That Popes, and Councils, and Fathers, and the Church too, have erred in their
belief and practice, is past all doubt, by that one instance of the Communion
of Infants for some hundred of Years together; which is otherwise determined by
the Council of Trent.

Yea, that there was no such Tradition of the Pope's, or the Church of Rome's
Infallibility in ancient times, is as manifest, by the oppositions betwixt the
Eastern and Western Churches; which could not consist with such Tradition or
belief of it.

And for the Church of England; had she owned such Tradition, her ancient
Bishops would not have contended with and rejected his Messenger, St. Austin
and his Propositions together.

Neither can any considering man imagine, that the Tradition of the Popes
Infallibility is Catholic, or generally received and believed in the Church of
Rome at this day: It Is well known, many of their eminent men renounce it; and
indeed the Pope himself does not believe it, or he does not believe that all
his Doctors believe it: For if he does believe both, why does he not make use
of his Talent, and put an end to all the scandalous broils and Ruptures
occasioned by the Doctrinal differences and Disputes, among the several
factions of his Church; and have peace within his own Borders? But this admits
no Answer.

It Is said by the Romanist, that Universal Traditions are recorded in the
Fathers of every succeeding Age; and it is reasonably spoken. It behooves him as
to the present point, to show us in some good Authors, in every age since the
Apostles, this Tradition for Infallibility; then indeed he has done something
which ought to be done: But till that be done, we must adhere; that there is no
such ground of the Popes Authority over us as his Infallibility, proved by
Scripture or Tradition.

This proof, I think was never yet so much as undertaken, and may be expected:
Hoc opus est. It Is observed by Dr. Stillingfleet, that there is but one eminent
place in Antiquity produced on their side in the behalf of Traditions; and that
is out of St. Basil de sp. sanc. ad Amphilo: But the Book, with just reason, is
suspected. Three of the Traditions mentioned in the place, are the Consecration
of the Person to be Baptized, the standing at the Prayers until Pentecost; and
above all, the Trine Immersion in Baptism. The two first of these, are not
acknowledged by the present Church of Rome; and the last, by the very Council
of Trent, is pronounced not to be of Apostolical Tradition.

Here is not one word touching any Tradition for the Infallibility of the
Church; but indeed much reason against it: For either the present Church at
that time, was actually deceived, and took that to be Apostolical which was not
so; or the present Church in the Council of Trent, took that not to be
Apostolical which indeed was so, and was actually deceived in her Judgment and
determination to the contrary: For those words of that Author, ( parem vim
habent ad pietatem) unwritten Traditions have equal force to stir up Piety with
the written word, put the dilemma beyond exception, as those known words of
Hom. 29. de tri. To. 1.
the true Basil. [That it is a manifest falling from the Faith, and an Argument
of Arrogance, either to reject any point of those things which are written, or
to bring in any of those things which are not written] make it justly
suspicious, that the Book extolling unwritten Traditions was none of his.

Bellarmine's three Arguments. [1. The Fathers say the sentence of general
Councils admits of no Appeal. 2. Such as submit not to them are Heretics. 3.
Such Sentence is Divine.] prove their Authority but not their Infallibility;
and the force of such Sentence is from Scripture, Syst. fid. 1. c. 26. Nu. 2.
or Reason, or Miracles, or approbation of the whole Church; as Occham, and
Santa Clara after St. Augustine affirm. Therefore the Fathers generally allow
us liberty of examination; and derogate Faith from all men beside the Apostles.

CHAP. XVII.
Arg. III For Infallibility from Reason. 3 Reasons answered. Point Argued.
Retorted.
It Is Confessed, that though Scripture and Tradition prove it not; yet if there
be indeed any sound Reason (which is a kind of divine Law) for the Pope's
Infallibility, that will go a great way. But it doubtless ought to be very
clear and strong reason, that is able to carry it in so great a point, without
either Scripture or Tradition: Let us hearken.

Perhaps we have Tradition offering its Service R. 1.
to Reason in another form; and the Argument may stand thus: Tradition is
Infallible, but the Pope in the Church of Rome is the Keeper of Tradition;
therefore thereby the Pope is Infallible.

This Argument indeed, has countenance Antiquity: For Iraeneus advises his
Adversaries, who pretended Tradition, to go to Rome; and there they might know
what was true and Apostolical Tradition, for there it was preserved.

But how could that father assure us, that Rome would always be a faithful
preserver of true Apostolical Tradition?

What security could he give to after Ages, against innovations and additions
to Tradition it self in the Church of Rome?

Remember what has been said, that Tradition can be thought infallible, only
in the substantials of Religion; and consequently cannot protect, either it
self or the Church, from additional errors in other things.

Besides, in the Substantials of Religion, the Protestant Churches have the
benefit of Tradition as well as the Church of Rome; and if that carry
Infallibility with it, our Church is infallible as well as the Church of Rome;
and consequently thereby has a Right to govern it is self.

But the great Reason always gloried in, is Wisdom and Prudence of our blessed
Savior; who had he not intended to afford the assistance of Infallibility to
the succeeding Pastors of his Church, to lead them when assembled in a general
Council, he had built his Church upon the S^nd; as A. C. argues with his Grace
of Canterbury.

Admit the necessity of this Assistance to the the government of the Church in
the Pope, because of his Infallibility?

But if our Savior should not have assured us that he will thus assist his
Church in all Ages, as you cannot show; how do you know he has intended it?
and how unchristian is your Reason, to impeach your Savior with the inference
of Folly; and, as at other times, with Ignorance and imposture, if he has not?

Take heed, has not our Savior built his Church upon the Foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles? and is this Sand in the Roman Sense? Is not Christ
himself the chief Cornerstone? Is he Sand too? Does not he that keeps his
Sayings build upon a Rock, as firm as the decrees of a general Council?

Where has our Savior given us the least intimation, that inherent
Infallibility is the only Rock to secure the Church from Error? Is there not
sufficient ground to rely on the Doctrine of Christ, had there never been a
general Council? What? was the Church built upon the Sand only, before the
Council of Nice? why did it not then fall in the Storms of Persecution?

Did not the Apostles commit the doctrine of Christ to writing? Is not
Tradition the great mean of delivering the Scriptures, and all things needful
to Salvation, by your own Arguments? may not the latter be done by Nurses and
Tutors, etc. without a general Council? and if there be lesser differences in
the Church, is the Foundation subverted presently? and may not those lesser
differences among Christians be healed with Argument, or at least quieted; and
the peace of the Church preserved by the decrees of Councils, without
Infallibility? how unreasonable is it, to deny it?

We grant, says Doctor Stillingfleet, Infallibility P. 259.
in the Foundation of Faith: we declare the owning of that Infallibility is
that, which makes men Christians, (the body of whom we call the Church) we
further grant, that Christ has left in that Church sufficient means for the
preservation of it in Truth and Unity: but we cannot discern, either in
Scripture, Antiquity or Reason, that such Infallibility, is necessary for the
Churches preservation, by the Councils of succeeding Pastors; much less, a
living and standing Infallible Judge, as the Head of the Church.

But they say, the Infinite Dissentions and Divisions R. 3.
amongst those that deny it, make this necessary.

How is it in the Roman Church? are there sole Remedy Ineffectual? yea, are
there no differences there, about Infallibility it self? the Manner and Subject
of it? are not many of your selves, ashamed, and weary of it? do not some of
you deny it, and set up Tradition, in stead of it? was not the Apostle too
blame, to say, there must be Heresies or Divisions among you, and not to tell
them, there must be an Infallible Judge among you, and no Heresies? but now men
are wiser, and of another mind.

To conclude; whether we regard the Truth or Unity of the Church; both Reason
and Sense assures us that this Infallibility signifies nothing: for, as to
Truth, it is impossible men should give up their Faith and Conscience, and
inward apprehension of things, to the Sentence of any one man, or all the men
in the World, against their own Reason; and for Unity, there is no color or
shadow of pretense against it; but that the Authority of Ecclesiastical
Government, can preserve it, as well without, as with Infallibility.

But if there be any Sense in the Argument, methinks, it is better thus: the
Head and Governor of the Christian Church, must of necessity be Infallible:
but the Pope is not Infallible, either by Scripture, Tradition, or Reason;
therefore the Pope is not the Head and Governor of the Christian Church.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Pope's Universal Pastorship; its Right; divine or humane; this Civil,
or Ecclesiastical; all examined; Constantine; King John; Justinian; Phocas, etc;
WE have found some flaws in the pretended Title of the Pope; as our Converter,
Patriarch, Possessor; and as the Subject of Infallibility: his last and
greatest Argument is his Universal Pastorship: and indeed, if it be proved that
he is the Pastor of the whole Church of Christ on Earth; he is ours also: and
we cannot withdraw our obedience from him, without the guilt of that which is
charged upon us, viz. Schism; (if his Commands be justifiable) but if the proof
of this fail also, we are acquitted.

This Right of the Pope's Universal Pastorship, is divine or humane, (if at
all;) both are pretended, and are to be examined.

The Bishop of Calcedon is very indifferent and reasonable as to the Original:
if the Right be granted, it is not de fide, to believe whether it come from God
or no.

If the Pope be Universal Pastor Jure humano only; his Title is, either from
Civil or from Ecclesiastical Power; and least we should err Fundamentally we
shall consider the pretenses from both.

If it be said, that the Civil Power has conferred this honor upon the Pope:
may it not be questioned, whether the Civil Powers of the World extend so far,
as either, to dispose of the Government of the Church; or to subject all the
Churches under one Pastor.

However, de facto, when was this done? when did the Kings of England, in
Conjunction with the Rulers of the whole World, make such a Grant to the Pope?

I think the World has been ashamed of the Constable. donat.
Donation of Constantine long agon; yet, that no shadow may remain unscattered,
we shall briefly take an account of it.

They say Constantine, the third day after he was baptized, left all the West
part of the Empire to Pope Sylvester; and went himself to dwell at
Constantinople; and gave the whole Imperial and Civil Dominion of Rome, and all
the Western Kingdoms, to the Pope and his Successors for ever.

A large Boon indeed: this looks, as if it was intended that the Pope should be
an Emperor; but who makes him Universal Pastor? and who ever since has
bequeathed the Eastern World to him, either as Pastor or Emperor? for, it
should seem, that part, Constantine then kept for himself.

But Mr. Harding throws off all these little Cavils; and with sufficient
Evidence out of Math. Hieromonachus, a Greek Author, shows the very Words of
the Decree, which carry it for the Pope, as well in Ecclesiastical as Civil
Advantages: they are these: (...), etc. We decree, and give in charge to all
Lords, and to the Senate of our Empire, that the Bishop of Rome, and Successor
of Saint Peter, chief of the Apostles, have Authority and Power in all the
World; greater than that of the Empire; that he have more honor than the
Emperor; and that he be Head of the four Patriarchal Seats; and that matters of
Faith be by him determined: this is the Charter, whereby some think the Pope
has Power (says De potest. Pap. c. 19.
Harveus) as Lord of the whole World, to set up and pull down Kings.

It Is confessed, this Grant is not pleaded, lately, with any Confidence. Indeed
Bishop Jewel did check it early, when he showed Harding; the wisest and best
among the Papists have openly disproved it: such as Platina, Cusanus, Petavius,
Laurent. Valla, Antoninus Florentinus, and a great many more.

Cardinal Cusanus has these words: Donationem Constantini dilligenter
expendens, etc. Carefully weighing this Grant of Constantine even Conc. Cath.
lib. 3. c. 2.
in the very penning thereof, I find manifest Arguments of Forgery and Falsehood.

It Is not found in the Register of Gratian; that is, in the allowed Original
Text; though, it be indeed in the Palea of some Books; yet that Palea is not
read in the Schools: and of it Pope Pius himself said, dicta Palea
[Constantinus] Pius. 2. dial.
falsa est; and inveighs against the Canonists that dispute an valuerit id,
quod nunquam fuit: and those that speak most favorably of it, confess, that it
is as true, that [ Vox Angelorum Audita est,] that, at the same time, the voice
of Angels was heard in the Air, saying, hodie venenum effusum est in Ecclesiam.

Much more to the discountenance of this P. 537, 538. 539.
vain Story you have in Bishop Jewel's Defense; which to my observation was
never since answered; to him therefore I refer my Reader.

But, alas, if Constantine had made such a Grant; Pope Pipus, tells us it was a
question among the very Canonists an valuerit? and the whole World, besides,
must judge the Grant void in it self, especially after Constantine's time.

Had Satan's Grant been good to our Savior, if he had fallen down and worshipped
him? no more had Constantine's; pardon the comparison: for in other things, he
showed great and worthy zeal, for the flourishing Grandeur of the Church of
Christ; though, by this he had, as was said, given nothing but poison to it:
for the Empire of the World and the Universal Pastorship of the Church, was not
Constantine's to give to the Pope and his Successors for ever. King John.


But it is urged, nearer home, that King John delivered up his Crown to the
Pope; and received it again, as his Gift.

It Is true; but this Act of present fear, could not be construed a Grant of
Right to the Pope; if King John gave away any thing, it was neither the Power
of making Laws for England; nor the exercise of any Jurisdiction in England,
that he had not before; for he only acknowledged (unworthily) the Pope's Power;
but pretended not to give him such Power, to confer the Crown for ever; much
less to make him Supreme Disposer of our English Church.

But if our Constitution be considered, how inconsiderable an Argument is this?
our Kings cannot give away the Power of the Crown during their own times,
without an Act of Parliament: the King and Parliament together, cannot dispose
of any thing inherent to the Crown of England, without a Power of Resumption;
or to the prejudice of Succeeding Kings: besides, no King of England ever did,
(not King John himself) either with, or without his Parliament, by any Solemn
Public Act transfer the Government of this Church to the Bishop of Rome; or so
much as Recognize it to be in Him before Henry the Eighth; and what John did,
Harpf. ad 5. Re. 14. c. 5.
was protested against by the Three States, then in Parliament.

And although Queen Mary, since, made a higher acknowledgment of his Holiness,
than ever we read was done here before; yet it is evident, she gave him rather
the Complement of the Title of that uncertain Word (Supreme Head) than any real
Power; as we observed before; and yet her New Act to that purpose, was endured
to remain in force, but a very short time, about four or five years.

But although neither Constantine, for the Justinian.
whole World; nor King John for England, did or could devise the Supremacy to
the Pope; it is confessed, the Emperor Justinian endeavored somewhat that
looked like it.

Justinian was a great friend of the Roman Bishop: Cod. inter Claras.
he says, Properamus honorem and authoritatem crescere sedis vestrae, we
labor to subject and unite all the Eastern Priests to the Sea of your Holiness.

But this is a plain demonstration that the Sea of Rome did not extend to the
East, near six hundred years after Christ; otherwise that would have been no
addition of honor or Authority to it; neither would Justinian have endeavored
what was done before; as it does not appear that he afterward effected it.

Therefore the Title that he then gave the Pope [of the Chief and Head of all
the Churches] must carry a qualified sense; and was only a Title of honor
befitting the Bishop of the Chief and most eminent Church, as the Roman Church
then was: (and indeed Justinian was a Courtier; and styles the Bishop of
Contantinople universal Patriarch too) or at most can only signify, that his
intentions were to raise the Pope to the chief Power over the whole Church;
which, as was said before, he had not yet obtained.

This is all that can be inferred, if these Epistles betwixt the Emperor and
the Pope be not forged; as Learned Papists suspect, because in Greg. Holiand.
and Azo.
the eldest and allowed Books, they are not to be found.

However, if Justinian did design any thing in favor of the Pope, it was only
the subjecting of the Clergy to him as an Ecclesiastical Ruler; and yet that no
farther, than might well enough consist with the Supremacy of the Empire, in
causes Ecclesiastical as well as Civil; which memento spoils all the argument.

For we find the same Justinian under this imperial style, We command the most
holy Archbishops and Patriarchs of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch,
and Jerusalem. Authent. Colla. 1.

We find him making Laws upon Monks, Priests, Bishops, and all kind of
Churchmen, to enforce them to their duty.

We find him putting forth his Power and Authority for the sanction of the
Canons of Councils; and making them to have the force of Laws.

We find him punishing the Clergy, and the Popes themselves; yea it is well
known and confessed by Romanists, that he deprived two Popes, Sylverius and
Vigilius: Indeed Mr. Harding says, that was done by Theodora the Empress; but
it is otherwise recorded in their own Pontifical; the Emperor demanded of
Belsarius what he had done with the Romans, and how he had deposed Sylverius,
and placed Vigilius in his stead? Upon Conc. To. 2. in v. Vigil.
his answer, both the Emperor and Empress gave him thanks: Now it is a Rule in
Law, Rati habito retrotrabitur, and mandato comparatur.

Zaberel declares it to be Law, that the Pope, De Schis. and Conci.
in any notorious crime, may be accused before the Emperor; and the Emperor may
require of the Pope an account of his Faith: And the Emperor ought to proceed,
says Harvy, against De Potes. Pap. c. 13.
the Pope, upon the request of the Cardinals.

And it was the judgment of the same Justinian himself, that there is no kind
of thing but Con. Constable. 5. Act. 1.
it may be thoroughly examined by the Emperor: For he has a principality from
God over all men; the Clergy as well as Laity.

But his erecting of Justiniana prima, and giving the Bishop, Locum Apostolicae
sedis; to which all the Provinces should make their last Appeal, Gothop. Nov.
13. c. 3. Nov. 11.
whereby, as Nicephorus affirms, the Emperor made it a free City, a Head to it
self; with full power independent from all others: And as it is in the imperial
constitutions; the Primate thereof should have all power of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, the Supreme Priesthood, Supreme Honor and Dignity. This is such
an instance, both of Justinian's Judgment and Power, contrary to the Popes
pretensions of Supremacy, (as granted or acknowledged by the Emperor Justinian)
that all other Arguments of it are ex abundanti; and there is no great need of
subjoyning that other great and like instance of his restoring Carthage to its
primacy after the Vandals were driven out; and annexing two new Provinces, that
were not so before, to its jurisdiction, without the proviso of submitting it
self to Rome; though before Carthage had ever refused to do it.

Phocas the Emperor and Pope Boniface, no doubt, understood one another; and
were well enough agreed upon the point: But we shall never yield that these two
did legally represent the Church and the World; or that the grant of the one,
and the greedy acceptance on the other part, could bind all Christians and all
mankind, in subjection to his Holiness's Chair for ever.

Valentinian said, all Antiquity has given the principality of Priesthood to
the Bishop of Rome: But no Antiquity ever gave him a principality of Power; no
doubt he, as well as the other Emperors, kept the Political Supremacy in his
own hands.

Charles the Great might complement Adrian, and call him universal Pope; and
say he gave St. Wilehade a Bishopric at his command: But he kept the power of
convocating Synods every year, and sat in them as a Judge himself. Auditor and
arbiter adfui: he made Ecclesiastical Decrees in his own Name, to whom this
very Pope -- acquitted all claim in the Election of succeeding Popes for ever.
A great deal more in answer to both these, you have in Archbishop Bramhall. p.
235, 236. and King James's defense. p. 50. etc.

CHAP. XIX.
The Popes pretended Ecclesiastical Right. Not by General Councils. 8 First. To
which Sworn. Justi. Sanction. Can. Apost. allowed by C. Nice and Ephesus.
THough it seem below his Holiness's present grandeur to ground his Right upon
the Civil Power, especially when that fails him; yet methinks the jus
Ecclesiasticum, is not at all unbecoming his pretenses, who is sworn to govern
the Church according to the Canons, as they say the Pope is.

If it be pleaded, that the Canons of the Fathers do invest the Pope with
plenary Power over all Churches: And if it could be proved too; yet one thing
more remains to be proved, to subject the Church of England to that his power,
viz. that the Canon Law is binding and of force in England as such, or without
our own consent or allowance: And it is impossible this should be proved, while
our Kings are Supreme; and the constitution of the Kingdom stands as it has
always stood.

However, we decline not the examination of the plea, viz. that the Popes
Supremacy over the whole Church is granted by the Canons of Councils, viz.
general: But when this is said, it is but reasonable to demand which? or in
what Canons?

It is said, the Pope receives his Office with an Oath, to observe the Canons
of the eight first general Councils; in which of these is the grant to be
found? Sure so great a conveyance should be very legible and Intelligible.

We find it very plain, that in some of those Councils, and those the most
ancient; this Power is expressly denied him, and that upon such reason, as is
eternal: and might justly and effectually prevent any such grant or usurpation
of such power for ever; if future Grants were to be just and reasonable, or
future Popes were to be governed by Right or Equity; by the Canons of the
Fathers, or fidelity to the Church, to God or their own solemn Oaths at their
Inaugurations.

But we are prepared for the examination of the Councils in this matter, by a
very strong presumption: That seeing Justinian made the Canons to have the
force of Laws, and he had ever showed himself so careful to maintain the Rights
of the Empire in all causes, as well as over all persons, Ecclesiastical; and
even Popes themselves; it is not credible that he would suffer any thing in
those Canons to pass into the body of the Laws, that should be agreeable to the
pretended donation of Constantine; or to the prejudice of the Emperor's said
Supremacy; and consequently, not much in favor of the Supremacy claimed by
later Popes.

Justinian's Sanction extended to the four Justin. Sanction of four first.
great Councils, Nic. Constant. Ephesians. 1. and Calcedon; in these Words, (...),
etc. Sancimus Vicem Legum obtinere Sanctos Ecclesiasticos Canones, qui a
Sanctis quatuor Conciliis constituti sunt and confirmati; hoc est Niceno, etc.
-- praedictorum enim Consiliorum dogmata, sicut divinas Scripturas, accipimus,
and Canones sicut Leges observamus.

Perhaps, it may be doubted, why he did not Apostles* Canons not mention.
reason.
confirm those Canons which were then well known by the Title of the Canons of
the Apostles: whether, because their Authority was suspected, especially many
of them; or, because Vid. Bin. To. 1. p. 17. a.
they were not made by a truly General Council; or, because they were Confirmed
in and with the Council of Nice and Ephesus, etc. or lastly, whether, because
the first fifty had before, a greater Sanction from the general Reception of
the whole Ibid.
Church; or the greater Authority of the Sacred Names of the Authors, the
Apostles, or Apostolical men; I venture not to declare my opinion.

But truly, there seems something considerable for the later; for that the
Council of Nice do not pretend to confirm the Apostles Canons, but their own,
by the Quotation of them; taking Authority from them, as Laws, founded in the
Church before to build their own and all future Canons and Decrees of Councils
upon, in such matters as were found there determined.

A great Instance of the probability of this Conjecture we have, full to our
present purpose given us by Binius, Nicena Synodus Can. 6. Bin. To. 1. p. 20.
etc. the Nicene and Ephesine Synods followed these Canons of the Apostles,
appointing that every Bishop acknowledge suum primum their Chief and
Metropolitan, Can. Ap. allowed by C. Nice and Ephesus.
and do nothing without their own Diocese: but rather, the Bishop of
Alexandria; according to the Canons (understand says Binius those 35, 36 of
the Apostles) must govern the Churches of Egypt; the Bishop of the East, the
Eastern Churches: the Ephesine Synod, also says, it is besides the Canons of
the Apostles, that the Bishop of Antioch should ordain in the Provinces of
Cyprus, etc.

Hence, it is plain, that according to Apostles Canons, interpreted and allowed
as Authentic, so far at least, by the Synods of Nice and Ephesus, the
Metropolitan was Primate or Chief oyer the Churches within his Provinces; and,
that he, as such (exclusive of all Foreign Superior Power) was to govern and
ordain, within his own Provinces; not consonant to, but directly against the
pretended Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome.

But let us consult the Canons to which Binius refers, and the matter is
plainer.

SECT. I.
Can. Apostol.
THere is nothing in the Canons of the Apostles to our purpose, but what we
find in Can. 35, 36. or in the Reddition, as Binius gives it, Can. 33 and 34.

(...), etc. let the Bishops of 35, 33.
every Nation know, or they ought to know, who among them is accounted (or is)
chief; and esteem him (...) ut caput; and do nothing difficult ( aut magni
momenti) praeter ejus Conscientiam, vel Sententiam: but, what if the matter
were too hard for the Primate; is no direction given to go to the Infallible
Chair at Rome? here, was indeed a proper place for it, but not a word of that.

In the 36 alias 34. it is added, that a Bishop should not dare to ordain any,
beyond the bounds of his own Jurisdiction: but neither of these Canons concern
the Pope; unless they signify, that the Pope is not Head of all Churches, and
has not power in any place, but within the Diocese of Rome: or, that Binius
was not faithful in leaving out the word (...), or Head, in his Note upon these
Canons.

SECT. II.
Council. Nicen. Genesis 1. Bellar. Evasion.
WE find nothing in the true Canons of the Nicene Synod, that looks our way,
except Can. 6. and 7. They are thus; (...), etc. Let ancient Custom be kept,
through Can. 6.
Egypt, Libia and Pentapolis; so, as the Bishop of Alexandria may have power
over all these, (...), because also the like Custom is for the Bishop of the
City of Rome: (...)* as likewise at Antioch and other Provinces, let the
Privileges be kept in their own Churches: but suppose differences arise; is no
Liberty or Remedy provided, by going to Rome? no more, than if differences
arise in the Roman Church, they may have Remedy from any other; a Remedy is
indeed provided by the Canon; Sin duo aut tres, etc. ^f two or three do
contradict, (...). not go to Rome; but obtineat Sententia plurimorum, let the
major Vote carry it.

In the seventh Canon, Custom and Tradition Can. 7.
both, are the Grounds upon which the Council confirmed the like privilege of
the Church of Jerusalem; because Custom and Ancient Tradition, ut Aeliae
Episcopus honoretur, let him have have the consequence of Honor, with a Salvo,
for the proper Dignity of the Metropolis; but not a word of Rome.

Note, that in Can. 6. the Power of the Alexandrian Bishop is grounded upon
Ancient Custom (Antiqua consuetudo servetur) and not upon the Concession of the
Roman Bishop; as Berlarmine would force it; and that the like manner or Custom
of Rome, is but another Example of the same thing, as Antioch was and the rest
of the Provinces; but this ungrammatical and illogical Evasion was put off
before.

SECT. III.
Council. Constantinop. Genesis 2. An. 381.
THe next Council, admired by Justinian, as one of the Gospels, is that Famous
Council of Constantinople adorned with 150 Fathers. Has this made any better
provision for the Pope's Supremacy? certainly no: for the very Can. 1. Bin. p.
660. Alter. Editio. Bin. p. 664. Can. 2.
first Canon, charge us not to despise the Faith of the 318 Fathers in the
Synod of Nice; which ought to be held firm and Inviolate.

The Second Canon forbids the confusion of Diocesses; and therefore injoyns
(Secundum Regulas constitutas, i. e.) the Rules of the Apostles, and Nicene
Fathers to be kept: the Bishop of Alexandria must govern them in Egypt only;
and so the rest, as are there mentioned more particularly, than in Nicene
Canons.

In the Third, is reinforced the Canon of the Can. 3.
former Council against Ordinations by Bishops out of their own Jurisdictions;
and adds this Reason, that casts no countenance upon any Foreign Jurisdiction;
it is manifest that the proper Provincial Synod ought to administer and govern
all things, per quasque singulas Provincias, within their peculiar Provinces;
secundum ea quae sunt in Nicaea definita.

This third Canon honors the Bishop of Constantinople, next after the Bishop
of Rome; as Binius renders (...). But Binius is very angry that such a Canon is
found there, and urges many reasons against it; and therefore Bin. To. 1. 672.
we shall conclude, that as none of the rest, so neither does this Canon,
confer the universal government of the Church upon the Bishop of Rome.

SECT. IV.
Council. Ephesin. Genesis 3. An. Christi 431.
THe third general Council, whose Canons Justinian passed into Laws, is that of
Ephesus, and this so far abhors from the grant, that it is a plain and zealous
contradicter of the Popes pretensions.

In Act the seventh, it is agreed against the invasion of the Bishop of Antioch,
that the Cyprian Prelates shall hold their Rights untouched and unviolated,
according to the Canons of the holy Fathers (before mentioned) and the ancient
custom, ordaining their own Bishops; and let the same be observed in other
Diocesses, and in all Provinces, that no Bishop occupy another Province, (or
subject it by force) which formerly and from the beginning, was not under his
power or his Predecessors: Or if he have done so let him restore it, that the
Canons of the Fathers be not slighted, nor Pride creep into the Church -- nor
Christian Liberty be lost. Therefore it has pleased the holy Synod, that every
Province enjoy its Rights and Customs unviolated, which it had from the
beginning, (...), twice repeated, whereby we are to learn a very great Rule;
that the bounds of primacies were settled very early, before this Council or
any other general Council, before this even at the beginning: and that those
bounds ought to be observed to the end, according to the Canons of the Fathers
and ancient custom: and consequently, that such as are invaders of others
Rights, are bound to make restitution. Now it is evident, we were a free
Province in England in the beginning, and when St. Augustine came from Rome to
invade our Liberties; it is evident this Council gave the Pope no power or
privilege to invade us: Yea, that what power the Pope got over us in after
times, was a manifest violation of the Rights we had from the beginning; as
also of the Canons of the ancient Fathers, in the three mentioned sacred and
General Councils of Nice, Constantinople, and Ephesus; all grounded upon the
ancienter Canons called the Apostles.

Lastly, such Usurpers were always under the obligation of the Canon to restore
and quit their encroachments; and consequently the Brittanick Churches were
always free to vindicate and reassume their Rights and Liberties, as they
worthily did in Hen. 8.

SECT. V.
Council. Calcedon, Genesis 4. An, 451. S. W's Gloss.
THere is little hope that this Council should afford the Pope any advantage,
seeing it begins ( Canones etc.) with the confirmation of all the Canons made
by the Fathers in every Synod before that time; and consequently of those that
we have found in prejudice to his pretensions among the rest.

The Ninth Canon enjoins upon differences Can. 9.
betwixt Clerks, that the Cause be heard before the proper Bishop; betwixt a
Bishop and a Clerk, before the Provincial Synod; betwixt a Bishop or Clerk and
the Metropolitan, before (...), or the Sea of the Royal City of Constantinople.
To the same effect we read Can. 17. Can. 17.
Si quis a suo, etc. If any one be injured by his Bishop or Metropolitan, apud
Exarchum seu Primatem Dioceseos, vel Constantinopolitam sedem litiget. But

Where is any provision made for Remedy at Rome? Indeed that could not consist
with the sense of this Synod, who would not endure the Supremacy, or so much as
the Superiority of Rome above Constantinople.

This is evident in Can. 28 the Fathers gave Can. 28.
privilege to the Sea of old Rome; Quod Vrbs illa imperaret, and eadem
consideratione, says the Canon, and for the same reason an hundred and fifty
Bishops gave (...), equal Privileges to the Seat of new Rome; recte
judicantes, rightly judging that that City that has the Empire and the Senate,
should enjoy equal Privileges with old Royal Rome, etiam in rebus
Ecclesiasticis non secus ac illa extolli ac magnifieri, secundam post illam
existentem.

Now to what purpose does S. W. (to Dr. S. W.'s Gloss.
Hammond) trifle on the Canon, and tell us that these Privileges were only
Honorary Pomps; when the Canon adds in Ecclesiastical matters, and names one,
the Ordination of Bishops and Metropolitans within themselves; as before was
declared by the divine Canons. We conclude that this Bar against the Popes
universal Pastorship, will never be removed.

These are the four first general Councils, honored by Justinian as the four
Gospels; to which he gave the Title and force of Laws. By which all Popes are
bound (by solemn Oath) to Rule the Church: Yet we find not one word in any of
them, for the Popes pretended universal Pastorship: Yea in every one of them we
have found so much and so directly against it; that as they give him no power
to govern the whole Church; so by swearing to observe them in such government
as the Canons deny him; he swears to a contradiction as well as to the ruin of
his own pretensions.

We conclude from the premises, that now, future Councils seem to build upon
the Nicene Canons; as that, upon the Apostles; if the Canons of Nice do indeed
limit the power of the Bishop of Rome, or suppose it to have limits; if his
cause be tried by the Councils, it must needs he desperate.

Now if those Canons suppose bounds to belong Minor.
to every Patriarchate, they suppose the like to Rome: But it is plain, that the
bounds are given by those Canons to the Bishop of Alexandria; and the reason
is, because this is also customary to the Bishop of Rome. Now it is not
reasonable to say, Alexandria must have limits because Rome has, if Rome have
no limits.

Pope Nicolas himself so understood it, whatever I. E. Pis. 8.
S. W. did: Nicena, etc. the Nicene Synod, says he, conferred no increase on
Rome, but rather took from Rome an example, particularly, what to give to the
Church of Alexandria.

Whence Dr. Hammond strongly concludes, that if at the making of the Nicene
Canons Rome had bounds; it must needs follow by the Ephesine Canon, that those
bounds must be at all times observed in contradiction to the universal
Pastorship of that See.

The matter is ended, if we compare the other Latin Version of the Nicene
Canon, with the Canon as before noted.

Antiqui moris est ut Vrbis Romae Episcopus habeat principatum, ut suburbicana
loca, and omnem provinciam sua sollicitudine gubernet; q^e vero apud Aegyptum
sunt, Alexandrinae Episcopus omnem habeat sollicitudinem: Similiter autem and
circa Antiochiam and in caeteris Provinciis privilegia propria serventur
Metropolitanis Ecclesiis.

Whence it is evident, that the Bishop of Rome then had a distinct Patriarchate
as the rest had; and that whatever Primacy might be allowed him beyond his
Province, it could not have any real power over the other Provinces of
Alexandria, etc. And it is against the plain sense of the Rule, that the
Antiquus mos should signify the custom of the Bishop of Rome's permission of
Government to the other Patriarchs, as Bellarmine feigneth. This Edition we
have in Christopher Justellus's Library; the Canon is in Voel. Biblioth. Jur.
Cano. Tom. 1. p. 284.

SECT. VI.
Council. Constant. 2. The Fifth General Conc. of 165 Bishops. An. 553.
BAronius and Binius both affirm, that this was Bar. an. 553. nu. 224. Bin. To.
2. Not. in con. Constable. 5.
a general Council; and so approved by all Popes, Predecessors and Successors
of St. Gregory, and St. Gregory himself.

The cause was; Pope Agapetus had condemned Anthinius; the matter was
afterward ventilated in the Council: Now where was the Popes Supremacy? we
shall see immediately.

After Agapetus, succeeded Vigilius: When the Council condemned the Tria
Capitula, Pope Vigilius would defend them; but how did he carry it in Faith or
Fact? Did the Council submit to his Judgment or Authority? No such thing: But
quite contrary, the Council condemned the tria capitula and ended: The Pope for
not consenting, but opposing the Council, is banished by the Emperor Justinian.
Then Vigilius submits, and confirms the Sentence of the Council; and so is
released from Banishment. This is enough, out of both Ibid. N* 223.
Baronius and Binius.

The Sum is, we condemn (say they as is expressed in the very Text) all that
have defended the Tria Capitula; but Vigilius, say the Historians, defended the
Tria Capitula; therefore was Vigilius the Pope condemned by this Council: such
Authority they gave him.

SECT. VII.
Council. Constant. of 289 Bishops. 6 General. An. 681 vel 685. Council. Nic. 7
General. of 350 Bishops. An. 781.
BEllarmine acknowledges these to be sixth and seventh general Councils; and
both these he acknowledges did condemn Pope Honorius for an Heretic. lib. 4.
de Pont. C. 11.

For Bellarmine to urge that these Councils were deceived in their Judgment
touching his opinion, is not to the point; we are not disputing now, whether a
Pope may be a Heretic in a private or public Capacity, in which the Councils
now condemned him; though he seems to be a bold man, to prefer his own bare
conjecture a thousand years after about a matter of Fact, before the judgment
of two general Councils, consisting of 659 Bishops; when the cause was fresh,
Witnesses living, and all circumstances visibly before their eyes: But our
question is whether these Councils did either give to the Pope as such, or
acknowledged in him an uncontrollable Authority over the whole Church? The
Answer is short, they took that power to themselves; and condemned the Pope for
Heresy as they also did Sergins of Constantinople.

SECT. VIII.
Council. Genesis 8. Constant. 383 Bishops. An. 870. Conclusions from them all.
HOw did this eighth general Council recognize Tom. 3. p. 149.
the Popes Supremacy? Binius himself tells us; this Council condemned a custom
of the Sabbath-Fast in Lent; and the practice of it in the Church of Rome; and
the word is, We will that the Canon be observed in the Church of Rome,
inconfuse vires habet.

It Is boldly determined against the Mother Church; Rome concerned, reproved,
commanded? Where is the Authority of the Bishop of Rome?

Rome would be even with this Council, and therefore, says Surius, she
receives not this 55 Canon. (Tom. 2. in conc. Constable. 6. p. 1048. ad Can. 65 in
Not. Bin.

But why must this Canon only be rejected? Oh! it is not to be endured, that is
all the reason we can have. But was not this a general Council? Is it not one
of the eight sworn to by every Pope? Is not this Canon of the same Authority
(as of the Council) with all the rest? Or is it tolerable to say, it is not
Authentic because the Pope does not receive it; and he does not receive it
because it is against himself? Quia Matrem Ecclesiarum omnium Romans Ecclesiam
reprehendit, non recipitur. says Surius, ibid.

These are the eight first general Councils, allowed by the Roman Church at
this day: What little exceptions they would defend their Supremacy with,
against all that has appeared; are answered in the Post script at the latter
end of the book, whither I refer my Readers for fuller satisfaction.

In the mean time we cannot but conclude, Conclus. 7 Infer.
1. That the Fathers during eight hundred and seventy years after Christ, knew
no such thing as the Popes Supremacy by divine Right or any right at all,
seeing they opposed it.

2. That they did not believe the Infallibility of the Church of Rome.

3. That they had no Tradition of either that Supremacy or Infallibility.

4. That it is vain to plead Antiquity in the Fathers or Councils or Primitive
Church for either.

5. That the Judgment of those 8 general Councils was at least the Judgment and
Faith, not only during their own times, but till the contrary should be decreed
by a following Council of as great Authority; and how long that was after, I
leave to themselves to answer.

6. That the Canons of those 8 first general Councils, being the sense both of
the ancient and the professed Faith of the present Church of Rome; the Popes
Authority stands condemned by the Catholic Church at this day; by the ancient
Church and the present Church of Rome her self, as she holds Communion, at
least in profession, with the Ancient.

7. That this was the Faith of the Catholic Church, in opposition to the
pretended Supremacy of the Pope, long after the eight first General Councils,
is evident, by the plain Sense of it, in the said Point, declared by several
Councils in the Ages following; as appears both in the Greek and Latin Church:
a word of both.

SECT. IX.
The Latin Church. Constance. Basil. Councils, etc.
THe Council of Constance in Germany, long after; of almost a thousand Fathers,
An. 1415, Say, they were inspired by the Holy Ghost; and a General Council,
representing the whole Church, and having immediate power from Christ;
whereunto, obedience is due from all Persons, both for Faith and Reformation,
whether in the Head or Members: this was expressly confirmed by Pope Martin, to
be held inviolable in Matters of Faith, vid. Surium. Council. Constable 99. 4. Tom.
3. Conc. Their great Reason was, the Pope is not Head of the Church by Divine
Ordinance; as the Council of Calcedon said, a thousand years before.

Now, where was necessary Union and Subjection to the Pope? where was his
Supremacy Jure divino? where was Tradition, Infallibility, or the Faith of the
present Church, for the Pope's Authority? Council. Basil. Bin. To. 4. in Conc.
Basil. initio.

The Council of Basil. An. 1431. decreed, as the Council of Constance; Pope
Eugenius, would dissolve them; the Council commands the contrary, and suspend
the Pope: concluding, that who ever shall question their power therein, is an
Heretic: the Pope pronounces them Schismatics; in the end, the Pope did
yield, and not dissolve the Council: this was the Judgment of the Latin Church
above 1400 years after Christ; and indeed to this day, of the true Church of
France; and in Henry the Eighth's time of England; as Gardner said; the Pope is
not a Head by Dominion, but Order: his Authority, is none, with us; we ought
not to have to do with Rome; the Common Sense of all in England.

Bellarmine says, that the Pope's Subjection to De Conc. li. 2. c. 14.
General Councils is inconsistent with the Supreme Pastorship: it is Repugnant
to the Primacy of Saint Peter, says Gregory de Valentia: yet nothing Anal.
fid. l. 8. c. 14.
is more evident, than that General Councils did exercise Authority over Popes;
deposing them; and disposing of their Sees, as the Council of Constance did,
three together; and always made Canons in opposition to their Pretensions.

Yea, it is certain, that a very great Number, if not the greater, of the Roman
Church it self, were ever of this Faith; that General Vid. Dr. Hammond's
dispute. p. 102.
Councils are Superior; have Authority over; give Laws unto; and may justly
censure the Bishop of Rome.

Pope Adrian the Sixth, and very many other Learned Romanists, declared this to
be their Judgment, just before, or near upon the time, that Henry the Eighth
was declared Supreme in England: So much for the Latin Church.

SECT. X.
The Greek Church. African Can. Synod. Carth. Cancil. Antiochen. The Faith of
the Greek Church since.
THat the Greek Church understood the first General Councils, directly contrary
to the Pope's Supremacy, is written with a Sunbeam; in several other Councils.

1. By the Canons of the African Church.
The 27th Canon forbids all Transmarine Appeals; Can. 27.
threatens such as make them with Excommunication; makes order that the last
Appeal proper Primate, or a General Council; to the same effect, is the 137
Canon; and the Notes of Voel, upon these Canons, put it beyond question, that
in the Transmarine Appeals, Tom. 1. p. 425.
they meant those to Rome; as it is expressed, the Church of Rome, and the
Priests of the Roman Church.

2. Constable. Council. Antiochen.
This Council is more plain: it says, if any Bishop, in any Crime, be judged
by all the Bishops in the Province, he shall be judged in no wise by any Other:
the Sentence given by the Provincial Bishops, shall remain firm. Thus the Pope
is excluded, even in the case of Bishops, out of his own Province; contrary to
the great pretense of Bellarmine, ibid.

3. Syn. Carthag.
This Synod confirmed the twenty Canons of Nice; and the Canons of the African
Councils: and then, in particular, they decreed, ab Vniversis Can. 4.
-- Si Criminosus est non admittatur: again, 8.
if any one, whether Bishop or Presbiter, that is driven from the Church, be
received into Communion (by another) even he that receives him is held guilty
of the like Crime: Refugientes sui Episcopi regulare Judicium.

Again, if a Bishop be guilty, when there is Synod, let him be judged by twelve
Bishops; Secundum Statuta Veterum Conciliorum, the Statutes Ancients knew no
reserve for the Pope in that Case.

Further; no Clergyman might go beyond the Seas, viz. to Rome, without the
Advice of his Metropolitan; and taking his Formatam, vel Commendationem.

The 28 Canon is positive, that Priests and Deacons shall not Appeal, ad
Transmarina Judicia, viz. to Rome; but to the Primates of their own Provinces:
and they add, Sicut and de Episcopis saepe constitutum est: and if any shall do
so, none in Africa shall receive them; and Can. African Councils, to which
Appeals are allowed, as well as to the Primates; but still Rome is Barred.

The Sense of the Greek Church, since.

Now when did that Church subject it self to Rome in any Case? our Adversaries
acknowledge the early contests betwixt the Eastern and Western Churches, in the
point of Supremacy; where, then, is the Consent of Fathers; or Universality of
time and place, they use to boast of?

Bellarmine confesses, that An. 381. to the time of the Council of Florence,
viz. 1140 years, the Greek Church disclaimed subjection to the Pope, and Church
of Rome; and he confesses, they did so, in several general Councils.

And he does but pretend, that this Church submitted it self to Rome, in the
Council of Florence, An. 1549. for the contrary is evident, in that they would
not yield, that the Pope should choose them a Patriarch; as Surius himself
observes, Tom. 4. p. 489.

So true is it, that Maldonate and Prateolus Mald. in Math. 10. 2. Prate. in
Haer. Tit. Grae. Vid. St. Aug. To. 2. Epist. 162.
acknowledge and Record; the Greek Church always disliked the Supreme Dignity
of the Pope; and would never obey his Decrees.

To conclude, the Law of the Greeks has always been against the Pope's
Supremacy; the Fundamental Law was, a prohibition of Appeals to Rome:
therefore, that Church acknowledged no absolute Subjection to Rome. 2. They
excommunicate all African Priests Appealing to Rome; therefore, they held no
necessity of Union with Rome. 3. They excommunicate all such ( qui putaverint)
as should but think it lawful to Appeal to Rome; therefore, they had no Faith
of the necessity of either Union or Subjection to the Church of Rome.

Enough, to the Pope's prejudice, from the Councils of all sorts: we must, in
the foot of the account, mind our Adversaries, that we have found no color for
the pretense of a Grant, from any one General Council, of the Pope's Authority;
much less over the Church of England: which, their Plea from the Canons,
expressly requires at their hand.

For, my Lord Bramhall, with invincible Reason, affirms: We were once a free
Patriarchate, Independent on any other: and, according to the Council of
Ephesus, every Province should enjoy its Ancient Rights, pure and inviolate:
and that, no Bishop should occupy any Province, which did not belong to him,
from the beginning; and, if no true General Council, has ever since, Subjected
Britain, under the Roman Court; then, says he, the case is clear, that Rome
can pretend no Right over Britain, without their own consent; nor, any
further; nor, for any longer time; then, they are pleased to oblige themselves.

We must expect, therefore, some better Evidence, of such Grant to the Pope;
and such Obligation upon England, by the Canons of some truly General Council;
and we may still expect it; notwithstanding the Canons of Sardice: which, yet
shall be considered; for it is their (faint) color of Antiquity.

SECT. XI.
The Sardican Canons. NO Grant from the Matter, manner or Authority. No
Appendix to Council of Nice. Zozimus his Forgery never Ratified; nor thought
Universal; after contradicted, by Councils.
THe Pope at length usurped the Title, and pretended the Power of Supreme; and
the Canons, in time obtained the Name of the Pope's Decrees; but the question
is, what General Council gave him either?

Doctor Stillingfleet observes, that nothing is more apparent, than, that when
Popes began to pirk up, they pleaded nothing but some Canons of the Church for
what they did; then their best and only Plea, when nothing of Divine Right was
heard of; as Julius, to the oriental Bishops; Zozimus to the African; and so
others: but still what Canons?

The Romanist, against Archbishop Laud, argues p. 193.
thus: it was ever held lawful to Appeal to Rome from all Parts; therefore the
Pope must be Supreme Judge: this, says he, is evidenced by the Sardican
Canons; accounted anciently, an Appendix to the Council of Nice; this he calls
an unanswerable Argument.

But it is more than answered; if we consider, Matter, or the Manner, or the
Authority of these Canons.

1. The Matter, said to be granted, appears 1. For the matter of these Canons.
in the words themselves, Can. 3. it is said, (...). if it seem good to you,
let us honor the Memory of Saint Peter, and by those Bishops that are Judges,
Scribatur Julio, Romanorum Episcopo; and by the next Bishops of the Province,
if need be, let the Judgment be revoked; and cognitores ipse praebeat.

But 1. here is no Grant, so much as of Appeal, only of a Review. 2 It Is not
pretended to be according to any former Canons. 3. The Judgment is to be
revoked by a Council of Bishops chosen for the purpose. 4. The request seems to
terminate in the Person of Julius, and not to extend to his Successors; for
else, why should it be said to Julius Bishop of Rome, and not to the Bishop of
Rome absolutely?

2. The Manner of the Motion spoils all: if Manner.
it please you; did the Universal Pastorship then lie at the feet, or depend
upon the pleasure of this Council? did no Canons evidence the Pope's Power, and
Right till then? eleven years after the death of Constantine? besides, how
unworthily was is said, let us honor the Memory of Saint Peter; did the Pope's
Succession of Saint Peter depend upon their pleasure too?

3. But lastly, the main exception, is against the Authority of this Council;
or, at least, of Authority.
this Canon; as Cusanus questions, Concord. Cathol. lib. 2. c. 15.

1. It Is certain, they are no Appendix to the No Appendix to Nice Can.
Council of Nice; wherein their strength is pretended to consist; though,
Zozimus fraudulently sent them, under that Name to the African Bishops; which
can never be excused; for they are now know to have been made twenty two years,
after that Council.

Upon that pretense of Zozimus indeed, a Zozimus's Forgery.
Temporary Order was made in the Council of Africa; that Appeals might be made
to the Pope, till the true Canons of Nice were produced; which afterward being
done, the Argument was spoiled; and that Pope, if possible, was put to shame:
hereupon, that excellent Epistle was written to Pope Caelestine, of which you
had account before.

2. This Council was never ratified by the Reception Not received.
of the Catholic Church; for the Canons of it were not known by the African
Bishops, when Zozimus sent them, and Saint Augustine discredits them; saying,
they were made by a Synod of Arrians.

3. It is evident, that this Council was never Or thought Universal*
accounted truly Universal; though Constance and Constantius intended it should
be so: for, but seventy of Eastern Bishops appeared, to three hundred of the
Western; and those Eastern Bishops, soon withdrew from the other, and decreed
things directly contrary to them: So that Balsomon and Zonarus, as well as the
Elder Greeks, say, it can only bind the Western Churches: and indeed, it was a
long time before the Canons of it were received in the Western Church; which is
the supposed reason, why Zozimus sent them, as the Nicen, and not as the
Sardican Canons.

4. After the Eastern Bishops were departed, there were not Patriarchs enough,
to make a General Council; according to Bellermine's De Conc. L. ^. c. 17.
own Rule. Consequently, Venerable Bede leaves it out of the Number: the
Eastern Churches do not reckon it among their Seven, nor the Western among
their Eight first General Councils. The English Church, in their Synod at He
difield, An. 680. left it out of their Number, and embrace only the Council of
Nice, the first of Constantinople, the first of Ephesus, the first and second
of Calcedon to this day.

Therefore Archbishop Bramhall, had reason to say, that this Council was never
incorporated into the English Laws, and consequently, has no force in England:
especially, being urged in a matter contrary to the Famous Memorial of
Clarendon; a Fundamental Law of this Land: all Appeals in England must proceed
regularly, from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and from him to the King to give
order for Redress.

But to wipe away all color of Argument; what ever Authority these Canons may
be thought to have in other matters, it is certain they have none in this matter
of Appeals; for, as to this Point the undoubted General Councils, afterward
decreed quite otherwise; reducing and limiting Appeals ultimately to the
Primate of the Province, or a Council; as has been made to appear.

When, I hear any thing of moment urged, from any other Council, as a Grant of
the pretended Supremacy to the Pope, I shall consider what may be answered;
till then, I think there is an end of his Claim, Jure humano; either, by a
Civil or Canonical Grant; by Emperors or General Councils. So much has been
said against, and so little to purpose, for the Council of Trent, that I shall
excuse my self and my Reader from any trouble about it.

But I must conclude that the Canons of the Council of Trent were never
acknowledged or received Epist. Synod* Conc. Basil.
by the Kingdom of England as the Council of Basil was, which confirmed the
Acts of the Council of Constance; which Council of Constance without the
presence or concurrence of the Pope, did decree themselves to be a lawful
complete general Council Superior to the Pope; and that he was subject to their
censures; and deposed three Popes at a time. The words of the Council are
remarkable, The Pope is subject to a general Council, as well in matters of
Faith as of manners; so as he may not only be corrected, but if he be
incorrigible, be deposed.

To say, this Decree was not conciliarly made; and consequently not confirmed
by Pope Martin the fifth signifies nothing; if that Martin were Pope; because
his Title to the Papacy depended merely upon the Authority of that Decree. But
indeed, the word Conciliariter was spoken by the Pope upon a particular
occasion, after the Council was ended and the Fathers were dismissed; as
appears in the History.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Popes Title by Divine Right. The Question. Why not sooner? It Is last
Refuge.
THe modern Champions of the Church of Rome, slight all that has been said;
and judge it beneath their Master and his Cause to plead any thing but a Jus
divinum for his pretended Supremacy; and indeed will hardly endure and tolerate
the question, Whether the Pope be universal Monarch; or Bishop of the whole
Church as St Peter's Successor, Jure divino?

But if this point be so very plain; may I have leave to ask, why was it not
urged sooner? why were lesser inconsistent Pleas, so long insisted on? why do
not many of their own great men discern it to this day?

The truth is, if the managery of the Combat all along be seriously reflected
on, this Plea of divine Right seems to be the last Refuge; when they have been
driven by Dint of Argument out of all other Holds, as no longer to be defended.
And yet give me leave to observe, that this last ground of theirs, seems to me
to be the weakest, and the least able to secure them; which looks like an
Argument of a sinking cause.

However, they mightily labor to support it, by these two Pillars. 1. That the
government of the whole Church is Monarchical. 2. That the Pope is the Monarch;
and both these are Jure divino: But these Pillars also must be supported, and
how that is performed we shall examine.

SECT. I.
Whether the Government of the whole Church be Monarchical, by Divine Right?
Bellar. Reason. Scripture.
BEllarmine has flourished with this argument through no less than eight whole
Chapters, and indeed has industriously and learnedly beaten it as far as it
would go; and no wonder if he have left it thin.

What solidity is in it, we are to weigh both from Reason and Scripture.

Not from Reason in 3 Arg.

From Reason they argue thus: God has appointed best and most profitable
Government: (for he is most wise and good) but Monarchical Government is the
best and most profitable.

It Is plainly answered that to know which is state of that which is to be
governed must be considered; the end of Government being the profit and good of
the State governed; so that unless it appear that this kind of Government be
the most convenient for the State of the Church, nothing is concluded.

2. We believe that God has the care of the World, and not only of the Church;
therefore in his wise and good Providence, he ought to have settled the World
under the best and most profitable Government, viz. under one universal Monarch.

3. Bellarmine himself grants, that if particular Churches should not be
gathered, inter se, so as to make one, (visible, Political Body) their own
proper Rector would suffice for every one, and there should be no need of one
Monarch.

But all particular Churches are not one visible political Body, but, as
particular Bodies, are complete in themselves; enjoying all parts of ordinary
Worship and Government singly; neither is there any part of Worship or
Government proper to the Ecumenical Church, qua talis.

4. The Argument seems stronger the contrary way: God is good and wise, and
has appointed the best Government for his own Church; but he has not
appointed that it should be Monarchical: Therefore that kind of Government
seems not to be the best for his Church. Christ might foresee the great
inconveniences of his Churches being governed by one Ecclesiastical Monarch,
when divided under the several secular Powers of the World; though the Ambition
of men overlook it and consider it not.

Yet that the Government of the Church appointed by God, as best for it, is
Monarchical, is not believed by all Catholics. The Sorbon Doctors doubt not to
affirm, that Aristocratical Government is the best of all, and most agreeable
to the nature of the Church. De Eccl. Polit. potest. an. 1611.

6. But what if we yield the whole Argument: as the government of the Church is
Imperial, it is in Christ, the Universal Monarch over it; but he being in a far
Country, he governs the several parts of his Church in distinct Countries, by
visible ministerial Monarchs or Primates, proper to each: The distinction of
imperial and ministerial Power, is given us in this very case by our
Adversaries: There is nothing unreasonable, unpracticable, or contrary to the
practice of the world in the Assertion. We grant that Monarchy is the best kind
of Government in a due Sphere; the World is wide enough for many Monarchs, and
the Church too: The Argument concludes for Primates over Provinces; not for an
universal Monarch, either over the world or the whole Church.

2. The Church cannot be propogated (as Bell. argues) without a universal
Monarch, to send Preachers into other Provinces, etc.

Who can doubt but that the Governors of any Power to send any of her members;
and have as much power in Pagan and Infidel Countries as the supposed Universal
Bishop? And if Heretics can propagate their errors, why should not the
Orthodox, the Truth, without the Pope?

3. It Is necessary (says Bellar.) that all the one Faith, which cannot be
without one chief Judge.

In necessaries they may, in other things they need not; as appears
sufficiently among the Romanists, about this as well as other points; neither
could Peter himself, with the help of the rest of the Apostles, in their time
prevent Heresies and Schisms. These things are too weak to bear up the great
power and Universal Monarchy pretended; and indeed an impeachment of the wisdom
and goodness of Christ; if he have not provided such a Government for his
Church as they plead a necessity of, for the said ends. The thing next to be
enquired.

2. Not from Scripture Prophesies, Promises, Metaphors, or Example of
High Priest.

They affirm, that the Scriptures evince an universal Monarchy over the Church:
but how is it proved?

The Prophecies and Promises and sundry Metaphors House, Kingdom, Body, Flock,
etc.) prove the Church to be one in it self; and consequently it must have one
Supreme Governor.

We are agreed, that the Church is but one; and that it has one Supreme
Governor: And Supreme Government of it, and that those Scriptures too signify
that he is such; if we consider the Government to be Imperial, as Heart
confesses to Dr. Raynolds: And thus the Argument passes without any harm; but
it still rests to be proved that the ministerial Governor is but one; or that
the Scriptures intend so, or St. Peter or the Pope, as his Successor, is that
one Governor over the whole Church.

It Is true; as our Savior says, there is one Flock and one Shepherd, but it is
as true, which he says in the same place; I am that good Shepherd; but as that
one principal Pastor, had many Vicars, not Peter only but 12 Apostles, to
gather and feed the Sheep; who were therefore sent to Preach to all Nations:
And did, as it said, divide the World into 12 Provinces respectively. So that
one great Monarch might have many Viceroy's, if we may so call the future
Bishops to govern the Church; though in Faith but one, yet in site and place
divided: It Is no unreasonable thing, that the King of Britain and Ireland,
should Govern Scotland and Ireland, which lie at some distance from him, by his
Deputations as before was hinted.

There was one High Priest over the Church of the Jews; and by Analogy it ought
to be so, Christian Church.

Many things were in that Church which ought this.

They were one Nation as well as one Church; and if every Christian Nation have
one High Priest the Analogy holds well enough.

The making the Nations of the World Christian, has, as experience shows,
rendered the Government of the Church by one person, that cannot reside in all
places, very inconvenient if not impracticable.

Now if our Savior foresaw this; and has ordered the government of the
Christian Church otherwise, than Moses had that of the Jews, who shall say,
What have thou done?

2. It can never be proved, that the High Priest Vid. Ray. and Heart. p. 240.
over the Jews, was either called the Judge, or had such Power over that
Church, as the Pope pretends over the Christian.

Lastly, it is not doubted but Moses was Faithful, and Christ as faithful in
appointing a fit Government for these great and distinct States of the Church:
But what kind of Government Moses appointed, is nothing to the question; unless
it appear that Christ has appointed the same. The proper question is, whether
Christ has appointed that the Christian Church should be governed by one
universal Monarch, let us apply to that.

The great issue is, the instance of St. Peter. It Is affirmed that our Lord
committed the Government of the Christian Church to St. Peter, and his
Successors; the Popes of Rome for ever.

A Grant of so great consequence ought to be Ar. 3. Peter.
very plain, the whole World is concerned and may expect Evidence very clear.
1. That Christ gave this universal Supremacy to St. Peter. And 2. To the Pope
as his Successor; if either fail, Roma Ruit.

SECT. II.
Of St. Peter's Monarchy. Tu es Petrus. Fathers abused.
WE are now come to the quick. The first great question is; Whether Christ
gave his Apostle St. Peter the Government of his whole Church. This would be
proved from Matthew. 1 Scrip. Matthew. 16: 18.
16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. The
Argument is, what Christ promised he gave, but in these words Christ promised
to make Peter the Supreme Head and Governor of his Church; therefore this Power
was given him.

If this Argument conclude, by [ this Rock] Peter; and the words [I will build
my Church upon it] must signify the committing the Supreme Power of the Church
to him.

For the First, It is at least a controversy among the ancient Fathers; and
many of them do deny that by this Rock we are to understand any thing, but that
Confession which was evidently the occasion of this Promise, and was made by
Peter just before, as St. Cyril, Hilary, Jerome, Ambrose, Basil, and St.
Augustine, whose Lapsus humanus in it is reproved by Stapleton. Princ. doct.
li. 6. c. 3.

But I am willing to agree as far as we may; and therefore shall not deny, but
something peculiar to St. Peter's Person was here promised; (though I believe
it was a point of Honor, not a Supremacy of Power;) what that was will appear
by the thing promised, I will build my Church -- that is, upon my Doctrine
preached by thee. I will build my Church, thou shall have the honor, of being
a prime and principal Author of the Worlds Conversion; or as Dr. Reynolds
against Heart: Peter, was in order with the first who believed; P. 60.
and amongst those First, he had a mark of Honor in that he was named Stone
above his Brethren. Yet as he, so the Rest are called Foundations; and indeed
so were in both these Senses: For the Twelve were all Prime Converts, and
converters of others; and were Foundations in their respective Provinces on
which others were built: But they were not built one upon another, and they had
no other Foundation on which they themselves were built but Christ himself.

We are willing to any thing, that the Sense of the words will conveniently
bear; but that they should signify Power and Government over the whole Church,
and the rest of the Apostles, we cannot understand: for, the Rock is supposed
before the building upon it; and the building before the Government of the
house; and the Government of the Church, cannot tollerably be thought to be of
the Foundation, or first building of the Church; but for the Preservation or
Augmentation of it after its existence is supposed.

Perhaps there is ground to allow, that Peter's Foundation was the first; as
his Name was first among the Apostles; and that this was the reason of that
Primacy of Order and Dignity which some of the Ancients, in their writings Paul
had the fame Primacy over Barnabas, that Peter over Apost. as St. Amb. in 2 ad.
Gal.
acknowledged in Saint Peter: but certainly, there is need of a plainer Text to
argue this Text to signify that Supremacy of Power over the rest of the
Apostles and the whole Church; which is so hotly contended for by our Romish
Adversaries to be given Saint Peter: however, after the Resurrection of Christ,
all were made equal, both in Honor and Power; as Saint Cyprian says, de
Vnita: Eccles.

But it is urged, that the other Part of the 2. Script. Matthew. 16. 19.
Promise, is most clear, to thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
viz. the fullness of Celestial Power, as Heart expressed it.

Our Answer is, that Christ, here, promised no Power to Peter, than he
performed to all the Apostles: Peter's Confession was made in the Name of all;
and Christ's Promise was made to Peter in the Name of all; and nothing can be
clearer, either in the Text, or in Fact.

The Text is plain; both, in it self, and in the Judgment of the Fathers; that
Peter stood in the room of the rest; both when he made the Confession, and
received the Promise, Vid. St. Aug. in Joh. Tract. 1 18. St. Ambr. in Psalm. 38.
Jerome. adv. Jovi: li 1. Orig. in Math. Tract. 1. Vid. Concor. Cottrol. l. 2. c.
13.
Hilary de Trinit. l. 6. etc. Cardinal. Cusan. is plain in this Point also.

And, that it did equally concern the rest of the Apostles, is evident, by the
performance of it. A Promise, is of something de futuro: our Savior says to
Peter, I will give thee the Keys; but when did he do it? and how did he do it?
Certainly at the time, when he delivered those words recorded, John 20. 21, 23.
And after the manner there expressed, and by that Form of Words: now, are not
those Words spoken by Christ equally to all the Apostles? As my Father sent me,
so do I send you; whose soever sins ye remit, etc. nothing plainer.

To say, that Christ gave not the Keys to all; but only the Power of remitting
and retaining sins, seems pitiful, unless some other proof be offered, that
Christ, did actually perform this Promise to Saint Peter apart; and give him
the Keys at some other time, in distinction to the Power given in the 20. John
to all together.

Remitting and retaining sins, is certainly the Power of the Keys; and so
called, by the Council of Trent itself, Chatech. in Sacram. Paenit. and it is
not the keeping, but the Power of the Keys, is the question; and indeed
Bellarmine proves, that the whole Power of the Keys, and not a part only, as
Stapleton supposed, was granted to all the Apostles in the Words John 20. to be
the general interpretation of the Fathers, in Prael. Romans Controv. 4. q. 3. de
Sum. Pontif.

Stapleton from Turrecrem; distinguishes betwixt From Turrecrem.
the Apostolic, and the Episcopal Power; and they grant, that the Apostolic
Power was equal in all the Apostles, and received immediately from Christ; but
the Episcopal Power was given to Saint Peter with the Keys; and immediately and
by him, to the rest.

This is a new shift: else, why is the Title, Apostolical, given to the Pope,
to his See, to all Acts, etc. seeing the Pope, according to the sineness of
this distinction, does not succeed Peter, as an Apostle, but as a Bishop.

It Is as strange, as new: seeing the Power of the Keys, must as well denote the
Episcopal Power of the rest of the Apostles, as of Peter; and the Power of
using them, by remitting, etc. was given, generally and immediately, by Christ
to them all alike.

This distinction of Turrecremata, was as Reynolds against Heart shows,
spoiled, before Relect. 2. de Potest. Eccl.
Doctor Stapleton new vamped it, by two learned Friars, Sixtus Senensis and
Franciscus Victoria; evidencing both out of the Scriptures, that the Bibli
Sanc. l. 6. annot. 269 and 271.
Apostles received all their Power immediately of Christ; and the Fathers, that
in the Power of Apostleship and order, (so the two Powers were called) Paul was
equal to Peter; and the rest, to them both.

Therefore, this distinction failing, another is invented, and a third kind of
Power is set up; viz. the Power of Kingdoms; and now from the threefold Power
of Saint Peter; Apostolatus, Ordinis, Regni, it is strongly affirmed: 1.
Touching the Apostleship, Paul, as Jerome says, 1. In Com. ad Gal.
was not inferior to Peter; for he was chosen to preach the Gospel, not by
Peter, but by God, as Peter was. 2. Touching the Power given 2. Advers. Jovini.
and ad Evag.
in the Sacrament of Order, Jerome says well too; that all the Apostles
received the Keys equally; and that they all, as Bishops, were equal in the
degree of Priesthood, and the Spiritual Power of that degree: thus the first
distinction is gone. But, thirdly, touching the Power 3. Advers. Jovin. and
Luci^.
of Kingdom, Saint Jerome says best of all, that Peter was chosen among the
Twelve, and made the Head of all, that all occasion of Schism might be removed.

These are Phansies of the Schoolmen; but where are they grounded? we are
seeking for Saint Peter's Supremacy, in the Scripture; where do we there, find
this Power of the Kingdom given him by Christ? or what Ancient Father ever so
expounded this Text of the Keys?

We grant, many expressions are found in the Fathers, in honor of Saint Peter:
Saint Augustine affirms his Primacy is conspicuous and preeminent with
excellent Grace: Saint Chrysostom, calls him the Mouth, the Chief, the Top of
the Company; Theodoret styles him, the Prince; Epiphanius the Highest; Saint
Augustine the Head, President and first of the Apostles; which he proves out
of Saint Cyprian, who says, the Lord chose Peter first; and Saint Jerome says,
he was the Head, that occasion of Schism might be taken away, and gives him the
honor of great Authority; all these were used by Heart against Raynolds.

To them all, Doctor Raynolds gives clear and satisfactory answers showing
largely that they signify nothing but a Primacy of Election, or Order, or
Dignity, or Esteem, and Authority in that Sense: or a Primacy in Grace and
Gifts, viz. a Principallity or Chiefness in Worth; or a Primacy of
Presidentship in Assemblies, as the Mouth and Moderator; or the Head of Unity
and Order, as Jerome means: but it is not to be proved from any or all of these
Encomiums, that the Fathers believed that the other Apostles were under Saint
Peter as their Governor; or that he had any real Power given him by Christ
more than they.

The Words of Saint Cyprian are plain and full: albeit Christ, says he, gave
equal Power to 1. St. Cyp. de Unit. Eccl.
all the Apostles after his Resurrection; and said, as my Father, etc. yet to
declare Unity, he disposed by his Authority, the Original of that Unity,
beginning in one: no doubt, says he, the rest were the same that Peter was;
endued with the like fellowship (pari Consortio) of Honor and Power; but, the
beginning does come from Unity, that the Church of Christ may be showed to be
but one.

Thus, this Topic of the Fathers, expounding the Text, being found to fail;
another device, and such a one as the very detection, both answers and shames
the Authors, is fled unto; viz. to corrupt instead of purging the Fathers; and
to make them speak home indeed.

The place of Saint Cyprian, just now set, is a In Opusc. Contr. Graec.
very clear instance of this black Art, allowed by the Popes themselves; the
place in the former Prints, was, as it is set down, in the Roman-purged.
Cyprian, is thus altered by addition of these words, And the Primacy is given
to Peter. Again he appointed one Church, and the Chair to be one; and to make
all sure, the Antwerp Cyprian adds conveniently Peter's Chair: And then,
says he, who forsakes Peter's Chair, on which the Against Heart.
Church was founded, etc. And by this time Peter's Primacy is the Popes
Supremacy. Vid. Dr. Rayn. p. 210, 211.

But Tho. Aquinas has dealt worse with St. Cyril, Fathering a Treasure upon
him which he never owned, beyond all tolerable defense. To the Grecians St.
Cyril is brought in speaking thus: Christ did commit a full and ample power
both to Peter and his Successors -- The Apostles in the Gospels and Epistles
have affirmed (in every Doctrine) Peter and his Church to be instead of God;
and to him, even to Peter, all do bow by the Law of God, and the Princes of the
World are obedient to him, even as to the Lord Jesus; and we as being Members
must cleave unto our Head, the Pope and Apostolic See, etc.

Now either St. Cyril said thus, or not: If he did; who will believe him, that
shall make such Stories, and Father them upon every Doctrine in the New
Testament, contrary to common sense, and the knowledge of all; or trust his
cause to the interpretation of such Fathers. But if this Book called St.
Cyril's Treasure, be none of St. Cyril's, as certainly it is not; then though I
am provoked, I shall say no more; but that we should weigh the Reasons, but not
the Authority of such a Schoolman, especially in his Masters Cause. It Is
certain, the words are not to be found in those parts of Cyril's Treasure,
which are Extant, as Heart acknowledges to Dr. Raynolds.

Yet the abuse of single Fathers is not so heinous Ibid.
a thing, as Thomas committed against 600 Bishops even the General Council of
Calcedon, when he says they decreed thus. If any Bishop be accused let him
appeal freely to the Pope of Rome, because we have Peter for a Rock of Refuge;
and he alone has Right with freedom of Power, in the stead of God, to Judge
and Try the crime of a Bishop, according to the Keys which the Lord did give
him; calling the Pope the Holy Apostolic and universal Patriarch of the whole
World. Now in that Council there is not a word of all this; and they answer,
Heretics have rased it out, if you will believe it, but neither Surius nor
Caranza find any thing wanting. I shall only make this Note, that seeing the
Fathers have been so long in the hands of those men that stick at nothing that
may advance the Power of their Master: It Is no wonder that their learned
Adversaries are unwilling to trust their cause with such Judges, but rather
appeal to the true Canon and call for Scripture.

One would think this were enough: but this Opinion of the equality of Power
among the Apostles, was not only the concurrent Judgment of the Ancients, but
even of learned later men in the Church of Rome even from these words, Tues
Petrus etc. upon unanswerable Reason. Lyra, on Matthew. 16. Durand a St. Porciano
in 4 Cent. did. 18. q. 2. both in the 14 Cent. and Abulensis in the In Matthew.
18. q. 7. In Matthew. 20. q. 83, 84.
15 Cent. the latter argues earnestly, that none of the Apostles did understand
those words of Christ, to give any Supremacy to Peter; for afterward they
contended for Superiority, Matthew. 18. and after that the two Sons of Zebedee
desire it, Matthew. 20. and at the last Supper the question is put again, Luke
22. Therefore he concludes, they thought themselves equal till Christ's death,
when they knew not which of them should be greatest. Cusanus his contemporary
de concord. Cath. l. 2. c. 13. and 34. and Fran. Victoria. This was the
interpretation of all the Doctors of Paris, Bin. Conc. an. 1549.
and of Adulphus Archbishop of Cologne, and of the Bishops of his Province;
the Decrees of whose Synod, with this interpretation, were ratified in every
point by Charles the Fifth, and enjoined to be observed.

Thus the chief ground of St. Peter's Supremacy is sunk, and there is little
hopes that any other Text will hold up that weighty super-structure.

Another Scripture much insisted on for the 3. Joh. 21. 14, etc.
support of St. Peter's Supremacy, is Joh. 21. 14, 15, 16. Peter love thou
me, feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs: Wherein is committed to Peter the power of
the whole Church.

It Is answered, this Text gives not any Commission power to St. Peter; it gives
him charge and Commandment to execute his Commission received before. Now it
has appeared sufficiently, that the Commission was given equally to all the
Apostles in those words; as my Father sent me, so send I you, etc. so that the
power of feeding, and the Duty of Pastors was alike to them all; though this
Charge was given to Peter by name here, with so many Items perhaps intimating
his repeated Prevarications; yet were they all sent, and all charged with a
larger Province than these words to Peter import: Teach all Nations, Preach the
Gospel to every Creature; are our Saviors charge to them all.

In the Apostolic Power all were equal (says Heart) not in the Pastoral Charge.

We answer with a distinction (allowed by Stapleton) of the Name Pastor; it is
special and distinct from Apostle: Some Apostles -- some Ephesians. 4.
Pastors; or general and common to all commissioned to preach the Gospel: So
Christ is called Pastor, and all the Apostles were Pastors as well as Peter.

But St. Peter was the Pastor over the rest; for feed all the Sheep, the whole
Church: Now the Rest of the Apostles were Christ's Sheep, and members of his
Church. Heart and Ray. p 129.

Christ says not to Peter, feed ( all) my Sheep, all Preach -- to every
Creature: And if Peter have power over the rest, because they are Sheep, and he
is to feed the Sheep; then every one of the rest have power over Peter because
he is a Creature, and they are to preach to every Creature. But this is
trifling, so is all that is further argued from this Text; though by Feeding we
understand Ruling, Ruling of Pastors, or what you will; while whatsoever was
charged on Peter here, is within the same Commission, wherein Peter and all the
rest of the Apostles are equally empowered as before; and that of Bellarmine,
[that Peter was to feed the Sheep as ordinary Pastor; the Apostles as
extraordinary Embassadors] is altogether as groundless; as if there were any
color of Reason, that an ordinary Pastor should have more power than an
extraordinary Ambassador.

Dr. Hammond observes, Bellarmine was not 13 Oct. 1562.
the Author of that Artifice; Cajetan and Victoria had used it before him; and
obtained it the honor of coming into the Council of Trent; where the Bishop of
Granada derided it, and the Authors of it; and soon after the Bishop of Paris
expressly affirmed, that Cajetan was (about 50 years before) the first deviser
of it. The Bishop of Granada confutes it by Scripture, as understood by all the
Fathers and Schoolmen; as he affirmed. Concord. Cathol. l. 1. c. 11.

To conclude this matter, Feed my Sheep, are not a ground for the Popes
Presidency; which are found not to be so of Peter's, above the body of the
Universal Church; as was publicly pronounced in the Covent of the Friars
Minors, and appears by the Opusc. of John Patriarch of Antioch: And Cardinal
Cusanus who lived at the same De Conc. Cath. l. 2. c. 23.
time, makes them words of Precept not of Institution; and both are agreeable
to the interpretation of the Ancients. St. Ambrose de dign. Sacerd. c. 2. Aug.
de Ago. Christiano c. 30. Theoph. in Joh. c. 21, etc.

It is time to look further. The third great Luke 22. 31
place of Argument is Luke 22. 31. Thou being converted, strengthen thy
Brethren. Whence Heart reasons thus: Christ commands Peter to strengthen Rayn.
and Heart. p. 142.
his Brethren; and his Brethren were the Apostles: Therefore he was to
strengthen the Apostles, and by consequence he must be their Supreme Head.

When Heart urged this Argument, with all wit and might; and Dr. Raynolds had
made it evident, there is no Authority given by the words; nor carried in the
word Strengthen, that Equals and Inferiors are capable of it as well as
Superiors: (much less can it necessarily imply a Supremacy over the whole
Church; he confesses with Stapleton, that Christ gave the Power to Peter after
his Resurrection, when he said to him, Feed my Lambs; (which we have weighed
before) but those words of ( strengthening, etc.) he spoke before his death, and
did but ( futuram insinuaverat) insinuate therein; and as Hearts word is, that
he would make him Supreme Head; then if he did not make him so afterward, he
did it not at all.

That Peter had power over the rest of the 4 Scrip.
Apostles, would be proved, as before; from the Promise and Commission of
Christ, so at last by Act. 1. 25.
Peter's Execution; he proposed the Election of a new Apostle in the Room of
Judas.

Therefore he was Speaker (at least pro tempore) Prince or Supreme Monarch.

But St. Chrysostom says, that though Peter's In Matthew. 40. 51.
by common advice and consent, and nothing by his own Authority; yet adds,
that no doubt it was lawful for Peter to have chosen Matthias himself.

Yet the same Father calls this Seat given him In Matthew. Hom. 15.
by the rest, a Primacy, not a Supremacy: Again he derives this Primacy from
the modesty of the Apostles, (not the donation of Christ) as Heart Rayn. Heart.
p. 156.
confesses. But indeed the Father exceeded in his Charity; and it is he that
said that Peter might have chosen one himself: The Scripture says not that he
might; yea it says he did not. And the Argument from Peter's Execution of this
power is come to this, that he did not execute it.

Besides, many Fathers and in Council too; together with St. Cyprian,
pronounce; that Peter proposing the matter, to the end it might be carried by
common advice and voice, did according to the lessons and Precepts of God;
therefore, jure divino, they thought Peter had no such power as Dr. Raynolds
shows. p. 159.

But when Peter had been heard, all the Multitude 5 Scrip. Act. 15.
held their peace; and James and all the Elders did agree unto Peter's Sentence.

What is this to prove his Supremacy? because Council having heard Gamaliel
agreed to him, was therefore Gamaliel (a Pharisee, a Doctor of the Law, whom
all the People honored) Supreme Act. 3. 34.
Head, and Superior to the High Priest and Council? And if Jerome say, Peter was
Princeps Decreti, he acknowledged perhaps the Reason, the Motion, and the
Delivery or declaration of it, principally to Peter, the first Author of the
Sentence, as the same Jerome calls him; and explains himself Epist. 11. inter
Epistol. August. So was Pro Cor. Balbo.
Tully called, viz. Prince of Decrees, when he was neither President nor Prince
of the Senate.

We conclude, that Peter had no Superiority of Power or Government over the
rest of the Apostles, or the whole Church; because it neither was promised him,
nor given him, nor Peter added, Nihil doctrinae aut potestatis Aquinas. Not
inferior to the chief Apost. 2 Cor. 11. 5.
Executed by him; notwithstanding Bellarmine's 28 Prerogatives of St. Peter;
from which I presume none can be so hardy as to venture to argue: many of them
being uncertain; some vain and trifling, and some common with the rest of the
Apostles; but neither divisim or conjunctim sufficient to make, or to evince
any real Supremacy of power in St. Peter.

5. It Is indeed, said, by some of the Fathers; So Paul judged. Chris. Hom. 12.
2. and 87.
that the Government of the World, and the care of the whole Church was
committed to Peter: but it is plain they speak of his Apostleship; for they say
the same of Paul; ille Solusgerebat, (...) and Orbis praefectam suscepit; and
the like, of Timothy; who was never reputed Universal Monarck: Paul and Peter
had two different Primacies (Saint Hom. 1. ad Pop. Orat. 6. Con. Jud.
Ambr.) had the same Dignity; (Chrisost.) were equal.) Oecumenius.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Pope's Succession.
I Have labored the more to scatter the pretenses of Saint Peter's Supremacy;
because (though the Consequence be not good from that to the Popes, yet) it is a
Demonstration; that if Saint Peter had it not, the Pope cannot have it, as his
Successor, Jure divino.

We must leave Saint Peter's Supremacy, to stand or fall to the Reason of the
Discourse before; and must now examine the Plea of Successor; and the Pope's
Authority over the Church, as he is Successor to Saint Peter.

Now, that it may appear we love not quarrelling; we shall not dispute; whether
Peter was a Bishop of a particular See? whether he was ever at Rome? whether
Rome was at first converted by him? whether he was Bishop of Rome? whether he
resided there for any considerable time? whether he died there? whether the
Pope had any honor as his Successor? or lastly, whether the Pope had the
Primacy of all Bishops in the former Ages of the Church? it is well known, that
few Adversaries would let you run away quietly, with all or any one of these.

Yet there are two things, that I shrewdly question- 1. Whether the Pope had at
first the Primacy it self, as Successor of Saint Peter. 2. Much more, whether
by that Succession, he received Supreme Power over the whole Church, Jure
Divino; the main Point to be proved, is the last: yet it may be worth the
while, to examine the first.

SECT. I.
Whether the Primacy of Peter, descended to the Bishops of Rome? Neg.
IT does not appear, that Saint Peter had his Peter Primate.
Primacy, over the rest of the Apostles, as Bishop, much less as Bishop of
Rome; but the contrary does appear.

1. Because he was Primate, long before he Bishop, if he was so, at all; and
therefore, Before.
if he was Primate, ratione Muneris, or with respect to any Office; it was
that, of his Apostleship, and not of his Episcopacy; the Consequence, then, is
evident, that the Pope could not succeed Saint Peter, in the Primacy, as Bishop
of Rome; or indeed in any Sense; for the Apostolical Office was extraordinary;
and did not descend by Succession, as the Romanists yield.

That, Saint Peter was Primate, not as Bishop, Not as Bishop.
but was antecedently so; it is most apparent upon the Grounds of it allowed
and pleaded by our Adversaries; because he was first called to the Apostleship,
he was named, the first of the Apostles; he had the first promise of the Keys;
he was the first Converter of the Gentiles, etc. Privilegium personale, cum
persona extinguitur. Jesuit Salas.

2. Indeed, the Primacy of Saint Peter arose On personal respects.
from such personal respects and grounds, that rendered it incapable of
Succession; and therefore, none could derive that Prerogative, though they had
succeeded him both as Bishop and Apostle.

These Prerogatives of Saint Peter, which Bellarmine himself lays down as the
Grounds and Arguments of his Primacy, are generally such, at least, all of them
that appear in the Scriptures; all of them but such, as either beg the question
or depend on notorious Fables: as appears at first view.

1. Saint Peter was Primate, because his Name 21 Prerogatives. Bell.
was changed by Christ. 2. Because, he was always first named. 3. He alone
walked on the Waters. 4. He had peculiar Revelation. 5. He paid Tribute with
Christ. 6. He was the chief in the miraculous fishing. 7. He is commanded to
strengthen his Brethren. 8. He was the first of the Apostles, that saw Christ
risen from the dead. 9. His feet Christ first washed. 10. Christ foretold his
death, to him alone. 11. He was President at the Election of Matthias. 12. He
first preached after the Holy Ghost was given. 13. He did the first Miracle.
14. He condemned the hypocrisy of Ananias, etc. 15. He passed through all
quarters, Acts 9. 32. 16. He first preached to the Gentiles. 17. He was
miraculously delivered out of prison. 18. Paul envied him. 19. Christ baptized
him alone. 20. He detected and condemned Simon Magus. 21. He spoke first in the
Council, Acts 15.

These are 21 of the Prerogatives of Saint Peter, which Bellarmine makes
Grounds and Arguments of his Primacy; which, if one say them over, and
endeavor to apply them to any but Saint Peter's (individual) person, it will
appear impossible; the reasons of this Primacy, cannot be supposed out of
Peter's person; therefore Primacy cannot pass to his Successor: mark them, and
you will find they are all either Acts done by Saint Peter, or Graces received
by him; and so personally in him, that, whatsoever depends on them, must needs
die with Saint Peter's person, and cannot be inherited by his Successor.

Indeed, this Primacy rose of such Grounds; and was in Saint Peter by
Consequence of them; had the Primacy been an Office, or a Grace given, of or in
or for it self, without respect to any of these Grounds, there had been some
shadow (and but a shadow) for its Succession: but it having an essential
dependence on those Reasons which were peculiar and proper to Saint Peter's
person, they cease together.

But, lest it should be thought, that there is Other seven Prerog. Bell.
more of Argument in the other seven Prerogatives which Bellarmine mentioned; I
beg my Readers pardon, to set down them also: The first is, perpetual stability
is promised to Peter and his See. 2. He alone, was Ordained Bishop by Christ,
and the Rest by him. Card Cusan believes Aneclet. Epis. Bellarmine proves it
counterfeit, c. 34. p. 771. Azorius. Suarez. and Cosm. Ph. deny it (these
plainly beg the thing in question.) 3. He placed his Seat at Rome. 4. Christ
appeared to him, a little before he died; therefore Primate? and his Successor
too? 5. The Churches which he founded, were always counted Patriarchal. 6. The
feast of his chair was celebrated. 7. And his Name added to the Name of the
Trinity, in literis formatis: What then, was he not yet Primate before all
this? was not his Primacy founded upon the Reasons above? will you say, he was
not Primate; or by virtue of his Primacy was not President in the two Councils
mentioned? and, if that be more than confessed, (even pleaded by you) must not
the former personal respects, be the Grounds of that Primacy? and is it
possible for such a Primacy, by Succession, to descend to any other person?
none, that consider, will say it.

The Fathers acknowledge a Primacy in Saint Fathers.
Peter; but upon such personal grounds* as are mentioned. Saint Peter was
called a Rock (says Sermon. 47.
Saint Ambrose (if the Book he his) eo quod primus in Nationibus, etc. because
he was the first that laid the Foundation of Faith in the World. Cerameus gives
him likewise, primus Aditus Aedificationis spiritualis.

Christianorum Pontifex primus, Petrus; andReliquorum Apostolorum Princeps,
propter virtutis Eusebius.
Amplitudinem: He was Prince, for the greatness of hs Virtue. Virtue, is a
personal gift, and cannot pass by Succession.

Saint Chrisostom indeed, is urged against us -- Curam, tum Petro, tum Petri
Successoribus Committebat. lib. 2. de Sacerdotio.

It Is granted, Peter had his Successors in time place; and that is all the
words, ((...), to be rendered those which followed him) will conclude.

However, admit the Bishop of Rome, did succeed Saint Peter in his care, as the
word is; does it follow, that he succeeded him in his Primacy? which has
appeared not capable of Succession.

Application of Sect. 1.
Therefore, I conclude, that whatsoever Inference.
Primacy the Bishop of Rome obtained in the Ancient Church, it was not the
Primacy of Saint Peter; or, as he was Successor of Saint Peter in his Primacy;
but he obtained it, upon other Grounds, not those Antecedent in Saint Peter;
but such as arose afterward, and were peculiar to the Church of Rome. A Note
as easy to be observed by such as look into the practice of the Ancient
Church; as of great caution and use in this Controversy. The Grounds are known
to be such as these; because Rome was the Imperial City; because the Church of
Rome was then most Famous for the Christian Faith; because, she was the most
noted Seat of true Tradition; because her Bishops were most Eminent for Piety,
Learning, and a charitable Care for other Churches: and lastly, perhaps,
because Saint Peter had been Bishop there, his Memory might deflect some
honor, at least, by way of motive, on the Bishop of Rome; as the Council of
Sardica moves; if it please you let us honor the Memory of Saint Peter: but,
though the Memory of Saint Peter might be used, as an Argument of the Pope's
Priority; it is far from concluding his inheriting Saint Peter's Primacy; though
he had honor by being his Successor.

2. It further follows, that the Primacy of Inference. Primacy not Jure Divino.
that See heretofore, was not Jure Divino, but from the Civility of the World;
and the Courtesy of Princes; and the Gratitude of the Church.

Indeed, this Primacy was not an Office, but an honor; and that honor, was
not given by any Solemn Grant of God or Man; but seems to have gained upon the
World insensibly, and by degrees, till it became a Custom, as the Council of
Nice, intimates.

3, Lastly, it follows, that this Primacy, was Inference; Not in succeeding
Popes.
not derived to the Succeeding Bishops of Rome; it standing upon such temporary
Grounds, as too soon, failed: for, when that, which was the cause of it,
ceased; no wonder, if the honor was denied. When the Faith of the Sea was
turned to Infidelity, and Blasphemy, and Atheism, and Sorcery (as their own men
say) when their piety was turned into such villainies of pride, Symony,
uncleaness, and monstrous lawdness, (as themselves report) when their care and
vigilance was turned into Methods of wasting and destroying the Churches; when
the Exordium Vnitatis was turned into a Head of Schism and division; no wonder
that the Primacy and honor of the Sea of Rome, which was raised and stood upon
the contrary grounds, was at length discovered to be groundless; and the former
primacy which stood on Courtesy, and was exalted by an usurped Supremacy and
Tyranny, was thrown off by us; and our ancient liberty is Repossessed, and the
Glory of Rome is so far departed.

SECT. II.
Whether the Pope be Supreme as Successor of Peter, by Divine Right? Neg. Not
Primate as such. Peter himself not Supreme. Pope not Succed him at all.
THis is the last Refuge, and the meaning of it is; that our Savior made St.
Peter Universal Monarch of the whole Church, and intended the Pope of Rome
should succeed him in that power.

All possible defense herein, has been prevented: For if the Bishop of Rome
did not succeed him in his Primacy, how should he succeed him in his Supremacy?
Again, if St. Peter had no such Supremacy, as has appeared, how should the
Pope receive it as his Successor? Besides, what ever power St. Peter had, it
does no way appear that the Pope should succeed him in it; much less in our
Saviors Intention, or by Divine Right.

However, let us try their colors. Will they maintain it, that Christ
appointed the Bishops of Rome to succeed St. Peter in so great a power? The
Claim is considerable, the whole World in all Ages is concerned; none could
give this privilege of Succession, but the giver of the power. But where did
he do it? Where or how, when or by whom was it expressed? Should not the Grant
of so great an Empire, wherein all are so highly concerned, especially when it
is disputed and pretended, be produced?

Instead of plain proof we are put off with obscure and vanishing Shadows, such
as follow.

SECT. III.
Arg. 1. Peter Assigned it.
INstead of proving that Christ did, they say Peter when he died, bestowed the
Supremacy upon the Bishops of Rome, in words to this effect; as Heart expresses
them. I Ordain this Clement to be your Bishop; unto whom alone I commit the
Chair of my Preaching and Doctrine; And I give to him that power of binding and
loosing, which Christ gave to me.

And what then? (I Ordain) then he had it Peter's Successor by Divine Right, but
as a Gift and Legacy of St. Peter. 2. (This Clement) a foul blot to the Story:
For it is plain in Records, that Linus continued Bishop eleven years after
Peter's death; and Cletus twelve after Linus; before Clemens had the Chair.
[Your Bishop] Eusebius. in Chron.
that is the Bishop of Rome; what is this to the Universal Bishop? [And I give
to him] what? the Chair of Preaching and Doctrine, and the power of the Keys.
viz. no more than is given to every Bishop at his Ordination. Now it is
observable, though this pitiful Story signify Vid. Raynolds and Heart. p. 269
etc.
just nothing; yet what strange Arts and stretches of invention are forced to
support it, and to render it possible though all in vain.

SECT. IV.
Arg. 2. Bishop of Antioch did not Succeed: Ergo of Rome.
BEllarmine argues more subtly, yet supposes strongly than he argues.
Pontifex Romanus, the High Priest of Rome, succeeded St. Peter (dying at Rome)
in his whole dignity and power; for there was never any that affirmed himself
to be St. Peter's Successor any way, or was accounted for such; besides the
Bishop of Rome and the Bishop of Antioch: But the Bishop of Antioch did not
succeed St. Peter in pontificatu Ecclesiae totius; therefore the Bishop of Rome
did.

He supposes that St. Peter's Successor succeeded all his dignity and power;
but it is acknowledged by his friends, there was no Succession of the
Apostolic, but only of the Episcopal power. 2. If so, then Linus, Cletus, and
Clemens, should have had dignity and power over John, and the other Apostles;
(who lived after St. Peter) as their Pastor and Head; according to their own
way of Arguing. 3. Besides, St. Peter had power of casting out of Devils, etc.
and doing such miracles as the Pope pretends not to do. Lastly, what if the
Pope affirms that he is, and others account him to be St. Peter's Successor;
the point requires the truth thereof to be shown, Jure divino.

SECT. V.
Arg. 3. St. Peter dyed at Rome. Then de Facto, not de Fide.
BEllarmine says, the Succession it self is Jure divino; but the Ratio
Successionis arose out of the Fact of St. Peter (planting his See and dying at
Rome;) and not from Christ's first Institution: Then doubts ( quamvis non sit
etc.) whether this Succession be so according to his own position, forte non
est de jure divino; but neither shows the Succession it self to be Christ's
Institution at all; nor proves the Tradition of Peter, on which he seems to lay
his stress; and we may guess why he does not.

In short, if the Succession of the Bishop of Rome Faith; it is so either in
Jure or in Facto: But neither is proved. Yea the contrary is acknowledged by
Bellarmine himself. Not in Right because that is not certo divinum, as
Bellarmine confesses: Nor in Fact, because before Peter's death, which
introduced no change in the Faith, as Bellarmine also confesses, this
Succession was not of Faith.

Indeed it is well observed, that the whole weight of Bellarmine's reasoning,
is founded in Fact; (then where is the Jus divinum?) 2. In such fact (of Peter)
as is not found in Scripture, or can be proved any way. 3. In such Fact as
cannot constitute a Right either divine or humane. 4. In such Fact as cannot
conclude a Right, in the sense of the most learned Romanists. Scot. in 4. did.
24. Cordubensis lib. 4. qu. 1. Cajetan de prim. pap. c. 23. Bannes in 2. 2. q.
1. a. 10. who contend, that the union of the Bishopric of the City and the
World, is only per accidens, and not Jure divine, vel imperio Christi.

But when the uncertainty of that Fact (on which the Right of fo great and vast
an Empire is raised) is considered; what further answer can be expected? For is
it not uncertain whether Peter were ever at Rome? or whether he was ever Bishop
of Rome? or whether he dyed at Rome? or whether Christ called him back that he
might dye at Rome? or whether he ordained Clement to succeed him at Rome?
Indeed there is little else certain about the matter but this; that Peter did
not derive to him that succeeded him, and his Successors for ever, his whole
dignity and Power; and a greater Authority than he had himself, Jure divino.

But if we allow all the uncertainties mentioned, to be most certain; we need
not fear to look the Argument, with all its attendants and strength, in the
face. Peter was Bishop of Rome, was warned by Christ immediately to place his
Seat at Rome, to stay and dye at Rome; and before he died, he appointed one to
succeed him in his Bishopric at Rome: Therefore the Bishops of Rome
successively are universal Pastors, and have supreme power over the whole
Church jure divino. Is not the cause rendered suspicious by such Arguments? and
indeed desperate, that needs them, and has no better?

SECT. VI.
Arg. 4. Councils, Popes, Fathers.
BEllarmine tells us boldly, that the Primacy Councils; the Testimonies of
Popes, by the consent of the Fathers, both Greek and Latin.

These great words are no Arguments; the matter has been examined under all
these Topics, Supremacy of Power over the whole Church to have been anciently
in the Pope, much less from the beginning and jure divino; especially when St.
Augustine and the Greek Fathers directly opposed it as an Usurpation.

A Primacy of Order is not in the question; though that also was obtained by
the ancient Popes, only more humano; and on Temporary Reasons as has before
appeared. But as a learned man says, the Primacy of a Monarchical Power in the
Bishop of Rome, was never affirmed by any ancient Council, or by any one of the
ancient Fathers, or so much as dreamt of; and at what time afterward the Pope
took upon him to be a Monarch; it should be inquired qno jure, by what Right he
did so: whether by Divine, Humane, or altogether by his own, i. e. no Right at
all.

SECT. VII.
Arg. 5. The Prevention of Schism. St. Jerome.
A Primacy was given to Peter for preventing Ar. 5.
Schism, as St. Hierom says: Now hence they urge, that a mere precedence of
Order is not sufficient for that.

The Inference is not divine; it is not St. Hieroms; Peter and reaches not the
Pope: Besides it plainly argues a mistake of Lib. 1. Jov. c. 14.
St. Jerome's assertion, and would force him to a contradiction. For immediately
before; he teaches, that the Church is built equally on all the Apostles, and
that they all receive the Keys, and that the firmness of the Church is equally
grounded on them all; so that what Primacy he meant, it consisted with
Equality, as Monarchy cannot.

Therefore St. Hierom more plainly in another Epis. ad Evagr.
place, affirms; that wherever there is a Bishop, whether at Rome,
Constantinople, etc. Ejusdem meriti est, ejusdem est and Sacerdotii. Again,
it is neither Riches nor Poverty which makes Bishops higher or lower, but they
are all the Apostles Successors.

SECT. VIII.
Arg. 6. Church committed to him.
ST. Chrysostom says, the Care of the Church Ar. 6.
was committed, as to Peter, so to his Successors. (Tum Petro, tum etc.)
therefore the Bishops of Rome being Successors of St. Peter in that Chair; have
the care, and consequently the power committed to them, which was committed to
Peter.

True, the Care and power of a Bishop, not Apostle or universal Monarch; the
commission of all other Bishops, carried Care and power also.

But indeed, this place proves not so much as that the Pope is Peter's
Successor in either; much less Jure divino, which was the thing to be proved:
(...), those which followed in time and place, not otherwise; as before.

SECT. IX.
Arg. 7. One Chair. Optatus, Cyprian, Ambrose, Acacius.
THere is one Chair (says Optatus) quae prima est de Dotibus; in which Peter
sat first; Linus succeeded him; and Clemens, Linus.

Optatus speaks nothing against the Title or power of other Chairs; or for the
pre-eminence of power in this one Chair above the rest.

He intended not to exclude the other Apostolical Seats from the honor or
power of Chairs: For he says as well that James sat at Jerusalem, and John at
Ephesus; as that Peter sat at Rome, which Tertullian calls Apostolicas
Cathedras; all presiding in their own places. De praescrip. c. 36.

It Is most evident, that Optatus calls the Chair of Peter one, not because of
any Superiority over other Apostolical Chairs; but because of the Unity of the
Catholic Church, in opposition to the Donatists; who set up another Chair in
opposiion (Altar contra Altar) to the Catholic Church.

Bellarmine well observes, that Optatus followed the doctrine of St. Cyprian,
who said, there is but one Church, one Chair, etc. And out of St. Cyprian
himself, his meaning therein is manifest Cyprian.
to be no other, than a specifical, not numerical Unity. He tells us plainly in
the same place, that the other Apostles were the same with Peter, equal in
honor and power: He teaches that the one Bishopric is dispersed --
consisting of the unanimous multitude of many Bishops; that the Bishopric is
but one; a portion whereof is wholly and fully Head of every Bishop: So there
ought to be but one Bishop in the Catholic Church, i. e. all Bishops ought to
be one in Faith and Fellowship. Vid. Cypr. de Unit. Eccles. and lib. 3. Epis.
11.

But is it not prodigious, that men should build the Pope's Dominion, upon the
Doctrine of Saint Cyprian and Optatus? The latter tells us roundly; that
whosoever is without (the Communion of) seven Churches of Asia, is an Alien; in
effect, calling the Pope Infidel; and Saint Cyprian, is well known to have
always styled Pope Cornelius, Brother; to have severely censured his Successor
Pope Stephen, contradicting his Decrees; opposing the Roman Councils;
disclaiming the Pope's Power of Appeals, and contemning his Excommunications.

A Council at Africa under Saint Cyprian; as another, wherein Saint Augustine
sat, rejected and condemned the Jurisdiction of the Pope over them; as is
frequently observed; and why do men endeavor to blind the World with a few
words of these great Fathers contrary to the known Language of their Actions
and course of Life.

The sense of the words may be disputed, but when it came to a Trial, their
deeds are known to have showed their mind, beyond all dispute.

For Instance, Ambrose calls Pope Damascus Ambr.
Rector of the whole Church: yet it is known that he would never yield his
Senses to the Law of Rome about Easter, lib. 3. de sacr. c. 1. for which, the
Church of Milain, was called the Church of Ambrose 670 years after his death,
when the Clergy of Milain withstood the Legate of Leo 9. saying, the Church of
Ambrose had been always free, and never yet subject to the Laws of the Pope of
Rome; as Baron. notes, An. 1059. Nu. 46.

Many other Aerie Titles and Courtly Addresses given to the Pope in the
Writings of the Fathers, we have observed before, to carry some Color for a
Primacy of Order; but no wise man can imagine, that, they are an Evidence or
Ground, much less a formal Grant of Universal Dominion: seeing, scarce one of
them, but is, in some of the Fathers; and usually by the same Fathers, given,
as well to the other Apostles, and to other Bishops, as to Peter and the Pope;
and so unfortunate is Bellarmine in his Instances, that usually, the very same
place carries its Confutation.

It is strange, that so great a Wit should so egregiously bewray it self; to
bring in Acacius, Bishop of Constantinople, submitting, as it were, the Eastern
Church to the Sea of Rome; because, in his Epistle to Pope Simplicius, he tells
him, he has the care of all the Churches: for, what one Bishop of those times
could have been worse pitched upon for his purpose? who, ever opposed himself
more fiercely against the Jurisdiction of the Pope than Acacius? who, more
boldly rejected his Commands than this Patriarch? or stands in greater
opposition to Rome in all History? yet Acacius must be the Instance of an
Eastern Patriarch's Recognition of the An. 478. n. 3. An. 483. n. 78. An. 484.
n. 17. As they say.
See of Rome. Acacius, phrenesi abreptus (as Baronius has it) adversus Romans
Pontificem Violenter insurgit. Acacius, that Received those whom the Pope
Damned. Acacius, Excommunicated by the Pope; and the very Head of the Eastern
Schism; this is the man that must witness the Pope's Supremacy against himself,
and his own* and his Churches famous Cause: and this, by saying in a Letter to
the Pope himself, that he had the care of all Churches; a Title given to Saint
Paul in the days of Peter; to Athanasius, in the time of Pope Julius; to the
Bishops of France, in time of Pope Elutherius; and to Zecharias an Archbishop,
by Pope John the first; but conferred no Monarchy upon any of them.

I do not remember, that I have yet mentioned the Titles of Summus Pontifex,
and Pontifex Sum. and max. Pontifex.
Maximus; which are also said to carry the Pope's Supremacy in them; but it is
impossible any wise man can think so. Azor. (Jesuit) acknowledges these terms,
may have a Negative Sense only: and Baronius says, they do admit Equality. In
this Sense, Pope Clemens called Saint James, Bishop of Bishops; and Pope Epis.
8^
Leo, styled all Bishops, Summos Pontifices; and the Bishops of the East write
to the Patriarch of Constantinople under the Title of Universal Patriarch, and
call themselves Chief Priests. Epist. ad Tharasiam, etc.

SECT. X.
The Conclusion touching the Fathers. Reasons why no more of them. A Challenge
touching them. No Consent of Fathers in the Point. Evident in General Councils.
Reasons of it. Rome' s contradiction of Faith. Pope, Schism, Perjury, etc.
I Was almost tempted, to have gone through, with a particular Examination of
all the Titles and Phrases, which Bellarmine has with too much Vanity,
gathered out of the Fathers both Greek and Latin, on behalf of the Pope's
Supremacy: But, considering, they are most of them very frivilous and
impertinent; and that I conceive I have not omitted any one that can be soberly
thought material; and, that all of them have been frequently answered by
Learned Protestants; and very few of them (so answered) thought fit to be
replied to by our Adversaries; I thought it prudent, to excuse that very
needless exercise; and I hope none will account me blameworthy for it: but, if
any do so, I offer Compensation, by this humble Challenge upon mature
deliberation.

If any one, or more places, in any of the A Challenge.
Ancient Fathers, Greek or Latin, shall be chosen, by any sober Adversary; and
argued from, as Evidence of the Pope's Supremacy, as Successor to Saint Peter;
God giving me life and health, I shall appear and undertake the Combat, with
weapons extant, in our English Writers; though they may not think, that one or
two, or more passages out of single Fathers are sufficient, to bear away the
Cause in so great a Point: seeing, they themselves, will not suffer the
Testimony of many of the same Fathers, to carry it for us, in a Point of the
least Concernment.

In the mean time, I most confidently conclude; that the Pope's Supremacy has
not the Consent of the Primitive Fathers; as Bellarmine boasts; and that, what
ever he would have them say; they did not believe, and therefore not intend to
say; that, the Pope was absolute Monarch of the Catholic Church: and
consequently, that there was no such Tradition in the Primitive Ages; either
before, or during the time of the eight first General Councils; is to me, a
Demonstration, evident, for these Reasons.

The eight first General Councils, being all Called and Convened by the
Authority of Emperors, stand upon Record, as a notable Monument of the former
Ages of the Catholic Church; in prejudice to the Papal Monarchy, as Saint
Peter's Successor, in those times; the first eight General Councils (says
Cusanus) were gathered, Concord. Cathol. l. 2. c. 25.
by Authority of Emperors, and not of Popes: insomuch that Pope Leo, was glad
to entreat the Emperor Theodosius the younger, for the gathering of a Council
in Italy, and (non obtinuit) could not obtain it.

Every one of these Councils opposed this pretended Monarchy of the Pope: the
first by stating the limits of the Roman Diocese; as well as other
Patriarchates: the second, by concluding, the Roman Primacy not to be grounded
upon Divine Authority; and setting up a Patriarch of Constantinople, against
the Pope's Will: the third, by inhibiting any Bishop whatsoever, to ordain
Bishops, within the Isse of Cyprus: the fourth, by advancing the Bishop of
Constantinople, to equal privileges, with the Bishop of Rome; notwithstanding
the Pope's earnest opposition against it: the fifth, in condemning the Sentence
of Pope Vigilius although very vehement in the cause: the sixth and seventh, in
condemning Pope Honorius of Heresy: and the eight and last, by imposing a
Canon upon the Church of Rome, and challenging obedience thereunto.

This must pass for the unquestionable Sense of the Catholic Church, in those
Ages, viz. for the space of above 540 years together, from the first General
Council of Nice: for our Adversaries themselves, style every one of the General
Councils the Catholic Church; and what was their Belief, was the Faith of the
whole Church; and what their belief was, has appeared; viz. that the Pope had
not absolute power over the Church Jure Divino; an Opinion abhorred by their
contrary Sentences and practices.

It Is observed by a Learned man, that the Fathers, which flourished in all
those eight Councils, were in Number 2280. how few Friends 2280 Fathers.
had the Pope left to equal and Countermand them? or, what Authority had they
to do it? yea name one eminent Father, either Greek or Latin, that you count a
Friend to the Pope, and in those Ages; whose name we cannot show you in one of
those Councils: if so, hear the Church; the Judgment of single Fathers is not
to be received, against their Joint Sentences and Acts, in Councils; it is your
own Law: now, where is the Argument for the Pope's Authority from the Fathers?
they are not to be believed against Councils: they spoke their Sense in this
very Point, as you have heard, in the Councils; and in all the Councils
rejected and condemned it.

The belief of these eight General Councils Faith of the Roman Church:
Therefore, the Roman Church has been involved Rome's contradiction of Faith.
and entangled, at least ever since the Council of Trent, in the Confusion and
Contradiction of Faith; and that in Points necessary to Salvation.

For the Roman Church hold it necessary to Salvation, to believe all the eight
General Councils; as the very Faith of the Catholic Church; and we have found
all these Councils, have one way or other, declared plainly, against the Pope's
Bull. Pii. 4.
Supremacy; and yet the same Church holds it necessary to Salvation to believe
the contrary, by the Council of Trent; viz. that the Pope is Supreme Bishop and
absolute Monarch of the Catholic Church.

Some Adversaries would deal more severely Rome's Heresy.
with the Church of Rome upon this Point; and charge her with Heresy in this,
as well as in many other Articles: for there is a Repugnancy in the Roman
Faith, that seems to inter no less than Heresy, one way or other: he that
believes the Article of the Pope's Supremacy, denies, in effect, the eight
first General Councils, at least in that Point; and that is Heresy. And, he
that believes the Council of Trent; believes the Article of the Pope's
Supremacy: therefore, he that believes the Council of Trent, does not believe
the eight first General Councils; and is guilty of Heresy.

Again, he that believes, that the Pope is not Supreme, denies the Council of
Trent, and the Faith of the present Church, and that is Heresy; and he that
believes the eight first general Councils, believes that the Pope is not
Supreme: therefore, he denies the Council of Trent, and the Faith of the
present Church, and is an Heretic, with a witness.

It Is well if the Argument conclude here; etc. Infidelity.
and extend not its Consequence to the charge of Infidelity, as well as
Heresy, upon the present Roman Church: seeing, this Repugnancy in the Roman
Faith seems to destroy it, altogether: for,

He that believes the Pope's Supremacy, in the Sense of the Modern Church of
Rome, denies the Faith of the Ancient Church in that point, and he that
believes it not, denies the Faith of the present Church; and the present Church
of Rome that professes both, believes neither. These contrary Faiths put
together, like two contrary Salts, mutually destroy one another. He that
believes that, does not believe this; he that believes this, does not believe
that: Therefore he that professes to believe both, does plainly profess he
believes neither.

Load not others with the crimes of Heresy and Infidelity, but Pull the beams
out of your own eye.

But the charge falls heavier upon the Head of Popes Schism and Perjury.
the present Roman Church: For not only Heresy and Infidelity, but Schism, and
the foulest that ever the Church groaned under; and such as the greatest Wit
can hardly distinguish from Apostasy; self-condemning Perjury, fasten
themselves to his Holiness's Chair, from the very constitution of the Papacy it
self.

For the Pope as such, professes to believe, and swears to govern the Church
according to the Canons of the 8 first general Councils; yet openly Greg. 7.
Bin. To. 3. p. 1196. Innoc. 3. Bonif. 8. Calechis. To. Nu. 10, 11, and 13.
claims, and professedly practices a Power condemned by them all.

Thus Quatenus Pope, he stands guilty of separation from the Ancient Church;
and as Head of a new and strange Church, draws the Body of his Faction after
him into the same Schism; in flat contradiction to the essential Profession,
both of the ancient and present Church of Rome: and to that solemn Oath, by
which also the Pope as Pope, binds himself at his Inauguration, to maintain and
communicate with.

Hence, not only Usurpation, Innovations, and Tyranny, are the Fruits of his
Pride, Ambition, and Perjury; but if possible, the guilt is made more Scarlet
by his Cruelty to Souls; intended by his formal Courses of Excommunications,
against all that own not his usurped Authority, viz. the Primitive Churches,
the 8 first general Councils, all the Fathers of the Latin and Greek Churches,
for many hundred years; the greater part of the present Catholic Church, and
even the Apostles of Christ, and our Lord himself.

The Sum of the whole matter. A touch of another Treatise. The material Cause
of Separation.
THe Sum of our defense is this: If the Pope have no Right to Govern the Church
of England, as our Apostle or Patriarch, or as Infallible; if his Supremacy
over us was never grounded in, but ever renounced by our Laws and Customs, and
the very constitution of the Kingdom: If his Supremacy be neither of Civil,
Ecclesiastical, or Divine Right; if it be disowned by the Scriptures and
Fathers, and condemned by the Ancient Councils; the Essential Profession of the
present Roman Church, and the solemn Oaths of the Bishops of Rome themselves:
If, I say, all be certainly so as has appeared; what reason remains for the
necessity of the Church of England's readmission of, or submission to the
Papal Authority, usurped contrary to all this? Or what reason is left to charge
us with Schism for rejecting it?

But it remains to be shown; that as the claim of the Popes Authority in
England cannot be allowed; so there is cause enough otherwise of our denial of
obedience actually to it, from Reasons inherent in the Usurpation it self, and
the Nature of many things required by his Laws.

This is the second Branch of our defense; proposed at first to be the Subject
of another Treatise.

For who can think it necessary to communicate with Error, Heresy, Schism,
Infidelity and Apostasy; to conspire in damning the Primitive Church, the
Ancient Fathers, General Councils, and the better and greater part of the
Christian World at this day? or willingly at least, to return to the infinite
Superstitions and Idolatries; which we have escaped, and from which our blessed
Ancestors (through the infinite mercy and providence of God) wonderfully
delivered us.

Yet these horrid things cannot be avoided, if we shall again submit our
selves, and enslave our Nation to the pretended Powers and Laws of Rome; from
which, Libera nos Domine.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
Objections touching the First General Councils, and our Arguments from them,
answered more fully.
SECT. I.
The Argument from Councils drawn up, and Conclusive of the Fathers, and the
Cath. Church.
IN this Treatise I have considered the Canons of the ancient Councils two
ways; as Evidence, and Law. As Evidence, they give us the undoubted sense and
Faith, both of the Catholic Church, and of single Fathers in those times; and
nothing can be said against that. As Law, we have plainly found that none of
them confer the Supremacy pleaded for, but every one of them in special Canons
condemn it.

Now this latter is so great a proof of the former, that it admits of no
possible reply; except Circumstances on the by, shall be set in opposition and
contradiction to the plain Text in the body of the Law.

And if neither the Church nor single Fathers had any such faith of the Popes
Supremacy, during the first General Councils; then neither did they believe it
from the Beginning: For if it had been the Faith of the Church before, the
Councils would not have rejected it, and indeed the very form and method of
proceeding in those Ancient Councils, is sufficient Evidence that it was not.

However, why is it not shown by some color of Argument at least, that the
Church did believe the Popes Supremacy before the time of those Councils? why
do we not hear of some one single Father, that declared so much before the
Council of Nice, or rather before the Canons of the Apostles? Or why is there
no notice taken of such a Right, or so much as Pretense in the Pope, either by
those Canons or one single Father before that time?

Indeed our Authors find very shrewd Evidence of the contrary.

Why (says Casaubon) was Dionysins so utterly Dionysins.
silent, as to the Universal Head of the Church Reigning at Rome; if at that
time there had been any such Monarch there? Especially seeing he professedly
wrote of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and Government. Exerc. 16. in Bar. an.
34. Nu. 2^0.

The like is observable in Ignatius, the most Ignatius Epist. ad Tral.
Ancient Martyr and Bishop of Antioch; who in his Epistles frequently sets
forth the Order Ecclesiastical, and dignity of Bishops upon sundry occasions,
but never mentions the Monarchy of St. Peter or the Roman Pope. Ibid. he
writing to the Church of Trallis to obey Bishops as Apostles, instanceth
equally in Timothy St. Paul's Scholar, as in Anacletus Successor to St. Peter.

The Prudence and Fidelity of these two prime Fathers, are much stained, if
there were then an Universal Bishop over the whole Church; that professedly
writing of the Ecclesiastical Order, they St. Paul.
should so neglect him, as not to mention Obedience due to him; and indeed of
St. Paul himself, who gives us an enumeration of the Primitive Ministry, on set
purpose, both in the ordinary and extraordinary kinds of it, [ viz. Some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers] and takes
no notice of the Universal Bishop; but we hence conclude rather, there was no
such thing.

For who would give an account of the Government of a City, Army, or Kingdom;
and say nothing of the Mayor, General, or Prince? This surpasses the fancy of
Prejudice it self.

Irenaeus is too ancient for the Infallible Chair; Ireneus lib. 2. c. 3. p.
140, 141.
and therefore refers us, in the point of Tradition, as well to Polycarp in the
East, as to Linus Bishop of Rome in the West.

Tertullian advises to consult the Mother-Churches Tertullian praescr. p. 76.
immediately founded by the Apostles; and names Ephesus and Corinth as well as
Rome; and Polycarpus ordained by St. John, as well as Clemens by Peter. Upon
which their own Renanus notes, that Tertullian does not confine the Catholic
and Apostolic Church to one place; for which freedom of Truth, the Judex
expurgatorius corrected him, but Tertullian is Tertullian still.

These things cannot consist, either with their own knowledge of an Universal
Bishop, or the Churches at that time; therefore the Church of Egypt held the
Catholic Faith with the chief-Priests, naming Anatolinus of Constant. Basil of
Antioch, Juvenal of Jerusalem, as well as Leo Bishop of Rome. Bin. To. inter
Epist. illust. person. 147. And it is decreed (says the Church of Carthage) we
consult our Brethren, Syricius Bishop of Rome, and Simplicius Bishop of Milain.
Council. Carth. 3. c. 48.

The like we have observed out of Origin, Clemens Alex. Cyprian, etc. before.

Hence it follows, that the Church and the Fathers before the Councils, had no
knowledge of the Popes Supremacy, and we have a plain answer to all obscure
passages in those Fathers to the contrary.

Besides, whatever private opinion any of them might seem to intimate on the
Popes behalf before, it is certain it can have no Authority against the sense
and sentences of General Councils, which soon after determined against him, as
has appeared in every one of them, in so express and indisputable terms, in
the very body of the Canons; that it is beyond all possible hopes to support
their cause from any circumstantial Arguments touching those Councils: Yet
these also shall now be considered in their order.

SECT. II.
Objections touching the Council of Nice, answered
LEt us begin with the Council of Nice, consisting 1. General.
of 318 Bishops, which is found so plain in two special Canons, (the one
forbidding Appeals, and the other limiting the Jurisdiction of the Provinces
according to Custom) against the Papal Supremacy; that one would think nothing
could be objected: But Bellarmine will say something that was never said before.

He says, the Bishop of Alexandria should Provinces, because the Bishop of
Rome was accustomed to permit him so to do.

We have given full answer to this before; but Prelate of ours has rendered it
so senceless Morton grand impost. p. 132 etc.
and shameless a gloss, in so many and evident instances; that I cannot forbear
to give the sum of what he has said, that it may further appear our greatest
Adversaries are out of their Wits, when they pretend a fence against the Canons.

After the nonsense of it, he shows its impudence against the Sunshine Light
of Story and Grammar; because it is so evident, that the words [ because the
Bishop of Rome has the same Custom] are words of Comparison betwixt Alexandria
and Rome, in point of ancient Privilege, both from the words [(...)] and three
Editions; now entered into the body of the Councils by their own Binius; wherein
the words are, because the Church of Rome has the like Custom.

Yet this were modesty, Did they not know, says he, that the Council of
Calcedon did against the Will of the Pope, advance the privilege of
Constantinople, upon this ground of Custom?

The matter is so plain, that (...) own Cardinal Cusan. concord Catho. li. 2.
cap. 12. concludes thus; We see how much the Bishop of Rome, by use and custom
of Subjectional Obedience has got at this day, beyond the ancient
Constitutions; speaking of this very Council.

Bellarmine says, the beginning of that Canon in the vulgar Books is thus: The
Roman Church semper habet primatum, mos autem perduret.

The answer is; it is shameful to prefer one vulgar Book before all other Greek
or Latin Copies; and before the Book of the Pope's decrees, set out at Paris,
an. 1559. or the Editions sent by two Patriarchs, on purpose to give
satisfaction in this Cause; which Bellarmine himself acknowledges, lib. 2. de
Romans Pont. c. 13. In none of all which, the word [ Primacy] is to be found; and
consequently is foisted into that vulgar book. But what if it were? the bare
Primacy is not disputed in the sense given of it by the Council of Calcedon; It
behooves, that the Archbishop of Constable. ( new Rome) be dignified with the same
Primacy of Honor after Rome: Prerogativam dignitatis Zozom. l. 7. c. 9.

SECT. III.
2. Genesis Council. Objections touching the Council of Constantinople, Answered.
NExt, to the Council of Constantinople, being 2. General.
the second General; let us hear what is objected.

They say themselves, says Bellarmine, that gathered by the mandate of Pope
Damasus.

1. What then? suppose we should give the Head of Unity and order, the honor
of convening General Councils; and of sitting as President in them? What Is this
to the Supremacy of Government? or what more than might be contained in the
Primacy, that is not now disputed.

2. But Bellarmine himself confesses, that those words are not in the Epistle
of the Council as all Mandates use to be; but of certain Bishops that had been
at the Council.

3. It Is recorded, that the Mandate from the Vid. Theod. l. 5. c. 7. Zoz. l. 7.
c. 7. Neeeph. l. 12.
Emperor gathered them together: the Testimony will have credit before the
Cardinal.

4. Indeed the Pope sent Letters, in order to the calling this Conncil, but far
from Mandatory; neither were they sent to the Eastern Bishops, to (...).
require, but to the Emperor Theodosius by way of Request, for the obtaining
Liberty to assemble a Synod. Did he command the Emperor? why did not Pope Leo
afterward command a general Council in Italy nearer home, when he had
entreated Theodosius for it with much importunity; and could not obtain? the
time was not ripe for the Pope's Commands, either of Emperors or Synods.

It is also said, that the Council acknowledged Rome was the Head, and they the
Members, in their very Epistle to Pope Damasus.

Bellarmine confesses, this is not in their Epistle, Bishops as before.

2. If they had thus complemented the Pope, it could not be interpreted beyond
the Head of a Primate and their union with him in the same Faith: It Is evident
enough they intended nothing less than a Supremacy of Power in that Head, or
subjection of Obedience in themselves as Members.

3. This is evident in the very inscription of the Epistle, which was not to
Damasus only, but jointly to others, thus. Most Honorable and Reverend
Brethren and Colleagues: And the Epistle it self is answerable; We declare our
selves to be your proper Members: but how? That you Reigning, we may Reign with
you.

4. The Sum is, there were at this time two Councils, convened by the same
Emperor Theodosius both to one purpose; this at Constantinople, the other at
Rome: That at Rome was but a particular, the other at Constantinople was ever
esteemed a general Council. Who now can imagine, that the General was subject
to the Particular; and in that sense, Members? No, the particular Church of
Rome then, was not the Catholic; they humbly express their Communion: We are
all Christ's, who is not divided by us; by whose grace we will preserve entire
the body of the Church. They did (...), (as their word was) their fellow
Members, which they styled (...) their fellow Workers.

This second Canon against the Pope, was never Baron. Binius.
received by the Church of Rome; because Furtive, as Baronius, inter Acta
relatus.

This is beyond all color; for the Bishops of Rome opposed it as unfit, yet
never said it was forged. Leo, Gelasius, Gregory, all took it very ill, but no
one said it was false: The Popes Legates also in the Council of Calcedon made
mention of this Canon by way of Opposition, but yet never offered at its being
surreptitious: But that which is, instar omnium, in this Evidence, is this; the
Fathers of the Council of Calcedon, in their Letters to Pope Leo, say, that
with mutual consent, they confirmed the Canon of 150 Bishops at Constable.
notwithstanding that his Bishops and Legates -- did dissent therefrom. Now what
if a few Histories do not mention this Canon, which is all that remains to be
said? Socrates and Zozomon do, and two positive Witnesses are better than
twenty Negative. Besides, though its much against the Hair of Rome, yet it is so
evident, that Gratian himself reports that Canon verbatim, as Acted in that
Council.

SECT. IV.
Objections against the Third General Council at Ephesus, answered.
IT is said by Bellarmine, that they confessed Nestorius, by the Command of
Pope Celestine.

We answer; that Command should appear in Letters to them, but it does not; the
style of Command was not then in use, for almost 200 years after, Pope Gregory
abhors it. Li 7. Ep. 30.


2. The words intended are these; tum Ecclesiae canonibus, tum Epistola Patris
(Celestini) and Verb. Conc. de Nest. l. 1. c. 4.
Collegae nostri, compulsi: They were compelled both by the Canons and by his
Letters, therefore they did it by the Popes Command; an excellent consequence
from the part to the whole. Indeed they first show, that they were satisfied
both by his Words and Letters, that he had deserved deposition; and then
acknowledge they ought by the Canons, and no doubt would have deposed him, as
well as John of Antioch shortly after, without the Popes Authority; though they
give this Complement to Celestine, for his seasonable advice, grounded upon the
Canons and merits of the Cause.

But the Council, say they, durst not Judge* Bishop of Antioch; and that they
reserved him to the Judgment of Pope Celestine.

Strange! Bellarmine hence 1. Denies matter Fact, mentioned in the very same
Paragraph. They durst not depose this Patriarch, when they tell the Pope in
terminis they had done it: Se illum prius excommunicasse and omni potestate
sacerdotali exuisse. What is this but Deposition? 2. He hence concludes, a
wonderful Right; that the Pope is absolutely above a General Council: a
conclusion denied by their own general Councils of Constance and Basil, ever
disclaimed by the Doctors of Paris, as contrary to Antiquity; and which no
Council since the beginning of Christianity did expressly decree; as Dr.
Stapleton himself confesses; and therefore flies to Silence as consent.
Quamvis nullo decreto publico tamen tacito doctorum consensu definita etc.
doctr. princ. l. 13. c. 15.

But all this is evidently against both the sense of the Council declared in
this point, and the reason of the Canon it self.

1. They sufficiently declared their sense in the very Epistle alleged, where
speaking of the points constituted by the Pope; We, say they, have judged them
to stand firm: wherofore we agree with you in one sentence, and do hold them
(meaning Pelagius and others) to be deposed: So that instead of the Popes
confirming Acts of Councils, this Council confirms the Acts of the Pope, whom
indeed they plainly call their Colleague and Fellow-worker. Epis. Syn.

2. In the Acts or Canons (their reason and very words, establishing the
Cyprian Privilege, as has been shown) they bound and determine the power of
Rome, as well as other Patriarchates; and certainly they therefore never
intended to acknowledge the absolute Monarchy of the Pope over themselves, by
reserving John of Antioch to Celestine, after they had deposed him; they
declare their own end plainly enough: Villius temeritatem animi lenitate
vinceremus; that is, as you have it in Binius, Celestine might try whether by
any reason he could bring him to a better mind, that so he might be received
into favor again.

SECT. V.
Objections touching the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth General Councils
especially. Touching the Fourth General Council of Calcedon, answered.
Conclusion.
THis Council styled the Pope, Ecumenical Patriarch, Bellar.
or Universal Bishop.

The Title was not given by the Council it self, but by two Deacons writing to
the Council, and of Paschasius the Popes Legate in the Council.

2. Though the Council did not question the form of the Title, yet no one can
think that they either intended to grant or acknowledge the Popes Universal
Authority by such their silence: For, it is incredible that the same Council
which gave equal Privileges to Constantinople, should give or acknowledge an
Universal Jurisdiction to Rome, over the whole Church.

3. But the words answer themselves; Universally Archiepiscopo magnae Romae,
Universal Archbishop, Conc. Calc. Act. 3.
not of the whole Church, but of Great Rome: Which grand Restriction denies
that Universal Power, which they would argue from it^* The style of the Roman
Emperor* is Universal Emperor of Rome, and thus is distinguished from the
Emperor of Turkey and all others; and denies him to be the Emperor of the whole
world.

Says Binius, in Annot* in Conc. Calced. Act 3. ex Baron. The Title at first
was the Bishop of the Universal Church, because it is so read in the Epistle of
Leo; but was altered by some Greek Scribe in envy to the Church of Rome.

It Is likely that a private man could or durst Style of a General Council,
against the dignity of the Pope, his Legate present; but it is more likely that*
some Latin Scribe has added that Inscription to the Epistle of Pope Leo, in
honor of the Church of Rome; as is confessed by Cusanus to have been done to
the Epistle of Anacletus; and by Baronius to have been done to the Epistle of
Pope Boniface; and by three other Popes themselves unto the Council of Nice,
viz. Zosimus, Boniface, and Celestinus. And the rather* because as was just now
noted, this Council at the same time, honored the Bishop of Constantinople,
with equal Privileges to the Bishop of Rome.

Pope Leo opposed this Decree of the Council, disclaimed it.

No wonder; but it seems General Councils General Council; and if that was a
General Council, as they themselves say it was, the Controversy is ended: For
by their own confession, this General Council made a Decree against the Popes
pretenses of Superiority, and therefore it did not intend, by the Title of
Bishop of the whole Church, to acknowledge that Superiority which he pretended;
and that Council of 400 Bishops denied him.

This Decree was not lawfully proceeded in, because Legates of the Pope were
absent. Bell. l. 2. de Pont. c. 22.

The Legates were there the next day; and Acts of the day before, read. Aetius
for the Council shows, that the Legates knew what was done; all was done
Cononically: Then the Acts being read, the Popes Legates tell the Council, that
Circumvention was used in making that Canon of Privileges, and that the
Bishops were compelled thereunto. The Synod with a loud voice cried, Jointly,
we were not compelled to subscribe. After, every one severally protest, I did
subscribe willingly and freely, and the Acts are ratified and declared to be
just and valid; and wherein say they, we will persist: the Legates are instant
to have the Act revoked, because the Apostolical See is humbled or abased;
thereto the Fathers unanimously answered, the whole Synod does approve it. This
clear account we have in Bin. in Council. Calced. Act. 16. p. 134, and 137.

Bellarmine says, that the Pope approved all the Decrees of this Council,
which were de fide: and does not Bellarmine argue that the Popes Superiority is
Jure divino? and the present Church of Rome hold, that his Supremacy is a point
necessary to Salvation? How comes it to pass, that he would not approve this
Decree? or how can they esteem this Council general and lawful, and swear to
observe the decrees of it, when it is found guilty of Heresy in so great a
point as the Popes Primacy?

But to end with this, the very Title it self of Bishop of the Universal
Church, in the style of those Ages, signified certainly neither Supremacy nor
Primacy; Universal Bishop of the Church seemed a dangerous Title, importing
universal Power over it, and was therefore so much abhorred by Pope Gregory.
But the Title of Bishop of the Universal Church signified the care of the whole
Church, to which, as Origin says, every Bishop is called: Therefore Aurelius,
Fortunatianus, Augustine, are called Bishops of the Universal Church, and many
in the Greek Church had the same honorable Titles given them; which signified
either that they professed the Catholic Faith, or as Bishops, had a general
regard to the good of the Catholic Church.

But your own Jesuit confesses, that Pelagius Azorius.
and Gregory both Popes, have born witness that no Bishop of Rome before them,
did ever use the Style of Universal Bishops. However, Universal Patriarch makes
as great a sound as Universal Bishop; yet that Title was given to John Bishop
of Constantinople, by the Bishops of Syria. Cod. Authent. Constitu. 3.

The custody of the Vine, i. e. the whole Bell. de Pont. l. 2. c. 13.
Church, the Council says is committed to the Pope by God.

True, so that Primitive Pope Elutherius said to Bin. Epist. Eleuth.
the Bishops in France, the whole Catholic Church is committed to you. St.
Paul also had the care of all the Churches, but that is high which Greg.
Nazian. says of Athanasius; that he having the presidence of the Church of
Alexandria, may be said thereby to have the Government of the whole Christian
World. Sai. Tom. 16. in 1 Pet. 5.

Now, says a Learned man, we are compelled to ask with what Conscience you
could make such Objections Bishop Morton.
in good earnest, to busy your Adversaries and seduce your Disciples withal,
whereunto you your selves could so easily make answer.

We find no further objection against the other Bellarmine argues the Popes
Supremacy, because the Synod of Constable. being the Fifth General Council,
complemented the Pope as his Obedient Servants; nos (inquit Praeses)
Apostolicam Sedem sequimur and obedimus, etc. Bell. lib. 2. de pont. c. 13.
Though this very Council both opposed, accused, and condemned the Pope for
Heresy; which could not possibly consist with their acknowledgment of his
Supremacy or Infallibility.

The same is more evident, in the sixth, seventh, and eighth General Councils,
condemning the Persons and Judgments of, and giving Laws to the Bishops of
Rome; to which nothing material can be objected, but what has been more than
answered.

Binius indeed in his Tract de Prim. Eccl. Romans gives us the sayings of many
ancient Popes for the Supremacy pretended; especially in two points, The Power
of Appeals, challenged by Pope Anacetus; Zepherinus, Fabianus, Sixtus, and
Symachus; and Exemption of the first See from censure or judgment by any other
power; claimed by Pope Sylvester and Gelasius. But these are Testimonies of
Popes themselves in their own cause, and besides both these points have been
found so directly and industriously determined otherwise by their own General
Councils, that further answer is needless.

CONCLUSION.
THus Objections being removed, the Argument from the Councils settles firm in
its full strength; and seeing both the ancient Fathers and the Catholic Church
have left us their sense in the said Councils; and the sense of the Councils is
also the received and professed faith of the present Church of Rome it self;
who can deny that the Catholic Church to this day, has not only not granted
or acknowledged, but even most plainly condemned the pretended Supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome: Yea who can doubt but our Argument against it, is founded upon
their own Rock, the very constitution of the Papacy it self, as before has
appeared?

Therefore the Popes claim upon this Plea, as well as upon any or all the
former, is found groundless; and England's Deliverance from his foreign
Jurisdiction, just and honest as well as happy: Which our good God in his wise
and merciful Providence, ever Continue, Preserve, and Prosper. Amen, Amen.

A Serious ALARM to all sorts of ENGLISHMEN against POPERY, from Sense and
Conscience; their OATHS and their INTEREST.
1. THe Kings of England seem bound, not only by their Title, but in Conscience
of their Ministry under God, to defend the Faith and the Church of Christ
within their Dominions, against Corruption and Invasion, and therefore against
Popery.

They are also bound in Honor, Interest, and Fidelity, to preserve the
Inheritance and Rights of the Crown; and to derive them entire to their Heirs
and Successors; and therefore to keep out the Papal Authority.

And lastly, it is said they are bound by their Oaths at their Coronation, and
by the Laws of Nature and Government, to maintain the Liberties and Customs of
their people; and to govern them according to the Laws of the Realm, and
consequently not to admit the foreign Jurisdiction of the Pope, in prejudice of
our ancient Constitution, our common and Ecclesiastical Laws, our natural and
legal Liberties and Properties.

2. The Nobility of England have anciently held themselves bound, not only* in
honor, but by their Oaths, Terras and honores Regis etc. to preserve together
with the King, the Territories and honors of the King, ( omni fidelitate
ubique) most faithfully; and to defend them against Enemies and Foreigners,
meaning especially the Pope of Rome. It Is expressed more fully in their Letter
to the Pope himself, in Edw. 1. Reign, to defend the Inheritance and
Prerogative of the Crown, the State of the Realm, the Liberties, Customs and
Laws of their Progenitors, against all foreign Usurpation, ( toto posse, totis
viribus) to the utmost of their power, and with all their might: adding, We do
not permit, or in the least will permit, (sicut nec possum ^^ nec debemus)
though our Sovereign Lord the King do, or in the least wise, attempt to do any
of the Premises, (viz. owning the Authority of the Pope, by his answer touching
his Right to Scotland) so strange, so unlawful, prejudicial, and otherwise
unheard of, though the King would himself.

See that famous Letter sent to the Pope, the 29 of Edw. 1. taken out of Cor.
Christi College-Library, and printed this year at Oxford, the reading of which
gave the occasion of these Meditations.

3. It appears further, in the Sheet where you have that Letter; that the
Commons in Parliament have heretofore held themselves bound, to resist the
invasion and attempts of the Pope, upon England, though the King and the Peers
should connive at them; their words are resolute, Si Dominus Rex and Regni
majores hoc vellent (meaning Bishop Adomers Revocation from Banishment upon the
Popes order) Communitas tamen ipsius ingressum, in Angliam nullatenus
sustineret. This is said to be recorded about the 44 of Hen. 3.

4. It is there observed also, that upon the Conquest, William the Conqueror
made all the Freeholders of England to become sworn Brethren; sworn to defend
the Monarchy with their Persons and Estates to the utmost of their Ability; and
manfully to preserve it: So that the whole Body of the people* as well as the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, stood anciently bound by their Oath,
to defend their King and their Country against Invasion and Usurpation.

5. The present Constitution of this Kingdom, is yet a stronger Bulwark against
Popery: Heretofore indeed the Papal pretensions were checked, sometimes in
temporal, sometimes in spiritual concerns and Instances: But upon the
Reformation, the Popes* Supremacy was altogether and at once rejected, and
thrown out of England; and the consequence is, an universal standing obligation
upon the whole Kingdom, by Statutes, Customs, and most solemn Oaths, to defend
our Monarchy, our Church, our Country, and our Posterity, against those
Encroachments and that Thraldom, from which we were then so wonderfully
delivered, and, for this hundred years have been so miraculously preserved,
blessed be God.

Accordingly in our present Laws, both the Temporal and Ecclesiastical
Supremacy is declared to be inherent in the Crown; and our Kings are sworn to
maintain and govern by those Laws: And I doubt not but all Ministers of the
Church, and all Ministers of State, and of Law and War, all Mayors and Officers
in Cities and Towns corporate etc. together with all the Sheriffs and other
Officers in their several Countries; and even all that have received either
Trust or power from his Majesty within the Kingdom: All these I say, I suppose
are sworn to defend the King's Supremacy as it is inconsistent with, and in
flat opposition to Popery.

In the Oath of Allegiance, we swear to bear true Allegiance to the King, and
to defend him against all Conspiracies and Attempts, which shall be made
against his Person and Crown, to the utmost of our power; meaning especially
the Conspiracies and Attempts of Papists, as is plain by that which follows in
that Oath, and yet more plain by the Oath of Supremacy.

In which Oath we swear, that the King is the only Supreme Governor in this
Realm, as well in all spiritual things and causes, as temporal; and that no
foreign Prince or Prelate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical within this Realm; and that we do abhor and renounce all such.
We swear also, that we will bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King -- and
to our power assist and defend all Jurisdictions, viz. Ecclesiastical as well
as Temporal, granted or belonging to the Kings Highness.

6. Now next to Oaths, nothing can be thought to oblige us more than Interest:
But if neither Oaths nor Interest, neither Conscience nor Nature, neither
Religion nor self-Preservation, can provoke us to our own defense; what
remains! but a certain fearful expectation of judgment to devour a perjured and
senseless Generation.

If either our joint or several Interests be considerable, how are we all
concerned?

1. Is there any among us that care for nothing but Liberty and Money? they
should resist Popery, which would many ways deprive them of both.

2. But if the knowledge of the Truth, if the Canon of life in the holy
Scriptures, if our Prayers in our own tongue, if the Simplicity of the Gospel,
the purity of Worship and the Integrity of Sacraments, be things valuable and
dear to Christians; let them abhor Popery.

3. If the ancient Privileges of the British Church, the Independency of her
Government upon Foreign Jurisdiction; if their legal Incumbencies, their
Ecclesiastical Dignities; if their opportunities and capacities of saving Souls
in the continuance of their Ministries; if their judgment of discretion
touching their Doctrine and Administrations; their judgment of Faith, Reason,
and Sense, touching the Eucharist; if exemption from unreasonable impositions
of strange Doctrines, Romish Customs, groundless Traditions, and Treasonable
Oaths: And lastly, if freedom from spiritual Tyranny and bloody Inquisitions;
if all these be of consequence to Clergymen, let them oppose Popery.

4. If our Judges and their several Courts of Judicature, would preserve their
Legal proceedings, and judgments and decrees; if they would not be controlled
and superseded by Bulls, Sentences and Decrees from the Pope, and Appeals to
Rome; let them never yield to Popery.

5. If the Famous Nobility and Gentry of England would appear like themselves
and their heroic Ancestors, in the defense of the Rights of their Country, the
Laws and customs of the Land, the Wealth of the people, the Liberties of the
Church, the Empire of Britain, and the grandeur of their King, or indeed their
own honor and Estates in a great measure; let them never endure the
readmission of Popery.

6. Yea, let our great Ministers of State, and of Law, and of War consider,
that they stand not firm enough in their high and envied places, if the Roman
Force breaks in upon us; and remember, that had the late bloody and barbarous
design taken effect, one consequence of it was, to put their places into other
hands: And therefore in this capacity as well as many other, they have no
reason to be Friends to Popery.

7. As for His Most Excellent Majesty, no suspicion either of inclination to,
or want of due vigilance against Popery, can fasten upon him; and may he long
live in the Enjoyment, and under a worthy Sense of the Royalties of Monarchy,
and the honor and exercise of his Natural and Legal Supremacy, in all Causes
and over all Persons within his Dominions, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, his
Paternal Inheritance of Empire; and at last leave it entirely to his Heirs and
Successors upon Earth, for a more glorious Crown in Heaven. And in the mean
time, may he defend the Faith of Christ, his own Prerogative, the Rights,
Privileges, and Liberties and Estates of his People, and the defensive Laws
and Customs of his Royal Progenitors: And therefore may he ever manage his
Government, both with Power, Care and Caution, in opposition to the force, and
detection and destruction of the hellish Arts and traitorous designs and
attempts of Popery.

8. I Conclude, that if the precious things already mentioned, and many more,
be in evident danger with the Return of Popery, let us again consider our Oaths
as well as our Interest; and that we have the Bond of God upon our Souls; and,
as the Conquerors words are, we are Jurati Fratres, we are sworn to God, our
King and Country, to preserve and defend the things so endangered, against all
foreign Invasion and Usurpation, i. e. against Popery. Accordingly, may our
Excellent King and his Councils and Ministers; may the Peers of the Realm, and
the Commons in Parliament; may the Nobility and Gentry, may the Judges and
Lawyers, may the Cities and the Country, the Church and State, and all Ranks
and Degrees of Men amongst us; may we all, under a just Sense, both of our
Interest and our Oaths, may we all as one man, with one heart stand up resolved
by all means possible to keep out Popery; and to subvert all grounds of Fear of
its Return upon England for ever. Amen, Amen.

Origin, Cont. Cells. l. 3.

(...).

It is fit that the Governor of the Church of each City, should Correspond to
the Governor of those which are in the City.

Praesumi malam fidem ex Antiquiore Adversarii possessione. Leg. Civil.

Ad transmarina Concilia qui putaverint appellandum, a nullo intra Africam in
communionem recipiantur. Council. Milevitan.

THE OATHS OF ALLEGIANCE AND SUPREMACY.
The Oath of ALLEGIANCE.
I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in
my Conscience before God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord King Charles is
Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries: And that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any
Authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any Power or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to Authorize any Foreign Prince to Invade
or Annoy Him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or to give License or leave to any of
them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my Heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration or
Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived or pretended
to be derived from him or his See, against the said King, his Heirs or
Successors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience; I will
bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and
Him and Them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracies
and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their Persons,
their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make
known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous
Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of, to be against Him or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure, as
impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which
be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be Deposed or Murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved, That neither the Pope, nor
any person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully
Administered unto me, and do Renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and
Swear according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain
and common sense and understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation
or mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever: And I do make this
Recognition and Acknowledgment heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true
Faith of a Christian. So help me God, etc.

The Oath of SUPREMACY.
I A. B. Do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, That the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Things or Causes, as Temporal: And that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate, has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this
Realm: And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise from
henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his
Heirs and lawful Successors, and to my Power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminences and Authorities granted, or belonging
to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. So help me God^ and by the Contents of this Book.

THE END.
A Catalogue of some Books Reprinted, and of other New Books Printed since the
Fire, and sold by R. Royston. (viz.)
Books Written by H. Hammond, D. D.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament, in
Folio. Fourth Edition.

The Works of the said Reverend and Learned Author, containing a Collection of
Discourses chiefly Practical, with many Additions and Corrections from the
Author's own hand; together with the Life of the Author, enlarged by the
Reverend Dr. Fell, now Bishop of Oxford. In large Fol.

Books written by Jer. Tailor, D. D. and late Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.
Ductor Dubitantium, or, The Rule of Conscience, in Five Books, in Fol.

The Great Exemplar, or, The Life and Death of the Holy Jesus, in Fol. with
Figures suitable to every Story, ingrav'd in Coper: whereunto is added, the
Lives and Martyrdoms of the Apostles, by Will. Cave, D. D.

(...), or, A Collection of Polemical Discourses addressed against the enemies
of the Church of England, both Papists and Fanatics, in large Fol. The Third
Edition.

The Rules and Exercises of holy Living, and holy Dying. The Eleventh Edition,
newly Printed, in Octavo.

Books written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick.
The Christian Sacrifice: A Treatise showing the Necessity, End, and Manner of
receiving the Holy Communion: together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year; and the principal Festivals in memory of our
blessed Savior: in Four Parts. The Third Edition corrected.

The devout Christian instructed how to pray and give thanks to God: or a Book
of Devotions for Families, and particular persons, in most of the concerns of
humane life. The Second Edition, in Twelves.

An Advice to a Friend. The Third Edition, in Twelves.

A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist, in Octavo, Two
Parts.

Jesus and the Resurrection justified by Witnesses in Heaven and in Earth, in
Two Parts, in Octavo, new.

The Glorious Epiphany, with the devout Christians love to it, in Octavo, new.

The Book of Job Paraphrased, in Octavo, new.

A Collection of Sermons upon several occasions, together with a correct Copy
of some Notes concerning God's Decrees, in Quarto. Enlarged by Tho. Pierce, D.
D. Dean of Sarum.

The History of the Church of Scotland, by Bishop Spotswood. The Fourth
Edition, Enlarged, Fol.

Memoires of the late Duke Hamilton, or a continuation of the History of the
Church of Scotland, beginning in the Year 1625. where Bishop Spotswood ends,
and continued to the Year 1653. Fol. new.

The Lives of the Apostles, in Fol. alone, by Will. Cave, D. D.

Chirurgical Treatises, by R. Wisman, Serjeant-Surgeon to his Majesty, Fol. new.

Go in peace; containing some brief directions for Young Ministers in their
Visitation of the Sick. Useful for the People, in this state both of Health and
Sickness. In Twelves, new.

The Practical Christian; in Four Parts: or a Book of Devotions and
Meditations. Also with Meditations and Psalms upon the four last things; 1.
Death, 2. Judgment, 3. Hell, 4. Heaven: By R. Sherlock, D. D. Rector of
Winwick. In Twelves.

The Life and Death of K. Charles the First; by R. Perenchief, D. D. Octavo.

Bishop Cozen's Devotions, in Twelves.

The true Intellectual Systeme of the Universe, the First Part: wherein all the
Reason and Philosophy of Atheism is confuted, and its Impossibility
demonstrated: By R. Cudworth, D. D. Fol. new.

The Jesuits Loyalty, manifested in three several Treatises lately written by
them against the Oath of Allegiance: with a Preface, showing the pernicious
consequence of their Principles as to Civil Government. Also three other
Treatises concerning the Reasons of the Penal Laws. ( viz.) 1. The Execution of
Justice in England, not for Religion but for Treason. 2. Important
Considerations by the Secular Priests. 3. The Jesuits Reasons unreasonable. In
Quarto, New.

The Sinner Impleaded in his own Court: wherein are represented the great
Discouragements from Sinning, which the Sinner receives from Sin it self. To
which is added the signal diagnostick, whereby we are to judge of our own
Affections; and as well of our Present, as Future State. By Tho. Pierce, D. D.
Dean of Sarum, and Domestic Chaplain to his Majesty, the Fourth Edition, in
Quarto.

Les Provinciales, The Mystery of Jesuitism, discovered in certain Letters,
written upon occasion of the present differences at Sorbonne, between the
Jansenists and the Molinists, displaying the pernicious Maxims of the late
Casuists, with Additionals, in Octavo.

The Penitent Pardoned: or, a discourse of the Nature of Sin, and the Efficacy
of Repentance; under the Parable of the Prodigal Son, by J. Goodman, D. D.
Rector of Hadham. In Quarto, New. To which is added a Visitation Sermon.

A Century of Select Psalms, and Portions of the Psalms of David, especially
those of Praise; turned into Meter and fitted to the usual Tunes in Parish
Churches, for the use of the Charter House, London. By J. Patrick Preacher
there, in Octavo, New.

THE END.
DUX MEA IN TENEBRAS ET GAUDIUM IN MEROREM

VT PELLICANA IN DESERTO

Nunquam CHRISTO Charior quam sub Cruce gemens Ecclesia



LEGES ANGLIAE.

THE LAWFULNESS OF Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction IN THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND,
Asserted and Vindicated In ANSWER to Mr HICKERINGILL's Late Pamphlet Styled
NAKED TRUTH, the 2d Part.

Genesis II. ult. Naked -- but not ashamed. By Fran. Fullwood, D. D. Archdeacon of
Totnes in Devon.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, at the Sign of the Angel in Amen-Corner, 1681.

TO THE READER
I MUST beg my Readers pardon, that I have not chastised so spiteful an
Adversary, according to his merits and provocations; for I verily want his
Talent, and dislike the Sport.

I confess that when a Divine of the Church of England, who has also a share
in her Government, when such a one shall be taken throwing dirt in the face of
his Mother, Fathers, Brethren, and his own Profession, he cannot but expect to
be lasht to purpose, and to be told roundly, that none but accursed Children
and very fools would speak such Naked Truth.

Some Censors, that observe his endeavors, to make not only the Canons of the
Church, but the very Canon of Scripture it self to vail to the Law of the Land,
would charge him with the profaneness of Hobbs: yea, others that find him
playing tricks, and sporting (according to his little wit) with the very names
of Canon, Clergy, Church and Churchmen; and scoffing at almost all that is
Sacred, will take him to be at Hugh Peters's game, and running his wretched
race.

But while he damns the Presbyterians, Independents* and the Fifth-Monarchy,
together with the Church of England, he tempts the Wits to produce thirty one
reasons to prove he is something, viz. a Papist; notwithstanding his drollery
and railery about Foppery and Popery.

Lastly, For Pride, Envy, Wrath, Malice, Spite and Revenge, some say he is a
very Angel of Light, and in somewhat more excellent; for the Scriptures witness
that the Devil himself spoke many words both of truth and soberness; and that
he seldom or never speaks like an Atheist.

For my part, I say nothing of him further than this, That if others can find
Truth in the man, I cannot: And though I am sure he lies open and naked enough,
yet I had never troubled my self to expose him, had it not been to secure the
Government, and to preserve the Simple from being betrayed to the danger of the
Laws by the insolent Rant of a pitiful Sophister.

THE PROEME.
The Contents of it.

1. Power purely Spiritual of Divine Right. 2. Emperors confirmed
Bishops-Canons. 3. The force of our Canons not from Rome. 4. Officers of our
Courts. 5. Magna Charta. 6. The Authors Concessions.

1. DIscoursing in the following Treatise of the Forensic Jurisdiction of this
Church, as Established by the Law of the Land, we had no direct or necessary
occasion to speak of the Churches Power, as purely Spiritual, touching
Preaching, the Sacraments and Censures.

For this is certainly of Divine Right; and was given to the Church by Christ
himself, with the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and was accordingly exercised
in the Apostles times, and several hundred years after, without the allowance
of the Civil Magistrate; and was also supposed, allowed, and admitted as such
in our own Kingdom; and by all the world, even with their receiving
Christianity, without question or Alteration, as is evident in all our
Histories: and indeed our own Laws exclude this purely Spiritual Power of the
Keys from the Supremacy of our Kings, except it be to see that Spiritual men do
their duty therein.

2. Neither does it concern me to enquire what Power the Church had, and
exercised after the Empire became Christian: only it seems very clear, that
Constantine, and the other eminent Christian Emperors never made any
Ecclesiastical Laws without the Counsel of Bishops; but only in Confirmation,
or for the Execution of Ecclesiastical Canons: Yet it cannot be denied, but
they called Councils; they approved their Canons; and afterward entered them
into the body of their Laws; and still ratified the Sentences of Ecclesiastical
Judges with Civil penalties.

3. Nor yet is it my present Province to recollect what Influence Imperial
Christian Rome had upon the Tender Age, and immature State of the new born
Church of England: though we do not deny, but it might be considerable, both as
to the Form and Order of our External Jurisdiction in our inferior Ministers
and ancient Canons.

But how great soever it was, it was at first only by way of Example and
Direction: and when afterward it was by Command, it was such Command, as
according to the Rights and Constitution of this Church, had no Legal
obligation upon us, but by our own consent; and as it became part of our own
Establishment, either by Custom or express Law; upon such an occasion the
ancient State of England cry out, Nolumus mutare Leges Angliae. This Realm has
been and is free from Subjection to any man's Laws, but only to such as have
been devised -- within this Realm, or to such other as by sufferance of your
Grace and your Progenitors, the people of this Realm have taken at their free
liberty, by their own consent to be used amongst them; and have bound
themselves by long use and Custom to the observance thereof; not as to the
observance of the Laws of any foreign Prince, 25 Hen. 8. 21.

For (as Coke declares in Cawdries Case) as the Romans fetching diverse Laws
from Athens, yet being approved and allowed by the State there, called them Jus
Civil Romanorum; and as the Normans borrowing all or most of their Laws from
England, yet baptized them by the name of the Laws or Customs of Normandy; so
albeit, the Kings of England derived their Ecclesiastical Laws from others, yet
so many as be proved, approved and allowed here, by and with a general consent,
are aptly and rightly called, The Kings Ecclesiastical Laws of England.

4. As for the Inferior Ministers in the Ecclesiastical Courts, that seem to be
so offensive to weak people, that they are* not Popish, or so slanderously to
be reported, there is this plain demonstration, that these Courts are the Kings
Courts, and the Laws thereof are the Kings Laws; and that notwithstanding all
the severe Statutes, especially since the Reformation, against all foreign
Jurisdiction, and all such as act under, or by virtue of any foreign Power
within this Realm; yet such Ministers are both permitted and required to
execute their places in the said Courts by the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom.

But grave Mr. Hickeringill says, there is not the least Specimen of
Chancellors, Registers, Sumners, Officials, Commissaries, Advocates, Notaries,
Surrogates, etc. or any ejusdem farinae in holy Writ: and hence it is learnedly
inferred by some, that we have made so many new Officers in the Church of
Christ.

But how witless and Quaker-like is this? and how unlike Mr. Hickeringill? I
should suspect he would call for Scripture, for an Hourglass, and for Clerks
and Sextons, were it not that he is so palpably in the service of a vile
Hypothesis, that will stand upon no better grounds; for he knows, that these
are not so many new Officers of the Church, but only Assistants allowed by Law
under Bishops, and such other Spiritual men as have proper power of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: he knows there is no other Canon, but the Law of
the Land; and that the Civil Magistrate has power to tell us what is
Scripture: and that he has told us S. Paul' s Epistles are so, where we read
of helps in 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Government; and that Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials and Surrogates are
but such helps under different names, from the several ways and degrees of
their Delegation: That Registers are but to make and keep the Acts of Court,
etc. Advocates and Proctors to order and manage Causes; and Apparators to serve
Process, and execute Mandates: and that none but one in Orders meddles with
the Keys, either for Excommunication or Absolution; Mr. Hickeringill is a man
of great experience in Spiritual Jurisdiction, and need not be told of these
plain matters.

5. And seeing the Statist will not be quieted, but by Argument taken from Law;
I have written the following Treatise, wherein I hope I have sufficiently
demonstrated, that our Ecclesiastical Courts are Established in the Laws and
Statutes of this Kingdom. Our Magna Charta it self, or the great Charter of the
English Liberties does suppose and acknowledge the Legal exercise of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by the forementioned Ministers, as one of the
Ancient Rights and Liberties of this Church; and does also ratify, confirm and
establish it for ever; at least in the Judgment of my Lord Coke, in these words.

This Charter is Declaratory of the Ancient Law and Liberty of England. -- [Et
habeat omnia Jura sua integra] that is, that all Ecclesiastical persons shall
enjoy all their lawful Jurisdictions, and other their Rights, wholly without any
Diminution or Substraction whatsoever: and [Jura sua] show plainly, that no new
right was given unto them, but such as they had before, hereby are Confirmed.

Libertates suas illaesas] Libertates are here taken in two Senses; 1. For the
Laws of England. 2. For Privileges held by Parliament, Charter or Prescription
more than Ordinary. Coke Magna Charta. By all which Titles the Church of
England (Ecclesia non Moritur, but Moriuntur Ecclesiastici) holds her Ancient
Liberty of keeping Courts to this day.

6. Yet I do not say but the manner of proceedings in these Courts may be
justly and reasonably altered, as his gracious Majesty may be advised; and yet
the true Liberty of the Church be rather fortified than Violated.

Therefore, after some Overtures made lately, by a far greater Person, in a
larger Sphere, my Narrower subject may suffer me humbly to offer my thoughts
touching some Alterations, that perhaps might not prejudice our Ecclesiastical
Ministers, or their Courts; with all due submission to my Superiors.

These things following have been long in my thoughts.

1. That a speedier way might be appointed for the dispatch of Causes in the
Spiritual Courts than the present Legal Rules thereof will allow.

2. That trivial matters (such as small Tithes and Church-Rates) might be
summarily ended, without exposing the solemn Sentence of Excommunication, as is
generally complained. Especially considering that the Statute touching the Writ
de Excom. capi. ( as well as Vulgar apprehension) makes a difference in
Original Causes; though indeed the immediate cause of all Excommunication is
always the contempt of the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in not obeying,
either its Summons or Sentence; both these perhaps may be contrived by wise
men, without prejudice to the said Jurisdiction.

3. That there is reason to reascertain the Fees for Probates of Wills, and
granting Letters of Administration, with some moderate respect had to the
difference of the value of Money, when the former Act was made, and at this
time, so as the Officers in the Kings Spiritual Courts may live upon their
Employment.

4. And why Excommunication decreed in Court may not be sent to the Parochial
Minister, to be, not only declared, but Executed by him, as the Bishops
Surrogate; and convenient time allowed him to endeavor to reconcile the
offender, and to prevent the Sentence, if it may be, I see not, if that may
give any satisfaction.

Such kind of Alterations perhaps may be admitted without real prejudice to the
Church, or rather with advantage, as well as those made by the Conqueror, when
he divided the Ecclesiastical from the Civil Courts: The Law by which he made
that Division is famous, the clauses of it concerning this matter may be
desired by the Reader, therefore I shall take the pains to transcribe them;
they are these:

Willielmus Gratia Dei, Rex Anglorum, etc. William by the Grace of God, King of
England -- to all -- that have Land in the Bishopric of Lincoln; know ye all,
and all others my faithful People in England, that the Episcopal Laws, that
have [Non bene] not well been exercised, nor according to the Precepts of holy
Canons, even to my time in this Kingdom (Concilio Communi) with Common Counsel,
and with the Counsel of the Bishops and Abbots, and all the chief men of my
Kingdom, I judge (fit) to be amended. Moreover, I Command, and by my Kingly
Authority enjoin, That no Bishop or Archdeacon de Legibus Episcopalibus, hold
(Placita) Pleas any longer in Hundret, nor bring any Ecclesiastical Cause to
the Judgment of Secular men; but whosoever shall be called or questioned for
any Cause according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, he shall come to the place
which the Bishop shall choose, and there shall answer for his Cause; and not
secundum Hundret; and he shall do right to God and the Bishop; not according to
the Hundred, but according to the Canons and Episcopal Laws.

-- But if any through pride will not appear [Venire ad Justiciam Episcopalem]
let him be called the first, second and third time, and if yet he will not
come, let him be Excommunicated, and if need be, let the Strength and Justice
of the King or Sheriff, ad hoc Vindicandum adhibeatur -- This also I defend,
and by my Authority interdict, that no Sheriff or other Minister of the King,
or any Layman do intermeddle with the Laws which belong to the Bishop.

Give me leave to subjoyn a few Notes upon this Law of the Conqueror and I have
done.

1. The substance and matters of Ecclesiastical Power and Connusance, was the
same long before this Law was made, and not Altered by it: 'twas a Law of King
Alured. Si quis Dei rectitudines aliquas deforciat, reddat lathlite cum Dacis,
witam cum Anglis: And the same is afterward confirmed and renewed by Canutus
and other Kings: whereby it appears, that long before the Conquest the
Authority and Jurisdiction of the Church was maintained by the settled Laws of
the Kingdom; and that Ecclesiastical Judges had power so anciently to
Excommunicate; and had the help of the King and the Sheriff to proceed against
the obstinate.

2. It Is yet very remarkable, that for the form and manner of their Spiritual
Courts and proceedings before the Conquest, it was not here in England as it
was at Rome; and therefore our most Ancient Church Government was not derived
or Received from Rome: This Law observes, that before the Conqueror, the
Precepts of holy Canons, as to distinct Jurisdictions, were not observed in
England; that is, the Canons of the Imperial Church, for six or seven Hundred
years before the Jurisdiction of that Church was divided from the Civil, even
by the Emperor Constantine himself; but for so many hundred years before the
Conquest, our Jurisdictions were exercised together in Hundret, as the Law
acknowledges, and is confessed.

3. We here see a plain Establishment of our Spiritual Courts, with power of
Excommunication, for nonappearance, in the letter of this Ancient Law, under
the Kings defense, and enforced with the Secular Arm; and it is observable, that
the distinction of the Ecclesiastical front the Civil Courts, was made in the
Kings own Name, and not the Pope's, by the Kings power and none other; with the
Counsel of his own Subjects only, and not of Rome that we read of; and only
with respect, and not in any obedience to the ancient Canons or foreign
methods: And thus the Jurisdiction in our Courts Ecclesiastical as distinct
from the Civil, is as far from being Popish in their Original, as it was when
they were conjoined; and therein so unlike to the distinct proceedings of the
Spiritual power beyond the Seas so many hundred years before: And thus our
Spiritual Courts, both before they were divided, and when they came to be
divided from our Civil Courts, stand firm in the Ancient Laws of this Land.

4. There are certain great Epoche's of the Legal Establishment of the Churches
power, which I shall but touch; 1. It was received with Christianity, and grew
and flourished by our Ancient Laws before the Conquest. 2. In the beginning of
our Norman Constitution, it was thus distinguished and established by the
Conqueror. So it was in Magna Charta, the first Statute. 3. Upon the
Reformation in Hen. 8. it was reestablish'd. 4. So it was upon the Return of
Reformation after Queen Mary by Queen Eliz. And 5. so likewise upon the Return
of our present gracious Sovereign King Charles II.

5. Further, I hence observe, that some Alterations in Ecclesiastical
proceedings may be made by Law, without any prejudice to the Churches power:
It Is observed out of Spelman before, that by this Law the Conqueror did not
lessen the Churches power: indeed some Inconveniences are usually consequent to
public changes; and it is thought by our Civilians, that the many prohibitions
which interrupt our Ecclesiastical Courts are occasioned by their being divided
from the Temporal: but may not that inconvenience be accidental to that
Division? Or if at any time there be just cause for the Church to complain in
that respect, is it not rather of the Judges than the Laws or the Constitution?

But to the matter before us; admit, for Instance, that after Summary hearing
and Sentence of the Judge, in Cases of small Tithes, Church rates, and such
trivial matters, a Justice of the Peace, or some other person being legally
certified, were empowered and obliged to grant Warrants of Distress: It seems
to me a greater inconvenience in exposing Excommunication in such light Causes
would be hereby removed, than any contracted by such an Alteration; and
methinks no one should disdain the new Office, seeing the Superior Judge has
been ever bound to issue out the Writ de Excom. Cap. and the Sheriff to
imprison the party, upon a Certificate from the Bishop.

But I must humbly leave such things to wiser Judges.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS and SECTIONS.
CHAP. I. THE general Proposition. The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as now
Exercised in the Church of England, is Allowed and Established by the Laws of
the Land. Sect. 1. An Account of the Method. Page 1. Sect. 2. Mr. Hickeringill'
s Reasoning Noted and Resolved. p. 2. Sect. 3. The Propositions suggested by M.
Hickeringill are these following. p. 4.
CHAP. II. Our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England was not derived from the
Pope, but from the Crown before the Reformation by Henry the Eighth. p. 5.
Proof against this Popish principle. Sect. 1. From the root and branches of
Ecclesiastical Power, Donation, Investiture, Laws. p. 6. Sect. 2.
Jurisdiction^. p. 7. Sect. 3, 4, 5. p. 9* 11, 12.
CHAP. III. King Hen. 8. did not by renouncing the Power pretended by the Pope,
make (...) the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: neither was it void before it was
restored by Edw. 6. 2. p. 13. Sect. 2, 3. p. 16, 20.
CHAP. IV. Ecclesiastical Jurisdictition is lawfully exercised, without the
King's Name or Style in Processes, etc. notwithstanding the 1 Edw. 6. 2. p. 22.
Sect. 1, 2, 3. p. 23, 24, 26. Sect. 4. 1 Edw. 6. 2. Repealed, appears from
practice. p. 28. Sect. 5. 1 Edw. 6. 2. Repealed in the Judgment of all the
Judges, the King and Council. p. 31. Sect. 6. Mr. H. Cary' s Reason to the
contrary considered. p. 36.
CHAP. V. The Act of 1 Eliz. 1. Establishing the High Commission Court, was not
the foundation of Ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England, against Mr.
Hickeringill. p. 41.
CHAP. VI. How our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England came at first, and is
at present Established by Law. p. 46. Sect. 1. Jurisdiction of the Church in
Common Law. p. 51. Sect. 2. The Government Ecclesiastical is Established in the
Statutes of this Realm. p. 54.
CHAP. VII. Of Canons and Convocations. p. 60. The Conclusion. p. 64. The
Postscript. p. 67.

The Bookseller to the Reader.
THE absence of the Author, and his inconvenient distance from London, has
occasioned some small Errata's to escape the Press. The Printer thinks it the
best instance of pardon, if his Escapes be not laid upon the Author, and he
hopes they are no greater than an ordinary understanding may amend, and a
little charity may forgive.

R. Royston.

CHAP. I.
The General Proposition. THE Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, As now Exercised in
the Church of England, is Allowed and Established by the Laws of the Land.
SECT. I.
An Account of the Method.
AFTER so many hundred years confirmation, both by Law and Practice, it is a
mavelous thing this should be a question: yet, of late two worthy Gentlemen,
treading in the steps of some former Malcontents, have ventured to make it
one. Mr. Edmond Hickeringill, and Mr. H. Carry: the first, in his Book called
Naked Truth, the Second part: the other, in his, modestly styled, The Law of
England: And it is to be observed, they were both Printed very seasonably for
the settling our distractions through the fears and danger of Popery.

I shall note what they say, discover their gross and dangerous mistakes,
answer and remove their pitiful Objections, and then endeavor to satisfy
ordinary and honest enquirers both that, and how our Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction stands firm and unshaken upon the basis of our English Laws.

SECT. II.
Mr. Hickeringill's Reasoning Noted and Resolved.
Mr. Hickeringill is pleased to say, that upon the Stat. 1 Eliz. 1. was built
the High Commission Court, and the Authority of all Canon-makers Synodi^al; but
down came the Fabric, when that Act was Repealed by 17 Car. 1. 11. and 13.
Car. 2. 12.

Where provision was made by striking at the foundation 1 Eliz. 1. that no more
Commissions of that nature be granted any more; only the Spiritual Courts by 1^
Ca^. 2. 12. were to be in Statu quo, wherein they were 1639. What state? no
great I Will warrant you, if the Basis, on which their Star Chamber and
High-Commission-Court were built, be taken away.

All Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions till Hen. 8. were derived from the Pope, as
Supreme of the Church ^ this Head being beheaded, the Supremacy was invested in
the Crown.

But 1 Edw. 6. 2. Enacts, that all Process Ecclesiastical should be in the Name
and with the style of the King, etc. So that if there be any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in England distinct from his Majesty's Day Courts, all their
Processes must be in the Kings Name, etc.

It Is true 1 Edw. 6. 2. is repealed by the 1 Mar. 2. but I care not for that,
for it is revived by the Act of repeal 1 Jac. 25.

The Clergy in Convocation acknowledged in their Petition, that their
Ecclesiastical power was at that time taken away.

So that their present Jurisdiction (being not from God; that is certain) it is
not from Man, because his Majesty has promised 13 Car. 2. 12. never to empower
them with any more Commissions to the worlds end.

But this I do not peremptorily assert.

I here protest, I know not by what Authority we do these things, considering
the premises, and the repealing of 1 Eliz. 1.

By the Statute of Hen. 8. all these Ordinary Jurisdictions were cut off, and
were revived by 1 Edw. 6: upon Conditions only.

This is the very Naked Truth, under his first Query, and in his Conclusion,
and up and down this worthy Book; that is, such a shabby lawless Logic; such a
rude and shattered way of reasoning, as deserves to be reduced with a rod, and
lasht into method and sense, and better manners.

Especially if you single out his false and study begging Pr^positions; fraught
with a wretched design of robbing his own Mother, in the Kings high way, with
which he challenges passage to cheat and abuse the Country.

My business is only to apprehend the Vagabonds, and commit them to the justice
of some more severe and smarter hand.

SECT. III.
The Propositions suggested by Mr. Hickeringill are these following.
I. That before Hen. 8. all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England was derived
from the Pope: as Mr. Carry, p. 6.

II. That Hen. 8. when he annexed the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown,
he took it wholly away from our Ecclesiastical Ministers.

III. That the Church had no Jurisdiction after Hen. 8. had annexed it to the
Crown, till 1 Edw. 6. 2.

IV. That if there be any Ecclesiastical Power in our Church, it cannot be
executed, but in the Name and with the Style, etc. of the King, according to 1
Edw. 6. 2.

V. That all our Ecclesiastical Power was lately founded in 1 Eliz. 1. as it
established the High-Commission-Court; and that Act being Repealed, all
Ecclesiastical Power was taken away with the Power of that High Commission.

On a Rock consisting of these Sands, stands our mighty Champion, triumphing
with his Naked Truth; but we come now to sift them.

CHAP. II.
Our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England was not derived from the Pope, but
from the Crown before the Reformation by Henry the Eighth.
DARE any Protestant stand to the contrary? had the Pope really Authority here
before Henry the Eighth? did our Bishops indeed receive all their power,
exercised so many hundred years together, originally from the Pope? was not
their Political Jurisdiction derived from and depending on the Crown Imperial?
and founded in our own Laws, the Customs and Statutes of the Realm? are these
the Popes Laws, and not the Kings? was there not Ecclesiastical power in
England, both for Legislation and Execution ab origin, before the Papal
Usurpation? was not Popery at first, and all along, till Hen. 8. an illegal
usurpation upon our more Ancient Government, never owned much less established
in the true and Ancient Laws of England, and under that very Notion rejected
and expelled by him?

How then did our Bishops, etc. derive all their power from the Pope before
Hen. 8. to say so, is not more like an Hobbist than a Papist. I thought I had
caught an Hobby, but War-Hawk.

Proof against this Popish principle. SECT. I.
From the root and branches of Ecclesiastical Power, Donation, Investiture,
Laws.
I. It was a known Law long before Hen. 8. that the Church of England was
founded ^5 Edw. 3. 25 Edw. 1.
in Episcopacy by our Kings, etc. and not in the Papacy.

II. The Collaetion and Donation of Bishoprics, and Nomination of Bishops did
always belong to the King; yea all the Bishoprics in this Realm are of the
Kings Foundation: and the full Right of Investiture was ever in the Crown. Coke
1. Inst. 2. S. 648. to deny it may be a praemunire.

III. When once the Bishops are legally invested, their proper Jurisdiction
came into ^5 Hen. 8. 20.
their hands, by the Laws, without any power derived from the Pope: Who says
otherwise, knows nothing, or means ill.

IV. It was acknowledged, That Convocations are, always have been, and ought to
be Assembled by the Kings Writ only: it is Law, 35 Hen. 8. 19.

V. As the power to make Laws for the Church was ever in the King, so the Laws
themselves must be his, and none other bind us. This Realm Recognizing no
Superior 35 Hen. 8. 21. As 16 Rich. 2. 5.
under God but the King, has been, and is free from any Laws, but such as have
been devised within this Realm, or at our Liberty, have been consented to, and
made custom by use, and not by any foreign power.

SECT. II.
Jurisdiction.
THUS our Ancient Ecclesiastical Governors and Laws depended upon the Crown,
and not upon the Pope, by the Laws of England, and in the Judgment of all the
States of the Kingdom before Hen. 8. and so did also the execution of those
Laws by those Governors in the same public Judgment: a little better than Mr.
Hickeringill's Popish opinion.

2. In sundry old Authentic Histories and Chronicles, it is manifest, that
this Realm is an Empire, having an Imperial Crown, to which belongs a body
Politic, compacted of Spiritualty and Temporalty: furnished thus, with --
Jurisdiction to yield Justice in all causes without restraint from any foreign
Prince.

The body Spiritual having power, when any Cause of Divine Law happened to come
in question, the English Church, called the Spiritualty, which always has been
reputed, and also found of that sort, for knowledge, etc. (without any
exterior person) to declare and determine all such doubts, and to administer
all such offices as appertain to them: for the due administration whereof the
Kings of this Realm have endowed the said Church both with honor and
possessions* both these Authorities and Jurisdictions do conjoyn in the due
Administration of Justice the one to help the other.

And whereas the King his most noble Progenitors, and the Nobility and Commons
of this Realm at diverse and sundry Parliaments, as well in the time of King
Edw. 1. Edw. 3. Rich. 2. Hen. 4. (all which were certainly before Hen. 8.) and
other noble Kings made sundry Ordinances, Laws, Statutes, and provisions for
the entire and sure preservation of the Prerogatives and Jurisdiction Spiritual
and Temporal of the said Imperial Crown, from the annoyance and Authority of
the Sea of Rome from time to time, as often as any such attempt might be known
or espied. Vid. 25 Hen. 8. 12.

These things plainly show, that the whole State in Hen. 8's. time was not of
Mr. Hickeringill's mind; but that before that time, the whole power of the
Church was independent on the Pope, and not derived from him, but originally
inherent in the Crown and Laws of England, whatever he blatters to the
contrary. Vid. 25 Edw. 3. Stat. 4. cap. 22. page 123. Sect. 3. 27 Edw. 3. cap.
1. and 38 Edw. 3. c. 4. and Stat. 2. c. 1. 2 Rich. 2. cap. 6. 3 Rich. 2. c. 3.
S. 2. 12 Rich. 2. c. 15. and 13 Rich. 2. Stat. 2. c. 2. 16 Rich. 2. c. 5. 2
Hen. 4. c. 3, and 4. 7 Hen. 4. c. 6. 9 Hen. 4. c. 8. 1 Hen. 5. 7. 3 Hen. 5.
Stat. 2. c. 4. Add to these Mr. Cawdries Case in my Lord Coke, and he must be
unreasonably ill affected to the Church of England, that is not more than
satisfied, that the chief and Supreme Governors thereof, were the Kings of
England, and not the Pope, before the Reign of Hen. 8.

3. Also it was the sense of the whole Kingdom, that the Pope's power and
Jurisdiction here, was usurped and illegal; contrary to Gods Laws, the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm; and in derogation of the Imperial Crown thereof: and
that it was timorously and ignorantly submitted unto, before Hen. 8. as the
words of that Statute are, 28 Hen. 8. cap. 16.

SECT. III.
BUT if our Gentleman be wiser than to believe their words; the matter is
evident in our ancient Laws, and constant practice accordingly, before Hen. 8.
his time: Indeed all the Statutes of provision against foreign powers, are to
own and defend the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction at home, under this Crown. Yea
all the Statutes made on purpose, to restrain and limit the Spiritual
Jurisdiction in certain cases, and respects, do allow and establish it in
others, exceptio confirmat Regulam in non exceptis.

2. Much plainer, all the Statutes that prohibit the Kings Civil Courts to
interrupt the Ecclesiastical proceedings, but in such cases, and the Statutes
granting consultations in such cases; and the Statutes directing appeals in the
Spiritual Courts, and appeals to the Chancery it self, and the Laws ratifying
and effectually binding their Sentence by the Writ de exc. cap. much more
plainly do these establish the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the laws of the
Land, before Hen. 8.

3. By this time it is vain to mention the Statutes which of old did specify
and allow particular matters to be tried only in the Ecclesiastical Courts:
such as Tithes, 18 Edw. 3. 7. the offenses of Ecclesiastical persons, 1 Hen. 7.
c. 4. causes Testamentary, 18 Edw. 3. 6. Synodals and procurations, and
pensions, etc. 15 Hen. 8. 19. Defamations, 9 Edw. 2. 3. 1 Edw. 3. c. 11, etc.
all which are clear evidences that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was
established by the Statute-laws of this Realm, and consequently, did not depend
upon, was not derived from any foreign power before the 20 of Hen. 8.

SECT. IV.
TO seek for the Original of our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Courts, in the
Statute-book, is more than ridiculous; seeing they both stood in a flourishing
estate long before the beginning of that book: and are among the number of the
great things, which were then, secundum consuetudinem and leges Angliae, and
are plainly established in the Common Law of the Land: by which they have stood
and been practiced, ever since (as we shall prove more fully anon.)

2. Magna Charta, which is found first in the book of Statutes, and is said by
Lawyers to be Common Law (i. e. shows us what is Common Law) in this Kingdom;
begins thus, We have granted and confirmed for us and our Heirs for ever, that
the Church of England shall be free; and shall have all her whole Rights and
Liberties Inviolable. Reserving to all Archbishops and Bishops, and all persons
as well Spiritual as Temporal all their Free Liberties and free Customs, which
they have had in times past, and which we have granted to be holden within this
Realm; and all men of this Realm, as well Spiritual as Temporal, shall observe
the same against all persons.

3. Now what can any man, that knows the practice of the Spiritual Courts,
before that time, at that time, and ever since, imagine what is meant by the
Liberties and Customs of the Church, ( i. e. in the sense of Mr. Hickeringill)
and the words of Magna Charta, Archbishops, Bishops, and all Spiritual men, but
the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in the first and chief place? And these, by the
great Charter, are confirmed for ever; and the like confirmation has been made
by the many succeeding Kings and Parliaments, in their confirmation of Magna
Charta.

4. Therefore I cannot but conclude, that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction being
founded in the Common Law, Magna Charta, and the Statutes, by so long practice
beyond all Records, is in the very Constitution of the Kingdom: The great men
of the Church having always had authority in the very making of Laws as they
had before Magna Charta, and been reputed (as in the Statute of Eliz.) one of
the three States in Parliament; and the Execution also of the Ecclesiastical
Laws of the Church of England.

SECT. V.
LASTLY, All this is plainly confirmed by ancient Ecclesiastical Canons (which
seems to be an Argument of great weight with Mr. Hickeringill) as well as by
the Ancient Laws and Customs of the Land.

In the Apostles Canons it is ordained, that every National Church should have
its own chief or head, and thence derive all Power under the Crown: It Is
acknowledged, against the Papists, that we had our Archbishops and Bishops
before the Usurpation of the Pope: We were anciently a Patriarchate independent
upon Rome: The four first Councils confirmed the Apostles Canons; and
established our ancient Cyprian privilege: Let after- encroachments of the
Pope be accordingly renounced as lawless Usurpations: Let us quietly enjoy our
restored ancient privileges; and let ancient Custom prevail, according to the
Sentence of the ancient Councils, in spite of all Papists and Hobbists.

CHAP. III.
King Hen. 8. did not, by renouncing the Power pretended by the Pope, make void
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: neither was it void before it was restored by
1 Edw. 6. 2.
It Is somewhat difficult to make this Proposition than it is in its self more
plain: pray Mr. Wiseman, where and by what words did Hen. 8. cut off, as you
say, all those ordinary Jurisdictions? Did that great Prince and his Parliament
intend by any Statute then made, to cut them off, or not? If they did intend
it, how came it to pass that they continued in their usual course of power and
proceedings all the rest of his Reign? which may be presumed to be near ten
years? Was that watchful Prince so asleep? was the whole Kingdom so stupid, so
long a time, to suffer such oppression, by invasion of the Crown and the
peoples Liberties, by a company of Churchmen, now deprived of the Pope's
assistance, and without any power at all? or were the Ecclesiastical Governors
so desperate or careless, as to lie under so much danger of praemunire, neither
desisting to act without power, nor to sue for it?

2. But perhaps, though the King and Parliament did not intend it, yet the
words of the Statute express enough to dissolve and cut off all those ordinary
Jurisdictions: and no body could see through this millstone, or tumble it upon
the Churches head, before Mr. Hickeringill was inspired to do it in a lucky
time. I will answer him with a story; There was a certain Lord laid claim to a
Manor that was in another Lord's possession: upon Trial it was found, that the
Plaintiff had the Right of it; and he that had had possession was thrown out,
and the other (the Right Owner) was, as he ought to be, put into the possession
of the said Manor; but it was observed, that, though the Lords were changed,
yet the Customs, and Courts, and Officers were not changed at all, but all
things proceeded as before.

3. Thus King Hen. 8. and his Parliament expressed themselves as if on purpose
to our present case; only that the Pope's power then was rather in a pretended
claim, than in possession; as is evident from that notable Statute 24 Hen. 8.
c. 12. where we have the Kings Supremacy first asserted, with a body Politic
of the Spiritualty and Temporalty, every way furnished with Authorities and
Jurisdictions, to administer Justice to the whole Realm. Thus the Imperial
Crown fully accomplished, throws off the pretense of the Pope, as King Edw.
Rich. and Hen. 4. had done before, yet as they also did, reserves as well the
Spiritualty and its Jurisdiction, as the Temporalty and its Jurisdiction.
Afterward

4. The King does by his Royal assent, and by the assents of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons Assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, Enact, Establish and Ordain, that all Causes Testamentary, Causes of
Matrimony and Divorces, rights of Tithes, Oblations and Obventions, the
knowledge whereof, by the goodness of Princes of this Realm, and by the Laws
and Customs of the same, appertains to the Spiritual Jurisdiction of this
Realm, shall be from henceforth heard, examined, discussed, clearly, finally
and definitively adjudged and determined in such Courts, Spiritual and
Temporal, as the natures of the controversy shall require.

5. It Is plain therefore, that though Hen. 8. did cut off the Pope's pretense,
which is the great intention of that excellent Law, yet the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was not dissolved, but annexed or declared to be annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, and to continue to exercise its power in the
Spiritual Courts, as before, according to the Laws and Customs of the Land.
Read the Statute, and you will not only see a continuance of the Spiritual
Courts supposed and allowed, but special directions touching proceedings and
Appeals therein.

SECT. II.
IF King Hen. 8. did take away the Ecclesiastical Authority of the Church of
England, he did either remove the Officers, or deny their power to make Canons,
or destroy their Courts, and the exercise of their Jurisdiction; but he did do
neither, but rather by Acts of Parliament established them all.

I. For the first, touching the Governors of the Church, consult Statute 31
Hen. 8. 3. that it may be Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament,
that all Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm, may, by Authority of this
present Parliament, and not by any provision, or other foreign Authority, enjoy
and retain their Archbishopricks and Bishoprics in as large and ample manner,
as if they had been promoted, elected, confirmed and Consecrated according to
the due course of the Laws of this Realm: And that every Archbishop and Bishop
of this Realm may minister, use and exercise all and every thing and things
pertaining to the Office or Order of any Archbishop or Bishop, with all Tokens,
Ensigns and Ceremonies thereunto lawfully belonging.

Further, that all Ecclesiastical persons of the Kings Realm, all Archdeacons,
Deans, and other having Offices, may by Authority of this Act (and not etc.)
administer, use and exercise all things appertaining to their Dignities and
Offices, so it be not expressly against the Laws of God and this Realm.

II. Neither did King Hen. 8. take away the power of the Bishops and others, to
make Canons in Convocation, as appears by the Statute of the 25 of Hen. 8. 19.
In that Statute, among other things, upon the Petition of the Clergy, two
things are granted to our purpose, touching Ecclesiastical Canons.

1. The old ones; it is provided that such Canons being already made, which be
not contrariant nor repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of this Realm,
nor to the damage of the Kings prerogative Royal, shall now be used and
exercised as they were before the making of this Act, till such time as they be
viewed by the said Thirty two persons, according to the Tenor of this Act,
which was never done; therefore such old Canons are yet of force by this Act.
Vid. Sect. 6.

2. For the making of new Canons; the Convocation has power reserved by this
same Act, provided the Convocation be called by the Kings Writ; and that they
have the Royal assent and license to make, promulgate, and execute such Canons:
as you may read Sect. 1. of the said Statute. Indeed the Convocation used a
larger power in making Canons before, as is there noted, which, they say, they
will not henceforth presume to do: but it therefore follows, that they may
still use their power, so limited and derived from the Crown; which is the
evident intention of the Act. For by restraining the Clergy thus to proceed in
making Canons, the Law allows them the power so to do; and by making the
exceptions and limitations confirms their Authority so far as it is not
excepted against.

III. Neither, lastly, did King Hen. 8. take away the ordinary Jurisdiction of
Ecclesiastical Governors as exercised in the Spiritual Courts, according to
the Laws and Canons of this Church: but indeed established them by Acts of
Parliament, as is plainly to be seen in the 37 Hen. 8. c. 16. Sect. 4. in these
words: May it therefore please your Highness, that it may be Enacted, that all
singular persons which shall be made -- deputed to be any Chancellor,
Vicar General, Commissary, Official, Scribe or Register, by your Majesty or any
of your Heirs or Successors, or by any Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeacon or other
person whatsoever, having Authority under your Majesty, your Heirs and
Successors, to make any Chancellor, Vicar General, Commissary, Official or
Register, may lawfully execute all manner of Jurisdiction, commonly called
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: and all Censures and Coercions appertaining unto
the same, etc.

2. It Is acknowledged, that in the Sect. 2. of this Statute, it seems as if the
Parliament concluded, that by the 25 of Hen. 8. 19. the ancient Canons were
abrogated, which I wonder Mr. Hickeringill his sagacity had not discovered: yet
it is plain enough, that wise Parliament did not thereby reflect upon or intend
all the Canons; but such Canons, as the present matter before them was
concerned in; that is, such Canons as forbad Ecclesiastical Officers to marry;
as the words Sect. 1. are, that no Lay or married man should or might exercise
any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, etc. directly repugnant to your Majesty's as
Supreme Head, your Grace being a Layman: then it follows in the next words,
And albeit the said Decrees, viz. being contrary to the Royal prerogative as
supreme Head of the Church, be in the 25 year of your most Noble Reign utterly
abolished.

That this is the meaning of that clause is reasonable to believe, because they
take no further care to correct the matter, but only by enacting persons
lawfully deputed, though they be Lay persons, though married or unmarried,
shall have power, and may exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, notwithstanding
any Law or Constitution to the contrary, as the Statute is concluded.

3. Besides, we are assured, that all the ancient Canons, that were not
repugnant to the Kings Prerogative, or the Laws and Customs of this Realm were
not abrogated; but declared to be of force, i. e. to be executed in the
Spiritual Courts, as was noted in the very letter of that Statute 25 Hen. 8.
19. and that this clause, speaking only of such Canons as were abrogated by
that Statute, abrogates nothing that was not so, by the Act referred to.

4. And thus the Jurisdiction and Canons of the Church stood in force, at the
latter end of the Reign of Hen. 8. this Statute being made in the last year,
wherein any were made by that great Prince.

5. Thus we have found in the time of King Hen. 8. an Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction exercised in England, without any dependence on the Pope, and
other Authority for Canon-makers Synodical (as Mr. Hickeringill cants) besides
the Statute for the High Commission 1 Eliz. upon which Statute of Eliz. Mr.
Hickeringill very learnedly asserts the Authority of all Canon-makers Synodical
was built: qu. Naked Truth.

SECT. III.
NO more is needful under this Head, but to show my respect to Mr. Hickeringill
his doughty and only Argument, taken out of the Petition of the Clergy to Queen
Mary; whereby he would fain prove, that the extinguishing Act of Hen. 8. took
away all ordinary Jurisdiction from the Church of England, and that there was
no such thing till she revived it.

2. The words of the Petition, from whence he thus argues, you shall have in
his own Translation, in this manner: they pray that her Majesty would make such
provision, that those things which belong to our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
and Liberties (without which we cannot duly discharge, etc.) and taken from us
lately by the Iniquity of the times, may be again restored; and that all Laws
which have taken away, or do any ways hinder our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
and liberties, may be made null and void. Hence he concludes, that in the
judgment of the Convocation at that time, their Jurisdiction and Liberties were
taken away. Is this proof sufficient against all the laws and practice of the
Kingdom during the Reign of Hen. 8. after the extinguishing Act? or do they say
that Hen. 8. took away the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction? how can Mr.
Hickeringill divine that it was not the renouncing the Pope as Head of their
Jurisdiction and Liberties, that was the very grievance that they complained of?

3. This is certain, that Queen Mary succeeded Edw. 6. that Edw. 6. did require
more express Testimonies of the Clergie's Recognition of the Crown, in the
exercise of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by the Statute (of which we shall
take more notice presently) than Hen. 8. did; and it is past Mr. Hickeringill
his skill to prove, that the Convocation in their said Petition, did not
principally, if not only intend that severe Act of Edw. 6. However that pass,
Mr. Hickeringill his argument, deserves not the strength of a Convocation to
confute it.

4. I leave it to Mr. Hickeringill himself; for if he think, that that
Convocation spoke that which was not true, he has said nothing to the purpose:
but if he think they did speak truth, then he thinks, that the Jurisdiction of
the Church of England, as derived from the King, according to the Statute of
Edw. 6. or in Hen. 8's time, was no lawful Jurisdiction, that is, Mr.
Hickeringill thinks as the Papists think; War Hawk again Mr. Hickeringill, and
a praemunire too.

But this brings us to consider the Statute of Edw. 6.

CHAP. IV.
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is lawfully exercised, without the Kings Name or
Style in Processes, etc. notwithstanding the 1 Edw. 6. 2.
THat all Ecclesiastical Processes should be in the Name and Style of the King,
etc. according to the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. is the great and old Objection,
not only of Mr. Hickeringill, but several others.

SECT. I.
Answ. But first, if this Statute were not repealed (as indeed it is) there are
several things in the body of it very considerable against Mr. Hickeringill,
and to our advantage.

1. The Statute observes in the very foundation of it, that it is justly
acknowledged by the Clergy of the Realm, that all Courts Ecclesiastical within
the Realms of England and Ireland, be kept by no other Power or Authority, but
by the Authority of the King; which, it seems, was then known without the
Testimonies thereof, then to be required; and indeed is so still by the Oaths
which all Ecclesiastical persons cheerfully take before their Instalment.

2. That there was such a thing in practice before the making this Act, as
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Church of England: for the Statute says,
that Archbishops, etc. do use to make and send out their Summons, etc. in their
own names at that time, who yet acknowledged all their Authority from the
Crown, Sect. 3.

3. The Statute allows the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction it self; and that the
Archbishops and Bishops shall make, admit, etc. their Chancellors, and other
Officers and Substitutes, which supposes the Constitution of the Spiritual
Courts, under their own names, and with their own Seals, Sect. 6.

4. This Statute also allows, that some things are limited by the Laws and
Customs of this Realm, and if such things are depending in the Kings Courts of
Record at Common Law, are to be remitted to the Spiritual Courts to try the
same, Sect. 7.

5. But what is the penalty if they do not use the Kings Name and Style, and
put the Kings Arms into their Seals of Office? This is considerable. It Is well
the Statute provided Sect. 4.
a better hand to punish the delinquents than Mr. Hickeringill, and a milder
punishment than he interprets the Law to do: the punishment is the Kings
displeasure, and imprisonment during his pleasure; not the voiding the
Jurisdiction, as Mr. Hickeringill would have it: And while the King knows the
Statute is repealed, as shall next appear, we fear not but his Majesty is
pleased with, and will defend our Jurisdictions, while we humbly acknowledge
their dependency on the Crown, and exercise the same, according to his Laws,
though we presume not to use his Name, and Style, and Arms, without the warrant
of Law.

SECT. II.
1. FOR that Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. was repealed by the first and second of
Philip and Mary, c. 8. wherein we have these plain words; The Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of the Archbishops and Ordinaries (are declared) to be in the same
state for process of suits, punishment of crimes, and execution of the Censures
of the Church, with knowledge of causes belonging to the same; and as large in
these points, as the said Jurisdiction was the said twentieth year of Hen. 8.
whereby that Statute is also revived, as my L. Coke affirms.

Thus, by Act of Parliament, of which that Queen was the undoubted Head, (and
by the power of the Crown of England, and not the Pope) the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of this Realm was established by our own Law is the same state
wherein it stood before the twentieth of Hen. 8. and then, we find, that by our
ancient Laws and Customs, it was dependent on the Crown, whatever some
Churchmen thought to the contrary.

2. I have read, that this same Queen Mary wore the Title of Head of the Church
of England her self; though in other points too too zealous for Popery: and by
this very Statute it is Enacted, That nothing in this Act shall be construed to
diminish the Liberties, Prerogatives, or Jurisdictions, or any part thereof,
which were in the Imperial Crown of this Realm the twentieth year of Hen. 8. or
any other the Queens progenitors before: And we have found, that the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of this Kingdom was subject to, and dependent on
the Imperial Crown, secundum consuetudinem and legem Angliae in her Ancestors
time: We have found also, that this was the undoubted Judgment of the whole
Kingdom in the Statutes of Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Queen Eliz. King James, etc.

Now let it be shown, that this clause of the Statute of Queen Mary is
repealed, which is so agreeable to the ancient Customs and Rights of the Crown;
let this be shown, and you do something: This Statute of my Lord Coke's is not
repealed by the 1 of Eliz. or King James, though the 1 of Mary should be
granted to be so. Also the 25 Hen. 8. 20. being contrary to 1 Edw. 6. 2. is
revived by 1 Eliz. and never repealed. Rep. Coke 12. p. 9.

I. Mr. Hickeringill indeed is bold enough, but I find Mr. Carry timorous in the
point, though against the hair: for though he toll on his weak and prejudiced
readers, to their great hazard, in putting their whole case upon this one
point, whether the Court can show the broad Seal, etc. yet when he comes home
to the matter, he tells them, that the aforesaid Statute of Edw. 6. not being
mentioned by King James's Act of repeal, and expressly revived, is thought not
to be of force; so that a citation in the Bishops own name, may, at this day,
be good in Law. Law of Engl. c. 2. p. 12. Mr. Hickeringill should have taken
the advice of this his friend, a great Lawyer certainly, that entitles his
minute and thin piece, the Law of England.

SECT. III.
Mr. CARRY indeed mistakes the Statute; for it is the first of King James 25.
not the fourth: yet we have his learned opinion, that Citations in the Bishops
own name, may, at this day, be good in Law; and for ought I know, his reason
for it may be good too, viz. because the Statute of Queen Mary, especially that
of the first and second of Phil. and Mar. c. 8. is not in the said Act of
repeal expressly revived, according to the express words of the Act, vid. 1
Eliz. sect. 13. But, O Mr. Carry! though we have here your opinion and your
reason, where was your Conscience? where was your kindness to your beloved
dissenting Clients? when you dared to betray them to the Devil and the Jailer
(to speak in Mr. Hickeringill's language*) (a far heavier sentence than Curse
ye Meroz) and that upon no other ground, that I can find, in your English Law,
but this Statute only; which yet for the reason aforesaid, you say, is thought
not to be of force; and though, you say, the Bishops may at this day send forth
Citations in their own names by Law; yet your grave advice to those friends is
this; When you are Cited, appear and demand, whether they have any Patent from
the King for the same, and under his great Seal or no; if they will not show
you by what Authority -- protest against their proceedings, and go your way, i.
e. the way of disobedience, contempt the way to the Gaol and the Devil; but
that is no matter, he has showed his spite to Ecclesiastical Authority against
his own Law and Conscience: he was not to satisfy a doubt, but a lust; and his
confidence is as able to secure the deluded people from the danger of contempt
of the Kings Ecclesiastical Courts, as his wise Notion of Magna Charta, c. 14.
from paying their Tithes. See this point excellently and fully argued on both
sides, and the Judges, etc. Opinion and Reasons silencing this Objection in
King James's time, Coke Rep. 12. p. 7, 8, 9.

SECT. IV.
1 Edw. 6. 2. repealed appears from practice.
II. A further Argument, that the Stat. 1 Edw. 6. 2. is repealed is taken from
the uninterrupted practice, both of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the
Kings of England, and their own immediate Courts, contrary to it: and I think
it is a rule in Law, that in doubtful cases, Lex currit cum praxi.

1. The Ecclesiastical Judges have, ever since the Repealing Act of Queen Mary,
before and since the Statute of Queen Eliz. and King James, called Statutes of
repeal, uncontroulably proceeded in their own names, and not expressly in the
name or style of the King (let one instance be shown to the contrary) then who
can imagine without a fancy possessed, that the Crown and States of the Realm
should intend so great an alteration in the Ecclesiastical government; and that
in the behalf of the supremacy, and for the Rights of the Crown, as is
pretended, by reviving that Act of 1 Edw. 6 and yet, neither then, not even
since, expect a conformity to, and observance of it? Were Queen Eliz. and King
James so easy and careless of their Crowns as this would make them? were all
the Bishops, who were concerned in making those Acts of Repeal, and all
Ecclesiastical Judges ever since, so dull and stupid, as not to know the force
of those Acts; not to mind either their duty, or their safety, in so great and
hazardous a point, as some would have it of a praemunire? or so foolhardy, as
to bear against the Crown it self, on which alone they know they depend against
plain Acts of Parliament, in the midst of froward and watching enemies on every
side them? who can think it? I must conclude, that if it be possible that the
Act of Queen Mary should be repealed in this point, either by Queen Eliz. or
King James, it is more than ever the Lawmakers themselves thought of,
understood or intended.

2. For secondly, the practice of the Crown that was in the first place highly
concerned in that Stat. 1 Edw. 6. 2. has been ever since the Act of Queen Mary
that repealed it, directly contrary to it; and, in a very great point or flower
of the supremacy, managed it self ever since, just as it did before that Act of
Edw. 6. and, as I said, directly contrary to it: therefore it is past all doubt
but that the sense of the Queen and Kings of England, and the sense of those
great Lawyers and Statesmen, that direct the Crown in such great affairs, is
evident, that the Statute of Edw. 6. stands repealed, and is not revived; for
in that Stat. 1 Edw. 6. 2. it is expressly enacted, that whereas elections of
Bishops by Deans and Chapters upon a Writ of Congee d'eslire -- seeming
derogatory and prejudicial to the Kings prerogative Royal; for a due
reformation thereof, be it enacted, that from henceforth no such Congee
d'eslire be granted, not election made, but, etc. yet ever since Congee
d'eslires have been granted, and such elections thereupon have been returned
and accepted.

3. The Kings immediate Courts, so far as they have been concerned with
Jurisdiction of the Church, and the Kings Civil Judges therein, have ever since
owned, and as occasion has required, ratified, fortified, and made effectual
all our Ecclesiastical proceedings ever since, though not acted in the Kings
name, contrary to the said Statute; though it is a great part of their places
and offices to secure the Prerogative against all Invasion, especially of the
Church: thus by their constant practice it appears, that they never understood
that Statute of Edw. 6. to be in force, since Queen Mary repealed it: Was the
whole Kingdom so long, and in so deep a sleep, to be awakened by such
impertinent and little barkings?

SECT. V.
1 Edw. 6. 2. Repealed in the Judgment of all the Judges, the King and Council.
THE objection from the 1 Edw. 6. is no new light of Mr. Hickeringill's, we
find it busy in the time of King Charles the first, Anno 1637. and by the
Kings Proclamation it seems it had troubled the Kingdom before, as indeed it
had in the Fourth of King James. In that year 1637. upon an order out of the
Star Chamber, the learned Judges were commanded to give their opinion in this
matter: and they all met together, and deliberately, and distinctly, and fully
declared, that the 1 Edw. 6. 2. is repealed, and is not in force; and that the
Ecclesiastical Judges did (in all the points called in question) act legally,
and as they ought to do; hereupon the King and Council being satisfied, issued
forth the said Proclamation to silence and prevent all such objections against
Ecclesiastical Judges, Courts and proceedings for the future; and the judgment
of the Judges under their hands, was enrolled in the Courts of Exchequer, Kings
Bench, Common Pleas, etc. as Law; where any one may find it that desires to be
further satisfied in the truth of it.

2. Hence I argue, that that Statute of 1 Edw. 6. is repealed in Law; at least
that the subjects ought so to esteem it, until they have the judgment of the
Judges declared otherwise; yea, though those Judges (which is profane to
imagine) did err in that their Declaration through ignorance or fear of the
High Commission, as Mr. Hickeringill meekly insinuates, p. ult.

For the Law is known to the subject, either by the letter or by the
Interpretation of it: and if the letter of the Law be not plain, or be
doubtful, we take the Interpretation of it from such as by law are of right to
make the Interpretation, to be the law; and this I think is the Common Law of
England, and believe that Mr. Carry himself thinks so too.

3. Now, who is or can be thought to be the most proper Interpreter of a
doubtful Law, but the King with his Council, by all the Judges of the Land?
especially if that law concern Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy of the Crown, as the law in question plainly does. But
the King himself with his Council, by all the Judges of the Land, has solemnly
declared, that the 1 Edw. 6. 2. is repealed, and not of force; this is a legal
interpretation of the law; this is law, and ought so to be taken, rebus sic
stantibus, by all the subjects of England, whatever little men that talk of the
law in their own narrow and private sentiments presume to vent, to the scandal
of the people, the trouble of the Kingdom and slander of the Church, and
Ecclesiastical proceedings: and indeed it would be an insufferable sawciness,
to say no worse, for any Ecclesiastical Judge to act by a law that is none,
against the so solemn declaration of the King, the Council, and all the Judges
of the Land, and this is the case.

I shall therefore trouble, if not pleasure, my reader with the Declaration of
the Judges, and the sense of the King and Council of it.

Primo Julii 1637.
The Judges Certificate concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
May it please your Lordships,
ACcording to your Lordships Order made in his Majesty's Court of Star Chamber
the Twelfth of May last, we have taken consideration of the particulars,
wherein our Opinions are required by the said Order, and we have all agreed:

That Processes may issue out of the Ecclesiastical Courts, and that a Patent
under the great Seal is not necessary for the keeping of the said
Ecclesiastical Courts, or for the enabling of Citations, Suspensions,
Excommunications, or other Censures of the Church; and that it is not necessary
that Summons, Citations, or other Processes Ecclesiastical in the said Courts,
or Institutions, or Inductions to Benefices, or Correction of Ecclesiastical
Offenses by Censure in those Courts, be in the Name or with the Style of the
King, or under the Kings Seal; or that their Seals of Office have in them the
Kings Arms. And that the Statute of primo Edvardi Sexti c. 2 which Enacted the
Contrary, is not now in force.

We are also of Opinion, that the Bishops, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons may keep their Visitations as usually they have done,
without Commission under the great Seal of England so to do.

John Brampstone, John Finch, Humph. Davenport, Will. Jones, Jo. Dinham, Ri.
Hutton, George Crook, Tho. Trevor, George Vernon, To. Berkley, Fr. Crawly, Ri.
Weston.


Enrolled in the Courts of Exchequer, Kings Bench, Common Pleas; and Registered
in the Courts of High Commission and Star Chamber.

Hereupon followed the Kings Proclamation, declaring that the proceedings of
his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers are according to the Law of
the Land; as are the words of the Title. I shall only transcribe the Conclusion
of the Proclamation, which you have faithfully in these words.

AND his Royal Majesty has thought fit, with the Advice of his Council, that a
public Declaration of these Opinions and Resolutions of his Reverend and
Learned Judges, being agreeable to the Judgment and Resolutions of former
times, should be made known to all his Subjects, as well to Vindicate the legal
proceedings of his Ecclesiastial Courts and Ministers, from the unjust and
Scandalous imputation of invading or entrenching on his Royal Prerogative, as
to settle the minds, and stop the mouths of all unquiet Spirits; that for the
future they presume not to censure his Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers in
these their Just and Warranted proceedings: And hereof his Majesty admonishes
all his Subjects to take Warning, as they shall answer the Contrary at their
Perils:

Given at the Court at Lindhurst, Aug. 18. in the Thirteenth Year of his
Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
You may see the Case fully, the Reasons on both sides, and the Judges
determination the Fourth of King James, to which this Proclamation may refer,
Coke Rep. 12. p. 7, 8.

Now I could almost submit it to Mr. Carry or Mr. Hickeringill himself, whether
it be fitter or safer for Ecclesiastical Judges to proceed in their Courts as
they now do; or alter their proceedings, and presume upon the King, by using
his Royal Name, and Style, and Arms, contrary to all this Evidence, and Reason,
and Law.

SECT. VI.
Mr. H. Cary's Reason to the contrary considered.
BUT Mr. Carry says, He sees not a dram of Reason, why the Spiritual Courts
should not make their Process in the Kings name, as well as the Temporal
Courts, since those, as well as these, are the Kings Courts.

He seems to talk Pothecary, without so much as a dram of Reason; the usage
of the Courts, and the evidence aforesaid, is better Law than his pitiful
guesses. Neither is there color of Reason in what he says, if these two
things appear.

1. That the Ecclesiastical Ministers do sufficiently and openly acknowledge
the dependence of their Courts upon the Crown without using his Majesty's Name,
or Style, or Arms.

2. That there is not the same reason that the Spiritual Courts should use the
Kings Name, etc. that there is for the Temporal.

1. For the first, the Ecclesiastical Judges accept their places thankfully as
the Kings donation, and not the Popes: then they readily grant they depend upon
the Crown, even for the exercise of their Spiritual function; and that they
receive all coercive and external Jurisdiction immediately from the Crown and
the Laws of the Land, and not from the Pope. Again, they all take the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance before their Instalment, which are the fence of the
Crown against Popery. And then in all their public Prayers before their
Sermons, the Bishops and Archdeacons, etc. do Recognize the Kings Supremacy in
all Ecclesiastical things and causes as well as Civil. Again, they Take the
late Test and the same Oaths at the public Sessions. And lastly, Mr. Carry
himself confesses, that they acknowledge the said Supremacy in their public
Canons or Constitutions of the whole Church of England, as he notes p. 2. in
Can. 1, 2, 1603. And are all these less significant to testify their
dependence on and acknowledgement of their derivation from the Crown, than the
Kings Name, and Style, and Arms (which may be far enough from the Conscience)
in a Process?

2. For the second, that there is not the same reason to use the Kings name in
Ecclesiastical as in Civil Courts, is apparent from the true cause of using it
in the Civil Courts, which being not known or well heeded, may be the cause of
the exception: for Bishop Sanderson has well observed the true reason of using
the Kings name in any Court, is not thereby to acknowledge the Emanation of the
power or Jurisdiction of that Court from, or the subordination of that power
unto the Kings power or Authority, as the objector seems to suppose; but rather
to show the same Court to be one of the Kings own immediate Courts, wherein the
King himself is supposed (in the construction of the Law) either by his
personal or virtual power to be present: and the not using the Kings name in
other Courts does not signify, that they do not Act by the Kings Authority,
but only that the Judges in them are no immediate representatives of the Kings
person; nor have consequently, any allowance from him to use his Name in the
execution of them.

1. This difference is evident among the Common Law Courts of this Kingdom; for
though all the immediate Courts of the King do act expressly in his Name, yet
many other more distant Courts do not; as all Courts-Baron, Customary-Courts of
Copyholders, etc. and such Courts as are held by the Kings grant, by Charter to
Corporations, and the Universities: in all which Summons are issued out, and
Judgments given, and all Acts and proceedings made and done in the name of such
persons as have chief Authority in the said Courts, and not in the Name of the
King; thus their styles run; A. B. Major Civitatis Exon. N. M. Cancellarius
Vniversitatis Oxon. and the like, and not Carolus Dei gratia.

2. Once more a little nearer to our case; there are other Courts that are
guided by the Civil (as distinguished from the Common) Law; as the
Court-Marshal and the Court of Admiralty; the Kings Name in these is no more
used, than it is in the Courts Spiritual; but all Processes, Sentences, and
Acts in these Courts, are in the Name of the Constable, Head Marshal, or
Admiral, and not in the Kings Name.

3. I shall conclude this with those grave and weighty words of the same most
admirable Bishop Sanderson, in his excellent Treatise, showing, that Episcopacy
as Established by Law in England, is not prejudicial to Regal Power; worthy of
every Englishman's reading: his words to our purpose are these; Which manner of
proceeding, like that of the Spiritual Courts, constantly used in those several
Courts before mentioned; since no man has hitherto been found to interpret, as
any diminution at all or disacknowledgment of the Kings Sovereignty over the
said Courts: it were not possible the same manner of proceeding in the
Ecclesiastical Courts should be so confidently charged with so heinous a crime,
did not the intervention of some wicked lust or other prevail with men of
corrupt minds to become partial judges of evil thoughts, p. 68, 69.

Mr. Hickeringill is one of those whom the Bishop describes, i. e. that so
confidently charge the Ecclesiastical Courts with that heinous crime, and
foundeth that confidence in the Statute of the 1 Eliz. 1. In charity to him, I
shall give him such words out of that Statute, as do not only secure the Act of
Queen Mary that repealed the Act of 1 Edw. 6. 2. (requiring the use of the
Kings Name in our proceedings) from repeal in that particular; but directly and
expressly ratifies and confirms the same, and our contrary proceedings
accordingly. So that our proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Courts without using
the Kings Name, or Style, or Arms, according to 1 Edw. 6. 2. are allowed and
established by this very Act of Queen Eliz. thus; Further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that all other Laws and branches of any Act repealed by
the said Act of repeal of Mar. and not in this Act specially mentioned and
revived, shall stand and be repealed in such manner and form as they were
before the making of this Act; any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding, 1 Eliz. 1. 13. but the Act of 2 Phil. and Mar. was not
specially mentioned in this Act of Repeal, nor any other: And the Learned
Judges in 4 Jac. observe, that this Act of 1 Eliz. revives an Act of Hen. 8.
repealed by Queen Mary, and in both these Statutes 1 Edw. 6. 2. is made void;
and the present proceeding of Spiritual Courts without the Kings Name, etc.
plainly confirmed; but vid. Coke Rep. 12. p. 7.

CHAP. V.
The Act of 1 Eliz. 1. Establishing the High Commission Court, was not the
foundation of ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England, against Mr.
Hickeringill.
THE worthy Gentleman, though he uses much Modesty, and will not peremptorily
assert; and has only fitted the matter for the consideration of wiser men (if
he can think there be any such) reasons wonderfully after this new and unheard
of manner, or to this purpose, if at all.

The Statute of Eliz. for the High Commission Court was the only Basis of all
Ecclesiastical power; this continued indeed during her time, and King James's;
but being repealed by 17 Car. 1. 11. and 13 Car. 2. 12. down came the Fabric;
their great foundation thus torn up, now they have neither power from God nor
man, nor ever shall; for his Majesty has by Statute Enacted never to empower
them with any more Commissions to the worlds end. Now their basis is taken
away, I cannot discern where their Authority lies, Nak. T. q. 1. p. 4, 5, 6.
This is the Spirit of his Reason, which he confesses is not infallible; for he
says as before, he does not peremptorily assert it.

But can a man have the face to write this first, and then to say he is not
peremptory? Would a man in his wits expose himself in this manner in Print, and
blunder out so much prejudice, envy, spite and wrath against Government? and
talk such pitiful unadvised stuff about Law? and think to shake the Fabric of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that has stood firm so long in the midst of all
its enemies, with shadows of straws? Had he advised with the learned Sage, his
Friend Mr. Carry, who is the Author of the Law of England, certainly he could
never have talked so idly and impertinently, but would have put some colors at
least upon his honest designs, as Mr. Carry himself has done.

But what if this wise Mr. Hickeringill err fundamentally all this while? and
the clause of 1 Eliz. and consequently the Stat. of Car. 1. and 2. touch not,
concern not the ordinary Jurisdiction of the Church at all? as certainly they
do not; and the only wonder is, so wise a man should not see it: A man of so
great, and long experience, and practice in the Jurisdiction and Laws of the
Church: So diligent and accurate in his writings, and especially of Naked
Truth; wherein he assures us, nothing is presented crude or immature, but well
digested; as a few of those things that his head and heart, that is, his
stomach have been long full of; as he says, if you will believe him, p. ult.

But does not that clause that establishes the High Commission affect our
ordinary Jurisdictions at all? what pity it is, that so excellent a Book as this
second part of Naked Truth is, should miscarry in its main project, and in the
very foundation too: the fundamental supposition, on which all its strength is
built; and in a maxim peculiar to the Authors invention, and singularly his
own, for ought I know; and wherein he seems to place his glory, especially
seeing, as he tells us, p. ult. he has no pique, private interest, or revenge
to gratify: and writes only to cure old Ulcers; and with such hearty wishes
that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which is his Interest as well as others, were
of force, strength and virtue, and not so disorderly uncertain and precarious;
as he proves it to be, without one Argument, if this beloved one, taken from
the High Commission, fail him.

And yet alas! it will fail him do what we can: for the clause in the Stat. 1
Eliz. 1. 18. granted a power to the Crown to establish the High Commission
Court, as a Court extraordinary; consisting of extraordinary and choice
Ministers, not restrained to ordinary Ecclesiastical Officers: and the ordinary
Jurisdiction did never derive from it, was never disturbed or altered by it;
but was ever from the beginning of it, consistent with and subordinate to it;
therefore was it called the High Commission. This is evident, as from the
concurrence of both Jurisdictions all a long; so from the letter of the Statute
it self, and clearly declared to be so by my Lord Coke.

This clause (says he) divides it self into two branches, the first
concerning the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical state and persons; this branch
was Enacted out of necessity, for that all Bishops and most of the Clergy of
England, being then Popish, it was Necessary to raise a Commission to deprive
them that would not deprive themselves: and in case of Restitution of Religion,
to have a more Summary proceeding than by the ordinary and prolix course of Law
is required. This branch concerns only Ecclesiastical persons: so that, as
Necessity did cause this Commission, so it should be exercised but upon
Necessity; for it was never intended that it should be a continual standing
Commission; for that should prejudice all the Bishops in their Ecclesiastical
Jurisdictions, and be grievous to the Subject, to be drawn up from all the
remote parts of the Realm, where before their own Diocesan they might receive
Justice at their own doors.

So that this power of the High Commission, neither granted any new power to
the ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, nor took away any of the old. Yea, it
plainly supposes the prae-existence and exercise of the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in an ordinary way, and meddles no further with it than to take
its measures from it, which by consequence allows it in it self, as well as for
a Rule of its own proceedings, as my Lord Coke observes in these words.

That your Highness -- shall name -- to execute under your Highness -- all
manner of Jurisdiction, etc. and to visit and reform, etc. all errors, etc.
which by any manner Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power -- can or may lawfully be
reformed, etc.

Now if the ordinary Jurisdiction by Bishops, etc. did not derive from, or
depend on that High Commission, the repealing the Statute (I mean the clause)
that empowered the High Commission can no wise affect, much less destroy that
ordinary Jurisdiction; and Mr. Hickeringill's foot is gone from his ground, and
the ordinary Jurisdiction of the Church of England stands fixed upon its
ancient Bottom, on which it stood before the High Commission, and ever since,
notwithstanding the High Commission is taken away, and should never be granted
more.

Now I cannot but observe, that Mr. Hickeringill has the ill luck to cut his
own fingers with every tool he meddles with. The Stat. of 13 Car. 2. 12. which
continues the repeat of the clause in 1 Eliz. for the High Commission by the 17
of Car. 1. which also took away our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; I say this
Stat. 13. Car. 2. 12. restores the ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and
excludes the power of the High Commission.

Whence it is plain, that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction does not Essentially
depend on, but may and does now stand by Act of Parliament without the
High Commission.

Again, whereas it is provided that the Jurisdiction so restored shall not
exceed in power, what it was in 1639. it is clear, that the Church had a lawful
Jurisdiction before the Wars, otherwise nothing is restored: yea, it is
nonsense, or a delusion unworthy of a Parliament, if they that made that Act
did not suppose and allow, that the ordinary exercise of Jurisdiction in the
Spiritual Courts in 1639. was according to Law; and I am sure that was just
such as is now exercised.

CHAP. VI.
How our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England came at first, and is at
present Established by Law.
TO show how the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction came at first to be Established by
Law, is a point not so difficult as much desired.

It Is agreed, I hope, that all Kindreds, Tongues and Nations owe their
Obedience to the Gospel, when and wheresoever it comes: and that England was
one of the first of the Nations that embraced it, and became a Church of
Christ; then we were a rude unpolished and Barbarous people, and knew little of
Civil Policy or order of Government; but by the gracious Ministry of Holy men
sent from God, our manners began to be softened, and our minds sweetened and
enlightened, and our Princes became early nourishers and honourers of Religion
and Religious persons; and good nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to the
Church then planting among us; and began to endow it with wealth and power.

Arviragus, Marius, Coilus (as the three Kings in Malmesb. are named by
Capgravius) entertained Christians exploded from all parts of the World, in
this Kingdom: and gave them peace, and provided them a Country to dwell in; and
first gave liberty to build and defend Churches in public. Lucius the first
Christian King, built Churches at his own charge; first constituted Bishops
Seats, and built dwellings for Priests, and much enriched all things of that
nature: and that Religious men might with more safety enjoy what they had given
them, amplis munivit privilegiis, fortified them with large privileges.

Here was born also (as Baronius confesses) Constantine the Great, who brought
peace to the whole Church; who was the first Christian Emperor; and likewise
the first Christian Queen, his Mother Helen.

If we come to the Kings of the Ages following, quis non stupeat, as Spelman
says, who can choose but be astonished at the eximious Piety, incredible Zeal
(Ardorem) extraordinary ( Insignes) Alms, manifold works of mercy, munificence
toward Gods Ministers, and their magnificent and wonderful ( profusionem)
liberality and expense in building, adorning, enriching Churches, insomuch, as
one says, Mirum tunc fuer at Regem videre non sanctum: And as another, There
were more holy Kings found in England than in any one, though the most populous
Province in the World.

The day would fail (that worthy Antiquary adds in his most excellent Epistle
before his Councils, enough to inflame the coldest Age with zeal for Religion)
The day would fail me, says he, should I speak of Edwin, Ina, Offa, Ethered,
Edmund, Ethelstan, Canute, Edward the Confessor, and many others; seeing among
all the Illustrious Kings, who were West Saxons, the third is scarce found, qui
Ecclesiam Dei, in Aliquibus, non Ornaverit, Auxerit, Ditaverit, who did not
Adorn, Augment and Enrich the Church of God.

In these early times of Zeal and Piety among the Kings of England, the
Jurisdiction and Authority of the Church took root, and began and proceeded to
flourish; now, no doubt, but Religion sincerely managed by good and meek
Churchmen, was a great mean to move the Nation toward a better Order in the
Civil State, both in Government and Law. Now I say (to use Spelman's words)
when Os Sacerdotis Oraculum esset plebis, Os Episcopi, Oraculum Regis and
Reipublicae, The mouth of the Priest was an Oracle to the People, and the mouth
of the Bishop was an Oracle to the King and the Commonwealth. In the time of
Ethelbert, the first Christian King of the Saxons, we find a Convention at
Canterbury of Bishops and Lords, to settle the affairs of Church and State. In
the time of the Heptarchy Summons was, Ad Episcopos, Principes, etc. Decrees
were made afterward, Cum Concilio Episcoporum, thus during the time of the
Saxons, etc. and until the Pope got footing here by the Conqueror,
Ecclesiastical Authority went on apace: Yea it is evident, that it went on step
by step with the progress of the Civil, and was gradually owned, enlarged and
established in the very Essence and degrees, and together with the
Establishment of the Civil State.

Insomuch, that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was so twisted and Interwoven, and,
as it were, wrapped in the very Bowels of the Civil; and the Ecclesiastical Law
so concerned and intimately wrought into the Temporal Law and Government, that
'twas hard to make the separation, or indeed clearly to assign the distinction
betwixt them; which has taken up the care, both of Lawyers and Statutes to do
it effectually and thoroughly; and perhaps may be in some measure a Reason of
many Prohibitions against Ecclesiastical Prohibitions to this day.

Hence also it was, that beyond all known time of Christianity in England, our
great Churchmen have had no small hand in making all our Laws, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil: and also sat many hundred years together with our
Temporal Judges in all places of public Judicature. Primi igitur sedebant in
omnibus Regni Comitiis and Tribunalibus Episcopi: In Regali quidem palatio cum
Regni magnatibus: in Comitat^s una cum Comite and Justitiario Comitatus: in
Turno Vicecomitis cum Vicecomite: in Hundredro cum Domino Hundredi. So that in
promoting Justice every where the sword might aid the sword, and nihil
inconsulto Sacerdote (qui velut suburra in Navi fuit) ageretur, Sp. Epis. Conc.

Yet we must remember, and it is carefully minded in our Statutes before
mentioned, that our Kings were the true and acknowledged fountains of the
beginning and increase of that wealth, and honor, and power, which the Church
and Churchmen then enjoyed; and that the Kings of England were ever Supreme
over this Church, and all its Ministers; and not the Pope, or any foreign
power; the Pope's Collector or Minister (so say our ancient Books) had no
Jurisdiction in this Land, Lord Coke of Courts, p. 321.

In our Law before the Conquest, the King was the Vicar of the highest King,
ordained to this end, that he should above all govern the Church, Edw. Laws, c.
19. and this has been carefully maintained by our Laws ever since. See
Cawdries Case.

SECT. I.
Jurisdiction of the Church in Common Law.
THUS the power and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical grew up with and received much
perfection by and in Common Law.

By Common Law, I mean, long and general use in the whole Land; for as I take
it, my Lord Coke says, That time and use make a Custom: when that is general in
England, it is called Common Law; that is my meaning; whether my Notion be
right, I weigh not, if the matter and Argument prove and express the manner of
the Churches ancient Authority and Jurisdiction before the Statutes.

It Is most evident, William the Conqueror found the Bishops and other
Ecclesiastical Ministers in great power and with large Jurisdiction, which they
had long enjoyed, according to the Law and Custom of the Realm. Call that Law
what you will, by that they enjoyed their ancient Rights and government, and
that is enough.

It Is true indeed, William changed the ancient Custom we spoke of, and
distinguished the Tribunals one from the other: but says Spelman, Secrevit,
non diminuit Jurisdictionem Cleri, he did not lessen the Jurisdiction of the
Clergy: Yea, by swearing, he confirmed the Laws of holy Church, Quoniam per
eam. Rex and Regnum solidum subsistendi sistendi habent fundamentum. Prooemium
ll. suarum, ut Spel. Epis. because, by the Church both King and Kingdom have a
solid foundation of subsisting. Thus the Churches Rights, in being before, were
confirmed by the Conqueror.

My Lord Coke notes two excellent Rules of Common Law to our purpose.

1. The Law does appoint every thing to be done by those unto whose office it
properly appertains.

2. It Is a Maxim of the Common Law, that where the Right is Spiritual, and the
Remedy thereof only by the Ecclesiastical Law, the Connusance thereof does
belong to the Spiritual Court, Coke Instit. p. 1.

3. Hence it follows, that there being many Cases in which there is no remedy
any other way provided, by Common Law Vid. Cawdries Case, Answ. to Object. 4.
they belong to the Spiritual Courts, and the Common Law both impowers and
requires those Courts to give Remedy in those Cases.

Thus stood Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England by Common Law before our
Statutes took so much notice of it; and our Statutes since, whenever they
mention it, do generally mention it, as a Government supposed, upon grounds
good and firm in Law to have existed before, and also then to be in use, and to
flourish in its present exercise, and proceedings in its proper course and
Courts.

It Is as idle a thing to look in the Statute-books for the beginning of
Ecclesiastical Power and its Courts, as for the Beginning of Courts-Baron,
which are such by Common Law, as Coke says, or the Court of Marshalsea, which,
as Coke's words are, has its foundation in Common Law; or Courts of
Copyholders, which are such by Custom: And for the same reason to question the
lawfulness of these Courts, because, in their original, they were not
Established by Act of Parliament, as well as the legality of the Courts
Spiritual; these being equally founded in the Ancient usage, Custom and Law of
England; and all taken care for in Magna Charta, that ancient Authentic
account of our Common Law.

And why are Ecclesiastical Judges (I mean not Bishops only, whom Mr.
Hickeringill finds in Scripture, but) Archdeacons, Chancellors, Officials, etc.
as well Established in their proper power, as Coroners, High-Constables, etc.
that have the Origin of their Offices before Statutes? Have not Ecclesiastical
Officers, when lawfully invested, power, as well as they, to Act in their
proper Jurisdictions, by the same Common Law? by long, ancient and established
Custom; or as the usual word in our Statutes in this very Case is, secundum
Consuetudines and Leges Angliae?

My Lord Coke says, The Kings Prerogative is a principal part of the Common
Law, which also flourishes in this part of it, the Ecclesiastical Power and
Jurisdiction, as well as in the Civil State and Government. Thus we
acknowledge, the Ecclesiastical State, and External, and Coercive Jurisdiction
derives from and depends upon the Crown of England by Common Law: And I am bold
to add, that the former cannot easily be Abolished and destroyed (I do not say
altered) without threatening the latter, I mean the Crown (at least some
prejudice to it) on which it depends.

Thus Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction stands by Common Law, on which also most of
our Civil Rights depend; but we confess it is bounded (as my Lord Coke) by the
same Common Law; and in all reason it must be so, it being subordinate to the
King as Supreme, who is supposed to be personally or virtually present in his
great Courts of Common Law; and is so declared to be by Acts of Parliament.
Instit. p. 1. page 344. of my Lord Coke.

SECT. II.
The Government Ecclesiastical is Established in the Statutes of this Realm.
THE Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction being thus found Established by Law before the
Statute-books were made, the Statutes do Establish it as much as any reasonable
unprejudiced man can expect or desire.

We shall begin with Magna Charta, which is Statute as well as Common Law, and
seems to unite and tie them together; This stands at the beginning of our
Statute-book; and the first thing in this, is a grant and establishment for
ever of the Rights and Liberties of the Church; that must be understood of the
Rights and Liberties then in being; and among the rest, sure the great Right
and Liberty of the Churches Power, and the free use of her Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.

Magna Charta it self expounds what it means by holy Church, i. e. the Bishops
and Ministers of it, which King Hen. 8. in the Statute says is commonly called
the Spiritualty: and Mr. HIckeringill, for all his scoffing, knows that the
Church of England allows a larger sense of the word [ Church] viz. the
Congregation of all faithful men, etc. And when we call the Clergy, or the
Governing-part of the Church, the Church, we use it in a Law-sence, and as a
term of Law, as Acts of Parliament as well as the Civil or Canon Law do: But
this by the way.

2. When the subsequent Acts of Parliament do so frequently mention the
Spiritual Courts, and their Jurisdiction; this to me is a legal allowance of
them; and indeed a Tacit or implicit acknowledgment of their more ancient
antecedent Power and Common right and liberty, by the undoubted Custom, i. e.
the Common Laws of the Land. Yea those very Statutes that look at least
obliquely upon them; that say they are bounded by the Common Law; that do of
themselves limit and prohibit the Ecclesiastical Courts in some cases, seem
plainly to acknowledge them in other cases not excepted from their
Jurisdiction. But,

3. More plainly and directly, those Acts of Parliament that appear in the
behalf of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in times of its trial and danger, and
vindicate its Rights, and preserve and maintain its Liberties when most in
question: there have happened such occasions, wherein the Statutes have rescued
and replevied the Ecclesiastical Power; in all which the Statutes have been
thus favorable to it; three of late, not to mention many formerly.

1. Thus, when some might imagine, that by the alteration made by King Hen. 8.
the Bishops and their Power was shaken: the Statutes made in his time assure
us, that it was but to restore the ancient Jurisdiction, and not to destroy it;
that Bishops should be elected and act as formerly; especially as Coke notes,
by the 25 Hen. 8. c. 20. it is Enacted, That every person chosen, invested,
Consecrated, Archbishop or Bishop, according to this Act, shall do and execute
every thing and things as any Archbishop or Bishop of this Realm, without
offending of the Prerogative Royal of the Crown, and the Laws and Customs of
the Realm at any time heretofore have done.

Note, that this Statute, contrary to the 1 Edw. 6. 2. was revived by Queen
Eliz. 1. cap. 1. which the Judges thought and judged a full answer to all the
Objections against the Churches proceedings contrary to the 1 Edw. 6. 2. and by
this very Statute 1 Edw. 6. 2. stands clearly repealed, as my Lord Coke
observes Rep. 12. 8, 9. which caused me to make choice of it for my present
purpose.

2. The second is observed in the time of Phil. and Mar. when the manner of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction had been altered by the 1 Edw. 6. the Statute
establishes the same as it was before in these words: And the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdictions of the Archbishops, Bishops, and (other) Ordinaries, to be in the
same estate for Process of Suits, punishment of crimes, and execution of
Censures of the Church, and knowledge of causes belonging to the same; and as
large in those points, as the said Jurisdiction was the 20 Hen. 8. which
Statute of Phil. and Mar. repealed the 1 Edw. 6. 2. and was never repealed
since, as the Judges resolved in the foresaid Case 4 Jac. but evidently revived
by 1 Eliz. 1. Sect. 13.

3. When thirdly, the long Parl. 17 Car. 1. had disabled the Jurisdiction of
the Courts Ecclesiastical, it was very carefully restored and established by
the Stat. 13. Car. 2. in these words; Neither this Act -- shall take away any
ordinary Jurisdiction from the said Archbishops, etc. but that they, and every
of them, may proceed -- in all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and in
all Censures and Coercions belonging to the same, as they did and might
lawfully have done before the making of the said Act. Vid. 17 Car. 1.

4. It Is sufficient, yet I cannot but subjoyn one notable way more
Argumentative enough, alone by it self, to prove the Ecclesiastical Courts to
be allowed and confirmed by Statute, viz. when the Statutes direct such
particulars to be tried in these Courts; and require these Spiritual Courts to
use their power for the punishment of offenders, and the doing Justice: And I
think there cannot be a better medium or clearer evidence than we have in this
matter.

For if the Spiritual Courts have no power to try such matters, and pass
Judgment, and punish in such cases, why do the Statutes direct and remit such
matters to them? and why do the Statutes enjoin them to take Connusance and
proceed accordingly? that so they do, is plain.

In the 18 of Edw. 3. 6. it is said, that Process in Causes Testamentary
notoriously appertains to holy Church. We must not blemish the Franchize of
Holy Church: And in the 18 of Edw. 3. 6. parties are to be dismissed from
Secular Judges in Cause of Tithes, and left to the Church: Ordinaries have
power to punish Ministers and Priests; as in 1 Hen. 7. c. 4.

Synodals, Proxies, Pensions, etc. are to be recovered in the Spiritual Courts.
Vid. 15 Hen. 8. c. 7. Sect. 7.

The like is known touching Causes Matrimonial and Defamations, etc. I shall
only instance one more, viz. in the great Cause of Nonconformity; and that in
an Act that is nearer to us, and of unquestionable Authority, which both
directs what we should punish, and most solemnly requires by its own Authority
to exercise our Ecclesiastical Power, by the very rules and proper methods of
our Spiritual Courts; in these words, 1 Eliz. before the Common Prayer:
Provided always, and be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and singular Archbishops and Bishops, and every of their Chancellors,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries, having any peculiar
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall have full power and Authority by virtue of
this Act, as well to enquire in their Visitatiions, Synods, and elsewhere,
within their Jurisdiction, at any other time or place, to take accusation and
informations of all and every the things above mentioned, done, committed or
perpetrated within the limits of their Jurisdictions and Authority, as to
punish the same, by Admonition, Excommunication, Sequestration, or Deprivation,
and other Censures and Process, in like form as heretofore has been used in
like cases, by the Queens Ecclesiastical Laws. This doubtless is very plain.

And hereupon, it is solemnly required in these words a little-before: For the
due execution hereof, they do in Gods name earnestly require and charge all
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor
themselves to the utmost of their knowledges, that the due and true execution
hereof may be had, throughout their Dioceses and Charges, as they will answer
before God for such evils and plagues, whereby Almighty God may justly punish
his people for neglecting this good and wholesome Law.

Now if in like cases it had not been lawful before this Act, for the Spiritual
Courts so to proceed, why are the former Laws and use to be followed by these
directions? Or if this Act cannot empower us, give us reason or Law against it.
Or if any thing be a greater grievance to you in the Spiritual Courts, than the
punishment provided for the crimes mentioned in this Act, say what it is, or
say nothing.

But if these cases be not sufficient, Mr. Carry can tell you of at least ten
particular matters, upon which the Law is, to grant the Writ de Excommunicato
capiendo: and according to a know Act of Parliament made after this, viz. 5
Eliz. 23. which sufficiently allows and confirms our Ecclesiastical proceedings
to the fences of too many, as some complain.

CHAP. VII.
Of Canons and Convocations.
WE see what Reason Mr. Hickeringill had to keep such a pother about the force
of Ecclesiastical Canons, and the Authority of Convocations. Especially,

1. Seeing the late mentioned Act of 1 Eliz. supposes the Ecclesiastical Laws,
i. e. the Canons to be her own Laws; and requires Ecclesiastical Judges so
severely to put them in execution.

2. Seeing, since the Reformation, most of the matters of Canons are expressed
and enjoined in Acts of Parliament; insomuch, that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
might stand and proceed well enough, had we no other Canon but Acts of
Parliament, as Mr. Hickeringill insinuates: and it is worthy his observation,
that the greatest complaints of Dissenters, since the Kings happy return, have
been upon the execution of Acts of Parliament, and that not so much by
Ecclesiastical as Civil Ministers.

Indeed the Statute of Car. 2. that restored the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
has a Proviso, That by virtue of that Act, the Canons of 1640. shall not be of
force; and that no Canons are made of force by that Act that were not formerly
confirmed by Acts of Parliament, or by the established Laws of the Land, as
they stood in Ann. 1639.

But it is evident enough, that by the 25 Hen. 8. c. 19. the old Canons, not
against Law or Prerogative, are of force; and that the King with the
Convocation, may make new ones, with the same Condition; and indeed, while the
Convocation is so limited by that Act, their power seems not very formidable.

My Lord Coke, who was not a Bigot for Spiritual Power, declares the Law in
both those Cases; and tells us, That it was resolved by the Judges at a
Committee of Lords, these restraints of the Convocation were grounded on that
Statute.

1. They cannot Assemble without the assent of the King.

2. They cannot Constitute any Canons without his license.

3. Nor execute them without his Royal assent.

4. Nor after his assent, but with these four limitations.

1. That they be not against the Kings Prerogative.

2. Nor against Common Law.

3. Nor against Statute Law.

4. Nor against any Custom of the Kingdom, Rep. 12. p. 720. And my Lord Coke
adds, That these restraints put upon the Convocation by the 25 Hen. 8. are but
an affirmance of what was before the Statute; and, as he says (in his book of
Courts) are but declaratory of the old Common Law: Page 323.
consequently the Courts of Common Law are to bound and overruled all
Ecclesiastical executions of Canons, and secure the Crown and the Laws against
them.

But what Acts of Parliament have abrogated the Authority of the Synod 1603.
and quite annihilated the very beings of Convocations, I am yet to learn;
though Mr. Hickeringill so boldly after his own way vents so wild a notion p.
3. and 12. or when that of 25 Hen. 8. 19. was repealed, or how they are made
less than nothing at this day, than they were before, since that Statute of
limitations, as he is pleased to insult?

He says, They are far from being the Representative Church of England; for
that the people have not the least Vote in their Election. Pray, when was it
otherwise than it is now? If the Law by Institution make the Clerk a guide to
his flock in Spirituals; if the people do expressly make choice of him for such,
or virtually consent in Law he should be so; and thereupon the Law allows this
Clerk to elect members for the Convocation, and also reckons the Convocation to
be the Representative Church of England; how comes it that Mr. Hickeringill who
is so great a stickler for a Legal Religion should be so much wiser than the
Law? and to scoff at its Constitutions?

I wish Mr. Hickeringill to beware of touching Foundations with his rude and
bold Fancies, and disturbing the frame of Government. I am sure he will not
abide by his own Rule, if he be well advised of the manner of Electing the
great Representative of the people of England: it is our duty to study to be
quiet, but some study to be otherwise. The wisest word in his Naked Truth is
this; If men once come to dispute Authority, and the wisdom of the Laws and
Lawmakers, the next step is Confusion and Rebellion, p. 11.

The Conclusion.
THUS you have a Taste of the Spirit and Sense that runs through the Book
called Naked Truth; his other little gross mistakes are not worthy observing,
much less insisting on: such as these:

1. First, That all Archdeaconries have Corpses annexed, which is certainly
otherwise, in most Archdeaconries in some Dioceses.

2. Then that Archdeacons require Procurations when they do not Visit; which is
not done in some, and I hope in no Diocese.

3. Lastly, That Procurations and Synodals are against Law, and not to be
recovered by Law or Conscience; when he himself confesses that they are due by
ancient Composition: That provision (notwithstanding his old Canons) in
Visitations is due; for which the money, paid for Procurations, is paid for
them by virtue of that Composition: and whereas, they are due by undoubted and
long possession and Custom, which is as Law in England: And to conclude, are
not only expressly allowed as due, but declared to be recoverable in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, by the Statute of 34 Hen. 8. 19.

I have, at this time, done with his Materials; and for the Manner of his
Writing, let the Sentence of every Reader reproach and shame him. I like not
the office of Raking Kennels or emptying Jakes; and all the harm I return him,
is to pray heartily for him, That God would give him Grace soberly to read over
his own Books, and with tears to wash these dirty sheets, wherein he has
played the wanton; and indeed defiled himself more than his own Nest (whatever
the unlucky Bird intended) and that with such a barbarous wit, and vile
Railery, as is justly offensive to God and Man: with such wild triumphs of
scorn and contempt of his own Order and Office, his Betters and Superiors; with
such a profligate neglect of Government and Peace; and of his own Conscience
and Law (against which, he confesses, he still acts) yea, against his own
Interest, Safety, and his very Reputation.

For all which Notorious and public Miscarriages, I wish he thought it fit to
do public Penance in another new and cleaner Sheet.

I have to do with two Adversaries, Mr. Hickeringill and Mr. Carry: the first
wishes the Church of England had more power than it now has; the other, that
it had less. I presume in the name of the true Sons of this Church, that we are
very thankful for the power we have, by the favor of our gracious King and his
good Laws.

And as we do, and always shall acknowledge the Dependence of our
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction upon the Imperial Crown of this Realm: So whether
it seem good to the King and his High Court of Parliament, to augment or lessen
it, or to continue it as it is, we shall still maintain our Loyalty, and
manifest our duty, and cheerfully submit our selves. But, Lord, forgive our
Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers, and turn their hearts.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
I Have reserved a few Authorities for the satisfaction of such as have no mind
or leisure to read the Book; which alone are sufficient to oppose and expose my
Adversaries Objections.

I.
Episcopal Government in the Church of England is as Ancient as the Church; and
at first was subordinate, under God, only to our Kings, without any relation to
or* dependence on the Pope; and declared to be so, with the grounds and reasons
thereof, very early by Edw. 1. and Edw. 3. and so Established by Acts of
Parliament.

Read 25 Edw. 3. the sum is thus.

Here we have a Recital of the first Statute against Provisors, to this effect;
Whereas the Holy Church of England was founded in the Estate of Prelacy by the
Grandfather of this King and his Progenitors, etc. and by them endowed with
great Possessions, etc. for them to inform the People in the Law of God; to
keep Hospitality, etc. And whereas the King and other founders of the said
Prelacies were the Rightful Adowers thereof; and upon Avoidance of such
Ecclesiastical Promotions, had power to advance thereunto their Kinsmen,
Friends, and other Learned men of the birth of this Realm; which being so
advanced, became able and worthy to serve the King in Council, and other places
in the Commonwealth: The Bishop of Rome Usurping the Seigniory of such
Possessions and Benefices, did give the same to Aliens, -- as if he were
Rightful Patron of those Benefices; whereas, by the Law of England, he never
had the Right Patronage thereof: whereby in short time all the Spiritual
Promotions in this Realm would be engrossed into the hands of strangers,
Canonical Elections of Prelates would be abolished, works of Charity would
cease, the Founders and true Patrons would be disinherited, the Kings Council
weakened, and the whole Kingdom impoverished, and the Laws and Rights of the
Realm destroyed.

Upon this complaint it was resolved in Parliament, That these Oppressions and
grievances should not be suffered in any manner; and therefore it was Enacted,
That the King and his Subjects should thenceforth enjoy their Rights of
Patronage: that free Elections of Archbishops and Bishops, and other Prelates
Elective should be made according to the Ancient Grants of the Kings
Progenitors and their Founders; and that No Provision from Rome should be put
in Execution; but that those Provisors should be Attached, Fined and Ransomed
at the Kings Will; and withal imprisoned, till they have renounced the benefit
of their Bulls, satisfied the Party grieved, and given sureties not to commit
the like offense again.

II.
Before this forementioned Act was made, the Spiritual Courts were in Being,
and had Power by the Law of the Land, to try such Causes as were not to be
tried by Common Law: so declared and Established by Acts of Parliament. Vid. in
the time of Edw. 1. and Edw. 2. near four Hundred years since.
Circumspecte agatis, 13 Edw. 1. An. 1285.

The King to his Judges sends greeting: Use your selves circumspectly, in all
matters concerning the Bishop of Norwich and his Clergy; not punishing them if
they hold Plea in things as be mere Spiritual, as Penance enjoined by Prelates,
Corporal or Pecuniary -- for Fornication, Adultery, or such like: for Tithes
and Oblations due and accustomed; Reparations of the Church and Churchyard;
Mortuaries, Pensions, laying violent hands upon a Clerk, Causes of Defamation,
Perjury: All such demands are to be made in the Spiritual Courts; and the
Spiritual Judge shall have power to take knowledge of them notwithstanding the
Kings Prohibition.

III.
Hereupon a Consultation was to be granted 24 Edw. 1. as follows.
Whereas Ecclesiastical Judges have often surceased to proceed by force of the
Kings Writ of Prohibition in Cases, whereas Remedy could not be had in the
Kings Courts -- our Lord the King Wills and Commands, That where
Ecclesiastical Judges do surcease in the aforesaid Cases, by the Kings
Prohibition, that the Chancellor or the Chief Justice, upon sight of the Libel,
at the instance of the Plaintiff (if they can see that the Case cannot be
redressed by Writ out of Chancery, but that the Spiritual Court ought to
determine the Matters) shall write to the Ecclesiastical Judge, that he proceed
therein, notwithstanding the Kings Prohibition.

More particularly, Those Cases reserved by Law and Statute, against which no
Prohibition can be legally granted, are enumerated in Articul. Cleri, 9 Edw. 2.

IV.
Thus the proceedings of the Spiritual Courts, and the Causes belonging to them
were supposed, directed, allowed, and Established by these Ancient Statutes.

And lest those Causes have not been sufficiently specified, no Prohibition
shall be awarded out of Chancery, but in Case where we have the connusance, and
of Right ought to have; as it is in the 18 of Edw. 3. provided.

Whence it is a general Rule, both in Law and Statute, That such cases as have
no remedy provided in the other Law, belong to the Spiritual Courts: and
indeed, it hence appears they have ever done so; because we no where find in
our Laws, that the Common Law did ever provide for them: and because the
Kingdom of England is an entire Empire, where the King is furnished with a
Temporalty and Spiritualty, sufficient to administer Justice to all persons,
and in all Causes whatsoever: And consequently, what Causes are not in the
connusance of the Common Law, belong to the Spiritual Jurisdiction, which is
plainly implied in 24 Hen. 8. c. 12. and other Statutes.

Upon the same ground in Law depend three great truths. 1. The Antiquity of
Ecclesiastical Courts. 2. Their dependence upon the Crown. 3. The perfection of
the Government, to administer Justice in all cases to all persons, from the
Supreme Power exercised in the Temporal and Spiritual Courts; all which lie in
the Preamble of that Statute according to our Ancient Laws.

For, says my Lord Coke in the conclusion of Cawdries Case, it has appeared,
as well by the ancient Common Laws of this Realm, by the Resolution of the
Judges and Sages of the Laws of England in all succession of Ages, as by
Authority of many Acts of Parliament, ancient and of latter times, That the
Kingdom of England is an absolute Monarchy, and that the King is the only
Supreme Governor, as well over Ecclesiastical persons, and in Ecclesiastical
Causes, as Temporal: To the due observation of which Laws, both the King and
the Subject are sworn.

V.
IF you desire a more full and particular account of such Cases, as being not
provided for at Common Law, are therefore, and have been ever under the
Spiritual power, take this excellent Enumeration of my Lord Cawdries Case.
Coke.

Observe (good Reader) seeing that the determination of Heresies, Schisms, and
Errors in Religion, Ordering, Examination, Admission, Institution and
Deprivation of men of the Church (which do concern God's true Religion and
Service) of right of Matrimony, Divorces, and general Bastardy, (whereupon
depend the strength of men's Descents and Inheritances) of Probate of
Testaments, and Letters of Administration (without which no debt or duty due to
any dead man can be recovered by the Common Law) Mortuaries, Pensions,
Procurations, Reparations of Churches, Simony, Incest, Adultery, Fornication
and Incontinency, and some others, does not belong to the Common Law, how
necessary it was for administration of Justice, that his Majesty's
Progenitors, Kings of this Realm, did by public Authority authorize
Ecclesiastical Courts under them, to determine those great and important Causes
Ecclesiastical ( exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Common Law) by the Kings
Laws Ecclesiastical, which was done originally for two causes. 1. That Justice
should be administered under the Kings of this Realm, within their own Kingdom,
to all their Subjects, and in all causes. 2. That the Kings of England should
be furnished upon all occasions, either foreign or domestical, with Learned
Professors, as well of the Ecclesiastical as Temporal Laws.

VI.
Ecclesiastical Laws are the Kings Laws, though Process be not in the Kings
Name.
Now, albeit the proceedings and Process of the Ecclesiastical Courts be in
the Name Coke, Cawdr. Case, latter end.
of the Bishops, etc. it follows not therefore, that either the Court is not
the Kings, or the Law, whereby they proceed, is not the King's Law. For taking
one example for many, every Leet or View of Frankpledge holden by a Subject is
kept in the Lords Name, and yet it is the Kings Court, and all the proceedings
therein are directed by the Kings Laws.

VII.
Spiritual Causes secured from Prohibitions, notwithstanding, by Acts of
Parliament. Lord Coke, Cawdries Case in Edw. 2.
Albeit, by the Ordinance of Circumspecte agatis made in the 13 year of Edw. 1.
and N. B.
by general allowance and usage, the Ecclesiastical Court held Plea of Tithes,
Obventions, Oblations, Mortuaries, Redemptions of Penance, laying of violent
hands upon a Clerk, Defamations, etc. yet did not the Clergy think themselves
assured, nor quiet from Prohibitions purchased by Subjects, until that King
Edw. the Second by his Letters Patents, under the Great Seal, in, and by
consent of Parliament, upon the Petitions of the Clergy, had granted unto them
to have Jurisdiction in those Cases. The King in a Parliament holden in the
Ninth year of his Reign, after particular Answers made to their Petitions
concerning the matters abovesaid, does grant and give his Royal assent in these
words.

We desiring, as much of right as we may, to provide for the state of the
Church of England, and the tranquillity and quiet of the Prelates of the said
Clergy, to the honor of God, and the amendment of the state of the said
Church, and of the Prelates and Clergy; ratifying and approving all and
singular the said Answers which appear in the said Act; and all and singular
things in the said Answers contained, We do for Us and Our Heirs grant and
command, that the said be inviolably kept for ever: willing and granting for Us
and Our Heirs, that the said Prelates and Clergy, and their Successors for
ever, do exercise* Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Premises, according to
the tenor of the said Answer.

VIII.
The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is a branch of the Kings Supremacy; and he
that denies it, denies the King to be a complete Monarch, and Head of the
whole entire body of Cawdries Case.
the Realm, as my Lord Coke assures us, both from the Common Law and many
Statutes in all Ages -- made on purpose, from time to time, to vindicate the
Crown and secure our own Church and its Jurisdiction under the Crown from the
Pope, and his illegal Encroachments and Usurpations before, and more especially
by Hen. 8. and since the Reformation; as is very amply proved by my Lord Coke,
in his most excellent discourse on Cawdrie's Case, and since very learnedly and
fully by Sir John Davis, Atturny General in Ireland, in his Case of Praemunire,
called Lalor's Case; both which should be well read by all that desire
satisfaction in this weighty point.

Thus the Jurisdiction of this Church, in subordination to the Supreme Head of
it, has proceeded through all time, in the Laws and Statutes of our own
Kingdom; and was never legally interrupted, till the 17 of Car. 1. but that Act
repealed by the 13 of our present gracious King, it stands firm again,
according to the letter of the said last Act, upon its ancient legal Basis.

IX.
The old Objection, that the Spiritual Courts do not Act in the Kings Name,
etc. is fully Answered in the Book; but, because it is only mentioned there,
that the Case was resolved by the Judges in King James's time: I shall here set
it L. Coke, Rep. 12. p. 7.
down, as abridg'd (for brevity) out of my Lord Coke by Manly.

Pasch. 4 Jac. Regis.

At this Parliament, it was strongly urged at a grand Committee of the Lords
and Commons in the Painted Chamber; that such Bishops as were made after the
first day of the Session, were not lawful Bishops.

1. Admitting them Bishops, yet the Manner and Form of their Seals, Styles,
Process and proceedings in their Ecclesiastical Courts, were not consonant to
Law; because, by the Stat. 1 Edw. 6. 2. it is provided, tht thenceforth Bishops
should not be Elective, but Donative, by Letters Patents of the King; and for
that, at this day, all Bishops were made by Election, not Donation of the King;
therefore the said Bishops are not lawful.

2. By the same Act it is provided, that all Summons, etc. and Process in
Ecclesiastical Courts shall be made in the Kings Name and Style, and their
Seals engraven with the Kings Arms, and Certificates made in the Kings Name: it
was therefore concluded, that the said Statute being still in force, by
consequence all the Bishops made after the Act of 1 Jac. were not lawful
Bishops; and the proceedings being in the Name of the Bishop, makes them
unlawful, quia non observata forma infertur adnullatio Actus.

Upon consideration of these Objections, by the Kings Commandment, it was
Resolved by Popham Chief Justice of England, and Coke Atturny of the King, and
after affirmed by the Chief Baron, and the other Justices attendant to the
Parliament, that the said Act of 1 Edw. 6. 2. is not now in force; being
Repealed, Annulled and Annihilated by three several Acts of Parliament; any
whereof being in force, it makes that Act of 1 Edw. 6. that it cannot stand,
quia Leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant: And by the Act of the 25
Hen. 8. c. 20. is set forth the manner of Election and Consecration of
Archbishops and Bishops; and also for the making and Execution of all things
which belong to their Authority: with which words the Style and Seal of their
Courts, and the manner of their proceedings are included: which Act of 25 Hen.
8. is Revived by 1 Eliz. c. 1. and consequently, that of 1 Edw. 6. c. 2. is
Repealed.

I advise the Reader to see it, as more at large, expressed; and the repealing
Statutes particularly mentioned, and argued in my Lord Coke, 12 Rep. p. 7, 8,
9. and bid him farewell, and not be wiser than the Law.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed for Richard Royston.
ROma Ruit: The Pillars of Rome, broken: wherein all the several Pleas for the
Pope's Authority in England, with all the Material Defenses of them, as they
have been urged by Romanists from the beginning of our Reformation to this day,
are Revised and Answered. By Fr. Fullwood, D. D. Archdeacon of Totnes in Devon.

The New Distemper: Or the Dissenters Usual Pleas for Comprehension,
Toleration, and the Renouncing the Covenant, Considered and Discussed; with
some Reflections upon Mr. Baxter's and Mr. Alsop's late Pamphlets, published in
Answer to the Reverend Dean of S. Paul's Sermon concerning Separation.

The Lively Picture of Lewis du Moulin, drawn by an incomparable Hand. Together
with his Last Words: Being his Retractation of all the Personal Reflections he
had made on the Divines of the Church of England, (in several Books of his)
Signed by himself on the Fifth and the Seventeenth of October, 1680.

Christ's Counsel to his Church: In Two Sermons preached at the two last Fasts.
By S. Patrick, Dean of Peterburgh, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

THE END.

