THE HISTORY OF Waltham-Abby in Essex, Founded by KING HAROLD.

Patria est ubicunque est been
Been vixit, qui been latuit.
By THOMAS FULLER, the CURATE thereof.

SIC OMNI TEMPORE VERNO


LONDON, Printed in the Year, M. DC. LV.

To the Right Honorable, JAMES HAY, EARL of CARLISLE, VISCOUNT Doncaster, BARON
of Sauley and Waltham.
I Have formerly in this History presumed to trouble your Honor, and now
adventure the second time. Indeed this Treatise contains the description of
your large Demesnes, and larger Royalty and Command. Should I therefore present
it to any other, save your self, it would be held as a STRAY indeed, (wandering
out of the right way it should go in) and so, (without any thanks to me) would
fall to your Lordship, as due unto you by the Custom of your Manor.

Your Honors most obliged Servant and Chaplain. THOMAS FULLER.

THE HISTORY OF Waltham-Abby.
PRovidence, by the hand of my worthy friends, The Authors design.
having planted me for the present at Waltham-Abby, I conceive, that in our
general work of Abbeys, I owe some particular description to that place of my
abode. Hoping my endeavors herein may prove exemplary to others (who dwell in
the sight of remarkable Monasteries) to do the like, and rescue the observables
of their habitations, from the teeth of time and oblivion.

Waltham is so called from the Saxon Ham, Waltham why so named.
which is a Town (whence the Diminutive Hamlet) and Weald, or Wealt, that is,
woody (whence the Weald of Kent) it being Anciently overgrown with trees and
timber. Thus Kiriath-jearim, or the City of the woods, in Palestine; Dendros,
an Island in Peloponnesus Sylviacum, an Ancient City in Belgia, got their names
from the like woody situation. Some will have it called Waltham, quasi
Wealthie-Ham: I wish they could make their words good, in respect of the
persons living therein, though in regard of the soil it self, indeed it is rich
and plentiful.

The Town is seated on the East side of the River Ley, which not only The
situation thereof.
parts Hartford-shire from Essex, but also seven times parts from its self,
whose septemfluous stream in coming to the Town, is crossed again with so many
bridges. On the one side, the Town it self has large and fruitful Medows
(whose intrinsic value is much raised by the vicinity of London) the grass
whereof when first gotten an head, is so sweet and lushious to Cattle, that
they diet them at the first entering therein to half an hour a day, lest
otherwise they over-eat themselves, which some Kine yearlie do, and quickly die
for it, notwithstanding all their Keepers care to the contrary. On the other
side a spacious Forest spreads it self, where, fourteen years since, one might
have seen whole Herds of Red and Fallow Deer. But these late licentious years
have been such a Nimrod, such an Hunter, that all at this present are
destroyed, though I could wish this were the worst effect which our woeful Wars
have produced.

The air of the Town is condemned by many, for over-moist and Aguish, Excused
from bad air.
caused by the depressed situation thereof. In confutation of which censure,
we produce the many aged persons in our Town, (above threescore and ten, since
my coming hither, above threescore and ten years of age) so that it seems, we
are sufficiently healthful, if sufficiently thankful for the same. Sure I am,
what is wanting in good air in the Town, is supplied in the Parish, wherein as
many pleasant hills and prospects are, as any place in England does afford.

Tovy, a man of great wealth and authority, as being the Kings Staller, First
Founded by Tovy.
(that is, Standard Bearer) first Founded this Town, for the great delight
which he took in the game, the place having plenty of Deer. He planted only
threescore and six in-dwellers therein.

Athelstan, his son, proved a Prodigal, and quickly spent all his Fathers Falls
back to the Crown.
goods and great estate, so that by some transactions the place returned to the
Crown.

Edward the Confessor, bestowed Waltham, with the Lands thereabouts, Bestowed
on Earl Harold
on Harold his Brother-in-law, who presently built and endowed therein a
Monastery, whereof nothing at this day is extant, save the West end, or body of
the Church.

A structure of Gothish-building, rather large then neat, firm then fair. The
model of the modern Church.
Very dark (the design of those days to raise devotion) save that it was
helped again with artificial lights; and is observed by Artists to stand the
most exactly East and West of any in England. The great pillars thereof are
wreathed with indentings, which vacuities, if formerly filled up with Brass
(as some confidently report) added much to the beauty of the building. But, it
matters not so much their taking away the Brass from the Pillars, had they but
left the Lead on the Roof, which is but meanly Tiled at this day. In a word,
the best commendation of the Church is, that on Lords-dayes generally it is
filled with a great and attentive Congregation.

To the South Side of the Church is joined a Chapel, formerly our Ladies,
Mortality triumphant.
now a School-house, and under it an arched Charnel-house, the fairest that
ever I saw. Here, a pious fancy could make a feast to its self on those dry
bones, with the meditation of mortality: where it is hard, yea, impossible to
discern the Sculls of a rich, from a poor; wise, from a simple; noble, from a
mean person. Thus all counters are alike when put up together in the box, or
bag; though, in casting of account, of far different valuation.

King Harold Dedicated the Monastery to the honor of an Holy Cross, A Dean and
Canons founded at Waltham.
found far Westward, and brought hither (as they write) by miracle; whence the
Town has the addition of Waltham-Holy-Cross; but the Church we find in after
ages also Dedicated to St Laurence. His foundation was for a Dean, and eleven
Secular Black Canons. Let none challenge the words of impropriety, seeing a
Dean, in Latin, Decanus, has his name from (...) ten, over which number he is
properly to be preposed. For, nothing more common, then to wean words from
their infant and original sense, and by custom to extend them to a larger
signification, as Dean afterward plainly denoted a superior over others,
whether fewer then ten, as the six Prebendaries of Rochester; or more, as the
three and thirty of Salisbury. The Dean and eleven Canons were plentifully
provided for, each Canon having a Manor, and the Dean six for his maintenance.

Edward the Confessor, Seventeen Manors confirmed to them by the Confessor.
besides North-land in Waltham (now called, as I take it, North-field)
wherewith the Monastery was first endowed, these following Lordshops, with all
their appurtenances, are reckoned up.

1. Passefield. 2. Walde. 3. Upminster. 4. Walthfare. 5. Suppedene. 6.
Alwertowne. 7. Wodeford. 8. Lambehide. 9. Nesingan. 10. Brickindon. 11.
Melnhoo. 12. Alichsea. 13. Wormeley. 14. Nichelswells. 15. Hitchche. 16.
Lukendon. 17. West-Wealtham.
cum Sacha and Socha, Tol and Team, etc. free from all gelts and payments, in a
most full and ample manner; Witness himself, Edith his Queen, Stigand
Archiepiscopus Dorobornensis, Count Harold, and many other Bishops and Lords
subscribing the same Charter.

Harold usurpeth the Crown, but enjoyed it not a full year, killed Harold
Crowned, killed and buried at Waltham.
in Battle-fight, by King William the Conqueror. Where either of their swords
(if victorious) might have done the deed, though otherwise both their titles
twisted together, could not make half a good claim to the Crown. Githa, Mother
of Harold, and two religious men of this Abbey, Osegod and Ailric, with their
prayers and tears, hardly prevailed with the Conqueror (at first denying him
burial, whose ambition had caused the death of so many) to have Harolds Corpse
(with his two Brethren, Girth and Leofwin, losing their lives in the same
battle) to be entombed in Waltham Church, of his foundation. He was buried,
where now the Earl of Carlisle his leaden Fountain in his Garden, then probably
the end of the Quire, or rather some Eastern Chapel beyond it. His Tomb of
plain, but rich gray Marble, with what seems a Cross-Floree (but much
descanted on with art) upon the same, supported with Pillarets, one Pedestal,
whereof I have in my house. As for his reported Epitaph, I purposely omit it,
not so much because barbarous (scarce any better in that Age) but because not
attested, to my apprehension, with sufficient Authority.

A Picture of King Harold in glass was lately to be seen in the North-window
Deforming Reformers.
of the Church, till ten years since some barbarous hand beat it down under the
notion of Superstition. Surely had such ignorant persons been employed in the
days of Hezekiah, to purge the Temple from the former Idolatry; under the
pretense thereof, they would have rended off, the Lilie-work from the Pillars;
and the Lions, Oxen, and Cherubims from the Bases of Brass. However, there is
still a place called Harolds-Park in our Parish, by him so denominated. Let not
therefore the village of Harold on the North side of Ouse near Bedford
(properly Harewood, or Harelswood, on vulgar groundless tradition) contest with
Waltham for this Kings interment.

The Re-foundation of WALTHAM-ABBY by HENRY the Second.
ONe will easily believe, that at the death of King Harold, Waltham-Abby,
Waltham Canons in a sad condition.
Founded by him, was in a swoon, and the Canons therein much disheartened.
However, they had one help, which was this; that, Edward the Confessor was the
confirmer of their Foundation, whose memory was not only fresh and fair in all
men's minds (bearing a veneration to his supposed sanctity) but also King
William the Conqueror, had the best of his bad titles by bequest of the Crown
from this Confessor. So that in some sense Waltham-Abby might humbly crave
kindred of King William, both deriving their best being from one and the same
person. The industry of Rob. Fuller last Abbot of Waltham.


Know Reader, that what ever hereafter I alledg touching the Lands and
Liberties of Waltham (if not otherwise attested by some Author in the margin)
is by me faithfully transcribed out of Waltham Leidger-Book, now in the
possession of the Right Honorable, JAMES Earl of Carlisle. This Book was
collected by Robert Fuller, the last Abbot of Waltham; who, though he could not
keep his Abbey from dissolution, did preserve the Antiquities thereof from
oblivion. The Book (as appears by many inscriptions in the initial
Text-letters) was made by himself, having as happy an hand in fair and fast
writing, as some of his Surname since have been defective therein.

Not long after the Conquest, Waltham-Abby found good Benefactors, and Queen
Maud gives Waltham Monks a Mill.
considerable additions to their maintenance. For, Maud, the first Queen to
King Henry the first, bestowed on them the Mill at Waltham, which she had by
exchange for Trinity-Church in London, which I take to be part of the
Trintly-Priory, now called the Dukes-place.

Adelisia, second wife to King Henry the first, being possessed of Waltham as
part of her Revenue, gave all the Tithes thereof, as well of her Demesnes,
Queen Adelisia the Tithes
as all Tenants therein, to the Canons of Waltham: Mean time how poorly was the
Priest of the place provided for? Yea, a glutton Monastery in former ages,
makes an hungry Ministry in our days. An Abbey and a Parsonage unimpropriate
in the same place, are as inconsistent together, as good woods and an Iron
Mill. Had not Waltham Church lately met with a Noble Founder, the Minister
thereof must have kept more fasting-dayes, then ever were put in the Roman
Calender.

Stephen, though he came a wrong way to the Crown, yet did all King Steven his
bounty.
right to the Monastery of Waltham (as who generally sought the good will of
the Clergy to strengthen himself) and confirmed all their Lands, profits, and
privileges unto them.

Henry the second utterly dissolved the foundation of Dean and eleven King
Henry dissolves the Dean and Canons at Waltham
Canons at Waltham. The debauchedness of their lives is rendered in his Charter
as the occasion thereof, Cum in ea Canonici Clericique minus religiose and
aequaliter vixissent, ita quod infamia conversationis illorum multos
scandalisasset. Whether these were really, or only reputed vicious, God knows,
seeing all those must be guilty whom power is pleased to pronounce so. Sure it
is, King Henry outed this Dean and Canons, and placed an Abbot and Regular
Augustinians in their room, increasing their number to twenty four. And because
(to use the Kings own words) it was fit that Christ his Spouse should have a
new dowry, he not only confirmed to this Monastery the primitive patrimony,
mentioned in the Confessors Charter, cum peciis terrae, With many pieces of
land, and tenements, which their Benefactors since bestowed upon them; but also
conferred the rich Manors of Sewardstone, and Eppings on this Monastery.

The whole Charter of King Henry is too long to transcribe, but some passages
Augustinians substituted in their room.
therein must not be omitted. First, the King had the consent of Pope
Alexander, for the suppression of these Canons; the rather moved thereunto,
quia praedictis Canonicis sufficienter provisum fuit, because the aforesaid
expelled Canons had sufficient provision made for them. For, grant them never
so scandalous, this was to add scandal to scandal, to thrust them out of house
and home, without any means or maintenance. Secondly, this Charter presents us
with the ancient liberties of Waltham-Church, that, Semper fuit Regalis Capella
ex primitiva sui fundatione, nulli Archiepiscopo vel Episcopo, sed tantum
Ecclesiae Romanae and Regiae dispositioni subjecta. And, though since
Reformation, the Church has been subjected to the Archbishops jurisdiction
(as succeeding to the Royal power) and sometimes (with grumbling and
reluctance) to the Episcopal power, yet it never as yet owned an Archdeacon,
or appeared at his Visitation.

The metioning of the consent of Pope Alexander to the suppression of Rome-land
in Waltham.
Waltham Dean and Canons, and substituting Augustinians in their room, minds
me of a spacious place in this Town, at the entrance of the Abbey, built about
with houses, called Rome-land, as (Peter Pence were termed Rome-scot) at this
day. It is generally believed, that the rents thereof peculiarly belonged to
the Church of Rome. Thus the Pope would not be so bad a carver, as to cut all
away to others, and reserve no corner to himself.

Richard the first (though generally not too loving to the Clergy) Fitz-Aucher
settled at Copt-Hall.
amply confirmed his Fathers Foundation, and gave Lands to Richard Fitz-Aucher
in this Parish, to hold them in Fee, and hereditarily of the Church of
Waltham-Holy-Cross. This Fitz-Aucher fixed himself at Copt-Hall, a stately
house in the Parish. Whether so called contractedly, quasi Cobbing-Hall, from
Cobbing, Turrets of that house, which are coped and covered with Lead: or from
(in my mind most probable) an high and sharp Hill (thus Copeland so called in
Cumberland) whereon the house is founded.

In or about this Kings Reign, Hugh Nevil, with the consent of Jone his Hugh
Nevil a bountiful benefactor.
wife, and John his son, bestowed the Manor of Thorndon on the Monastery of
Waltham, of whom largely before.

King Henry the third, to spare Court-keeping, came often and lay long at
Abbeys; so that Waltham (the nearest mitred Abbey to London) had much of his
company. Being a Religious Prince, great were his desires, but withal
necessitous, small his deeds in endowing Churches. However, what he wanted in
giving himself, he supplied in confirming the gifts of others. And finding it
the cheapest way of benefaction, to give liberties then lands, he bestowed on
Waltham a weekly Market and a Fair (so called a feriando, from peoples playing
there) to last seven days; which now is divided into two, but of shorter
continuance, the one on the third day of May, the Invention, the other on the
fourteenth of September, the Exaltation of the Cross.

We now have a Market on Tuesday, but cannot boast of much trading Waltham
Market.
therein. Indeed there is plenty of Flesh, but little Corn brought thither: and
Bread is the staff, as of a man, so of a Market. Nor let us impute the thinness
of Chapmen in Summer to Husbandmens having no leisure, as busied in tillage,
Hay, or harvest: or in Winter to their having no pleasure to repair thither in
so deep and dirty ways, seeing the plain truth is, no underwood can thrive
near the droppings of so great an Oak, the vicinity of London. The golden
Market in Leaden Hall, makes leaden Markets in all the Towns thereabouts.

Simon was made Abbot (which by exactest proportion Broils betwixt the Abbot
and the Townsmen about Commons.
we collect to be about the thirtieth year of King Henry the third) the M. S.
of Edward Stacy, written (as appears by character) 140 years since, fol. 42.
men of Waltham came into the Marsh, which the Abbot and his Covent formerly
enjoyed, as several to themselves, killed four Mares, worth forty shillings
sterling at least, and drove away all the rest. The Abbot was politickly
pleased, for the present not to take notice thereof. The next year some men of
Waltham went to the Abbot, the Thursday before Easter, in the name of the whole
Village, and demanded of him to remove his Mares and Colts out of the Marsh.
This the Abbot refused to do, adding withal, that if his Bailiffs had placed
his Cattle otherwhere then they ought, they might do well to have it amended,
yet so, as to defer the matter till Tuesday after Easter.

Tuesday, Richard, Brother to the King, Duke of Cornwall, came The sturdiness
of the Townsmen.
to Waltham, at what time both the men and women of the Town repaired to the
gate of the Abbey, to receive the Abbots final answer. He told them that he
could not speak with them for the present, as providing himself for a long
journey into Lincolnshire, there to visit the Justices itinerant; but by his
Prior and other Canons, he desired them to be patient till his return, when he
would mend what was to be mended. Not satisfied therewith, and neither
respecting the spiritual holiness of the Abbot, nor Temporal greatness of the
Duke, railed at and reviled him. Then into the pasture they go, and, in driving
out the Abbots Mares and Colts, drowned three worth twenty shillings, spoiled
ten more, to the value of ten marks, and beat their keepers who resisted them,
even to the shedding of blood.

But, after the Abbot returned from Lincolnshire, the Townsmen, fearing The
most guilty first accuse.
they should be trounced for their riot, desired a Love-day, submitted
themselves unto him, and proffered to pay him damage. But next day, when the
performance of these promises were expected, away went the Waltham-men, with
their wives and children, to the King to London, inraging him as much as in
them lay, against the Abbot, accusing him that he would disinherit them of
their right, Pastures, and (to use their own words) eat them up to the bones;
and that he had wounded and abused some of them, who stood defending their own
rights. Which false report was believed of many, to the great disgrace of the
Covent of Waltham.

The Abbot would not put up so great a wrong, but, having Episcopal The Abbot
comes off conqueror.
power in himself, proceeded to the Excommunication of the Rebellious
Walthamites. But the Townsmen went another way to work, namely, to defend their
right by the Common Laws of the Realm. Whereupon Stephen Fitz-Bennet, Simon of
the Wood, William Theyden, and Ralph of the Bridge, in the name of all the
rest, implead the Abbot for appropriating their Commons to himself. But in fine
(after many cross pleadings here too long to relate) the Abbot so acquitted
himself, that he made both his own right and the Townsmens riot to appear: who
at last at the King's Bench were glad to confess that they had done evil, and
were amerced twenty Marks to the Abbot, which he not only remitted unto them,
but also on their submission assoiled them from the Excommunication.

Abbot and Townsmen of Waltham were no sooner The suit betwixt the Abbot of
Waltham and the Lord of Chesthunt.
ended, but far fiercer began betwixt the said Abbot and the Lord of Chesthunt,
on the like occasion. This Chesthunt is a large Parish in Hertford-shire,
confining on the West of Waltham, so called says In his short Survey of
Hertford-shire.
Norden, quasi Castanetum, of Chestnut-trees, though now, I believe, one hardly
appears in the whole Lordship. In this suit,

Plaintiff. Peter, Duke of Savoy, the Kings dear Uncle, (first founder, I take
it, of the Savoy in London) on whom the King conferred many Lordships, and
Chesthunt amongst the rest. Judges. Ralph Fitz-Nicolas, John of Lexington,
Paulin Peyner Seneschal, Henry of Bath, Jeremy of Caxton, Henry de Bretton.
Defendant. Simon, the Abbot, and the Covent of Waltham. Solicitor. Adam de
Alverton.


The Case.

The Plaintiff endeavored to prove, that the stream of Ley, (called the
Kings-Stream) dividing Hertford-shire from Essex, ran through the Town of
Waltham, all the land West thereof belonging to the Manor of Chesthunt. This
was denied by the Defendant, maintaining that Small-Ley-stream, running welnigh
half a mile West of Waltham, parted the Counties, all the interjacent meadows
pertained to Waltham.

Perusing the names of these the Kings Justices at Westminster, who would A
like not the same.
not suspect, but that this Henry of Bath was Bishop of that See? considering
how many Clergymen in that age, were employed in places of Judicature. But the
suspicion is causless, finding none of that name in the Episcopal Catalogue.
Others in like manner may apprehend, that Bretton, here mentioned, was that
Learned Lawyer (afterward Bishop of Hereford) who wrote the Sea Godwin in his
Bishops of Hereford.
Book De Juribus Anglicanis, and who flourished in the latter end of the Reign
of this King Henry the third. But his name being John, not Henry, discovers
him a different person.

Not long after, this suit was finally determined, and Peter Duke of Savoy
remised and quit-claimed from him and his Heirs, to the said Abbot and his
Successors, the right and claim he had to ask in the same Meadows and Marshes
of the said Abbot. This is called in the Instrument sinalis concordia, though
it proved neither final, nor a concord. For, soon after this pallia^cure broke
out again, and the matter was in variance and undetermined betwixt Robert, the
last Abbot, and the Lord of Chesthunt, when the Abbey was dissolved.

Many accessions (besides those common prolongers of all suits, namely the heat
of men's anger, and the bellows of instruments, gaining by Law) did concur to
lengthen this cause.

1. The considerableness and concernment of the thing controverted, being a
large and rich portion of ground. 2. The difficulty of the cause, about the
channels of that River, which, Proteus-like, in several Ages has appeared in
sundry forms, disguised by derivations on different occasions. 3. The
greatness of the Clients; Chesthunt Lordship being always in the hand of some
potent person, and the Corporation of Waltham Covent able to wage Law with him.
Hence has this suit been as long-lived as any in England, (not excepting that
in Cambden in Gloucestershire.
Gloucestershire, betwixt the posterity of Vice-Count Lisle, and the Lord
Barkley;) seeing very lately (if not at this day) there were some suits about
our bounds; Waltham Meadows being very rich in grass and hay, but too fruitful
in contentions.

For mine own part, that wound which I cannot heal, I will not widen: and,
seeing I may say with the Poet,

Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites.
No power of mine so far extends,
As for to make both parties friends.
I will not turn, of an unpartial Historian, an engaged person, who as a
neighbor wish well to Chesthunt, as a Parishioner better to Waltham; as a
Christian, best to both. And therefore so much for matter of fact, in our
Records and Leiger-books, leaving all matters of right for others to decide.

Mean time, whilst the Abbot and Monks of Waltham, were vexed with the men of
Chesthunt, they found more favor (if public fame belies them not) from some
loving women in that Parish, I mean the Holy Sisters in Chesthunt-Nunnery,
whose House (when ever Founded) I find some ten years since thus confirmed by
Royal Authority.

Henricus Rex Anglie, Dominus Hybernie, Dux Normanie, Aquitanie, Chesthunt
Nunnery Founded.
and Comes Andegavie etc. Shestrehunt Moniales totam terram Dom. teneant cum
pertinentiis suisque Canonicis de Cathele etc. quos amoveri fecimus. Datum apud
West. xj. Aug. Anno Regni nostri xxiiij. But this subject begins to swell
beyond the bounds intended unto it, lest therefore what we intended but a Tract
should swell to a Tome, we will here descend to matters of later date.

Only be it premised, that some years before the Dissolution, Robert the
Copt-Hall past to King Hen. 8.
last Abbot of Waltham, passed over the fair seat of Copt-Hall, unto King Henry
the eighth. Thus as the Castor, when pursued by the Hunter, to make his escape
is reported to bite off his own stones, (as the main treasure sought after) and
so saves his life by losing a limb: So this Abbot politickly parted with that
stately Mansion, in hope thereby to preserve the rest of his revenues. However
all would not do, (so impossible it is to save, what is designed to ruin) and
few years after, the Abbey, with the large Lands thereof, were seized on by the
King, and for some Months, He alone stood possessed thereof.

The Extraction, Charter, Death and Issue of Sir Anthony Dennie, on whom King
Henry the Eighth bestowed WALTHAM-ABBY.
AT the Dissolution, King Henry bestowed the Site of this Abbey, with A Lease of
Waltham-Abby given to Sir Anthony Denny.
many large and rich Lands belonging thereunto, on Sr Anthony Dennie, for the
term of Thirty one years. Let us a little enquire into his extraction and
descent.

I find the name very Ancient at Speed, or rather Sr Rob. Cotton in
Huntingdon-shire.
Chesterton in Huntington-shire, where John Denny the great sould^er in France.
the Heir-general was long since married, to the worshipful and Ancient Family
of the Bevils. It seems, a branch of the Male-line afterward fixed in
Hertford-shire; Whereof John Denny, Esquire, valiantly served Henry the fifth
in France, where he was slain, and buried with Thomas, his second Son, in St
Dionys his Chapel; their interment in so noble a place speaking their worthy
performances. In the Reign of Queen Mary, a Friar showed their Tombs to Sr
Matthew Carew, together with their Coats and differences. Henry, eldest son of
this John Denny, begat William Denny of Chesthunt in Hertford-shire, which
William was High Sheriff of the County in the year 1480. leaving Edmond Denny
to inherit his estate.

Edmond Denny was one of the Barons of the Exchequer, in credit and favor Edm.
Denny Baron of the Exchequer.
with King Edward the Fourth, and Henry the Seventh. He Married Mary, the
Daughter and Heir of Robert Troutbeck Esquire, on whom he begat Thomas Denny,
from whom the Dennies in Norfolk are descended.

Anthony Denny, second Son to Baron Denny, was Knighted by King Henry Anthony
Denny his high commendations.
the Eighth, made Gentleman of his Bedchamber, Privy-Councellour, and one of
his Executors. I cannot say he was bred any great Scholar, but find him a
Mecaenas, and grand favourer of Learned men. For, when the School of Ascham,
Commend. Epist. fol. 210. Idem. fol. 208.
Sedbury in the North, belonging to St John's in Cambridg, was run to ruin, the
Lands thereof being sold and embezeled, Sr Anthony procured the reparation of
the School, and restitution of their means, firmly settling them to prevent
future alienation. Hear what character c Mr Ascham gives of him; Religio,
Doctrina, Respublica, omnes curas tuas sic occupant, ut extra has tres res
nullum tempus consumas; Religion, Learning, Commonwealth, so employ all thy
cares, that besides these three things you spend no other time. Let then the
enemies (if any) of his memory abate of this character to what proportion they
please (pretending it but the Orators Rhetorical Hyperbole) the very remainder
thereof, which their malice must leave, will be sufficient to speak Sr Anthony
a worthy and meriting Gentleman.

I find an excellent Epitaph made on him by one the Learned of Noblemen,
His Epitaph made by the Lord Howard.
and Noblest of Learned men in his age, viz. Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, and
eldest son to the Duke of Norfolk, worthy the Reader his perusal.

Upon the Death of Sir Anthony Weavers Funeral Monuments, p. 852.
Denny.
Death, and the King, did, as it were, contend,
Which of them two bare Denny greatest love:
The King, to show his love 'gan far extend,
Did him advance his betters far above.
Near place, much wealth, great honor eke him gave,
To make it known what power Princes have.
But when Death came with his triumphant gift,
From worldly cark he quit his wearied ghost
Free from the corpse, and straight to Heaven it lift.
Now deem that can, who did for Denny most.
The King gave wealth, but fading and unsure:
Death brought him bliss that ever shall endure.
Know Reader, that this Lord made this Epitaph by a Poetical Prolepsis;
otherwise, at the reading thereof who would not conceive, that the Author
survived the subject of his Poem? Whereas indeed this Lord died (beheaded
1546.) in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, whom Sr Anthony outlived, being
one of the Executors of his Will. Nor was it the worst piece of service he
performed to his Master, when (all other Courtiers declining the employment) he
truly acquainted him with his dying-condition, to dispose of his soul for
another world.

Sr Anthony died about the second of Edward the sixth, Dame Joan his His issue
by Dame Joan his wife.
Wife, surviving him. Daughter she was to Sr Philip Champernoon of Modbury in
Devon-shire: a Lady of great beauty and parts, a favourer of the Reformed
Religion when the times were most dangerous. She sent eight shillings by her
man, in a Violet coat, to Anne Fox, Acts and Monuments, fol. 1239.
Aschough when imprisoned in the Counter; a small sum, yet a great gift, so
hazardous it was to help any in her condition. This Lady Joan bought the
Reversion in Fee of Waltham, from King Edward the Sixth, paying three thousand
and hundred pounds for the same, purchasing therewith large privileges in
Waltham-Forest, as by the Letters Patents does appear. She bare two Sons to Sr
Anthony, Henry Denny, Esquire, of whom hereafter: the second Sr Edward, who, by
Gods blessing, Queen Elizabeth's bounty, and his own valor, achieved a fair
estate in the County of Kerry in Ireland, which at this day is (if any thing in
that woeful war-wasted Country can be) enjoyed by his great Grandchild, Arthur
Denny Esquire; of Tralleigh.

The condition of Waltham Church from the Dissolution of the Abbey, until the
Death of King HENRY the Eighth.
HAving the perusal of the Churchwardens accounts, wherein their Ancient
expenses and receipts are exactly taken, fairly written, and carefully kept, I
shall select thence some memorable Items, to acquaint us with the general
devotion of those days.

Know then, there were six Ordinary Obits which the Churchwardens did annually
discharge, viz.

For Thomas Smith, and Joan his wife, on the sixteenth of January. Thomas
Friend, Joan and Joan his wives, on the sixteenth of February. Robert Peest and
Joan his wife, on the tenth of April. Thomas Towers and Katharine his wife, the
six and twentieth of April. John Breges and Agnes his wife, the one and
thirtieth of May. Thomas Turner and Christian his wife, the twentieth day of
December.

The charge of an Obit was two shillings and two pence; and, if any be curious
to have the particulars thereof, it was thus expended. To the Parish Priest
four pence; to our Ladies-Priest three pence; to the Charnel-Priest three
pence; to the two Clerks four pence; to the Children (these I conceive
Choris^ers) three pence; to the Sexton two pence; to the Bell-man two pence;
for two Tapers two pence; for Oblation two pence. Oh the reasonable rates at
Waltham! two shillings two pence for an Obit, the price whereof in Saint Paul's
in London was forty shillings. For (forsooth) the higher the Church, the
holier the service, the dearer the price, though he had given too much that had
given but thanks for such vanities.

To defray the expenses of these Obits, the parties prayed for, or their
Executors, left Lands, Houses or Stock, to the Churchwardens. Thomas Smith
bequeathed a Tenement in the Corn-Market, and others gave Lands in Vpshire,
called Pater-noster-Hills; others ground elsewhere, besides a stock of eighteen
Cows, which the Wardens let out yearly to farm for eighteen shillings, making
up their yearly accounts at the Feast of Michael the Archangel, out of which
we have excerpted the following remarkable particulars.

Anno 1542. the 34th of HENRY the 8th.
Imprimjs. For watching the Sepulcher, a groat.] This constantly returns in
every yearly account, though what meant thereby, I know not. I could suspect
some Ceremony on Easter-eve, (in imitation of the Soldiers watching Christ's
grave) but am loath to charge that Age with more superstition then it was
clearly guilty of.

Item, Paid to the Ringers at the coming of the Kings Grace, six pence.] Yet
Waltham Bells told no tales every time King Henry came hither, having a small
house in Rome-land to which he is said often privately to retire, for his
pleasure.

Item, Paid unto two men of Law for their counsel about the Churchleases, six
shillings eight pence.

Item, Paid the Attorney for his Fee, twenty pence.

Item, Paid for Ringing at the Prince his coming, a penny.

Anno 1543. the 35th of HENRY the 8th.
Imprimis, Received of the Executors of Sr Robert Fuller, given by the said Sr
Robert to the Church, ten pounds.

How is this man degraded from the Right Honorable the Lord Abbot of Waltham
(the last in that place) to become a poor Sr Robert, the title of the meanest
Priest in that age. Yet such his charity in his poverty, that, besides this
legacy, he bequeathed to the Church a Chalice The Churchwardens account, Anno
1556.
silver and gilt, which they afterward sold for seven pounds.

Anno 1544. the 36. of HENRY the 8th.
Imprimis, Received of Adam Tanner the overplus of the money which was gathered
for the purchase of the Bells, two pound four shillings and eleven pence.] It
seems the Kings Officers sold, and the Parish then purchased the five Bells
being great and tunable (who, as they gave bountifully, so I presume they
bought reasonably) and the surplusage of the money was delivered.

Item, Received of Richard Tanner for eight Stoles, three shillings.] A Stole
was a vestment which the Priest used. Surely these were much worn, and very
rags of Popery, as sold for four pence half penny a piece. It seems the
Churchwardens were not so charitable to give away, nor so superstitious to
burn, but so thrifty as to make profit by sale of these decayed vestments.

Item, Paid for mending the hand-bell, two pence.] This was not fixed as the
rest in any place of Church or Steeple, but (being a Diminutive of the
Saints-bell) was carried in the Sextons hands at the circumgestation of the
Sacrament, the visitation of the sick, and such like occasions.

Item, Paid to Philip Wright, Carpenter, for making a frame in the Bellfrey,
eighteen shillings four pence.] The Bells being bought by the Parishioners, were
taken down out of the decayed Steeple, and we shall afterward see what became
thereof. Mean time a timber-frame was made (which the aged of the last
generation easily remembered) in the South-East end of the Churchyard, where
now two Yew-trees stand, and a shift made for some years to hang the Bells
thereon.

Anno 1546. the 38. of HENRY the 8th.
Item, For clasps to hold up the Banners in the body of the Church, eight
pence.] By these, I understand, not Pennons with Arms hanging over the Graves
of interred Gentlemen, but rather some superstitious Sireamers, usually carried
about in Procession.

Item, Paid to John Boston for mending the Organs, twenty pence.

The state of Waltham Church during the Reign of King EDWARD the Sixth.
OLd things are passed away, behold all things now are become new. Superstition
by degrees being banished out of the Church, we hear no more of prayers and
Masses for the dead. Every Obit now had its own Obit, and fully expired, the
Lands formerly given thereunto being employed to more charitable uses. But let
us select some particulars of the Churchwardens accounts in this Kings days.

Anno 1549. the 3d. of EDWARD the Sixth.
Imprimis, Sold the Silver plate which was on the desk in the Charnel, weighing
five ounces for twenty five shillings.] Guess the gallantry of our Church by
this (presuming all the rest in proportionable equipage) when the desk, whereon
the Priest read, was inlaid with plate of silver.

Item, Sold a rod of iron which the curtain run upon before the Rood, nine
pence.] The Rood was an Image of Christ on the Cross, made generally of wood,
and erected in a loft for that purpose, just over the passage out of the Church
into the Chancel. And, wot you what spiritual mystery was couched in this
position thereof? The Church (forsooth) typified the Church Militant, the
Chancel represents the Church Triumphant; and all, who will pass out of the
former into the latter, must go under the Rood-loft; that is, carry the cross
and be acquainted with affliction. I add this the rather, because Fox Acts and
Mon, in the examination of Tho. Hawks, page 1590.
Harpsfield, that great Scholar (who might be presumed knowing in his own art
of Superstition) confesses himself ignorant of the reason of the
Rood-scituation.

Item, Sold so much Wax as amounted to twenty six shillings.] So thrifty the
Wardens, that they bought not candles and tapers ready made, but bought the wax
at the best hand, and paid poor people for the making of them. Now they sold
their Magazine of wax as useless. Under the Reformation more light and fewer
candles.

Item, Paid for half of the Book called Paraphrase, five shillings.] By the
seventh Injunction of King Edward, each Parish was to procure the Paraphrase of
Erasmus, namely, the first part thereof on the Gospels, and the same to be set
up in some convenient place in the Church.

Item, Spent in the Visitation at Chelmsford amongst the Wardens and other
honest men, fourteen shillings four pence.] A round sum I assure you in those
days. This was the first Visitation (kept by Nicholas Ridley newly Bishop of
London) whereat Waltham-Wardens ever appeared out of their own Town, whose
Abbot formerly had Episcopal Jurisdiction.

Anno 1551 the 5th of EDWARD the 6th.
Imprimis, Received for a Knell of a servant to the Lady Mary her Grace, ten
pence.] Copt-Hall in this Parish being then in the Crown, the Lady (afterward
Queen) Mary, came thither sometimes to take the air probably, during whose
residence there this her servant died.

Item, Lost forty six shillings by reason of the fall of money by
Proclamation.] King Henry much debased the English Coin, to his own gain and
the Lands loss (if Sovereigns may be said to get by the damage of their
Subjects) yet all would not do to pay his debts. His Son Edward endeavored to
reduce the Coin to its true standard, decrying bad money by his Proclamation,
to the intrinsic value thereof. But, prevented by death, he effected not this
difficult design (Adultery in Men, and Adulterateness in Money, both hardly
reclaimed) which was afterward completed by the care of Queen Elizabeth.

Item, Received for two hundred seventy one ounces of Plate, sold at several
times for the best advantage, sixty seven pound fourteen shillings and nine
pence.] Now was the Brotherhood in the Church dissolved, consisting as formerly
of three Priests, three Choristers, and two Sextons; and the rich plate
belonging to them was sold for the good of the Parish. It may seem strange the
Kings Commissioners deputed for that purpose, seized not on it, from whose
hands Waltham found some favor (befriended by the Lord Rich their
Countryman) the rather because of their intentions to build their decayed
Steeple.

Church-alterations in the Reign of Queen MARY.
NEw Lady new Laws. Now strange the Metamorphosis in Waltham. Condemn not this
our Como-graphie, or description of a Country-Town, as too low and narrow a
subject, seeing in some sort the History of Waltham-Church is the
Church History of England, all Parishes in that age being infected alike with
superstition. Nor intend I hereby to renew the memory of Idolatry, but to
revive our gratitude to God for the abolishing thereof, whose numerous trinkets
here ensue.

Anno 1554. Mariae primo.
Imprimis, For a Cross with a foot copper and gilt, twenty five shillings.

Item, For a Cross-staff copper and gilt, nine shillings and four pence.

Item, For a Pax copper and gilt, five shillings.] Greet one another, says St
1 Cor 16. 20
Paul, with an holy kiss, on which words of the Apostle the Pax had its
original. This Ceremony performed in the Primitive times, and Eastern
Countries, was afterward (to prevent wantonness, and to make the more
expedition) commuted into a new custom, viz. A piece of wood, or metal (with
Christ's picture thereon) was made, and solemnly tendered to all people to kiss.
This was called the Pax, or Peace, to show the unity and amity of all there
assembled, who (though not immediately) by the Proxy of the Pax kissed one
another.

Item, For a pair of Censers copper and gilt, nine shillings and eight pence.]
These were pots in the which frankincense was burned, perfuming the Church
during Divine Service.

Item, For a Stock of brass for the Holy Water, seven shillings.] Which by the
Canon must be of marble, or metal, and in no case of brick, Durantus de
Ritibus Eccles. number. 6. page 173.
lest the sacred liquor be sucked up by the spunginess thereof.

Item, For a Chrismatory of pewter, three shillings four pence.] This was a
vessel in which the consecrated oil, used in Baptism, Confirmation, and
Extreme Unction, was deposited.

Item, For a yard of silver Sarcenet for a cloth for the Sacrament, seven
shillings eight pence.] Here some Silkeman or Mercer must satisfy us what this
was. The price seems too low for Sarcenet inwoven with silver, and too high for
plain Sarcenet of a silver color.

Item, For a Pix of Pewter, two shillings.] This was a Box wherein the Host, or
consecrated wafer, was put and preserved.

Item, For Mary and John that stand in the Rood-loft, twenty six shillings
eight pence.] Christ John 19. 26* etc.
on the Cross saw his Mother, and the Disciple whom he loved standing by. In
apish imitation whereof the Rood (when perfectly made with all the
appurtenances thereof) was attended with these two images.

Item, For washing eleven Aubes and as many Head-clothes, six pence.] An Aube,
or Albe, was a Priests garment of white linen down to their feet, girded about
his middle. The thin matter denoted simplicity; color, purity; length, (deep
Duranius de Ritibus Eccles number. 9. page 316.
Divinity) perseverance: and the cincture thereof signified the person wearing
it prompt and prepared for Gods service. Their head-clothes were like our
Sergeants Coifes, but close, and not turned up.

Item, For watching the Sepulcher, eight pence.] Thus the price of that service
(but a groat in King Henry's days) was doubled. However, though Popery was
restored to its kind, yet was it not re-estated in its former degree, in the
short Reign of Queen Mary, for we find no mention of the former six Obits
anniversarily performed, the lands for whose maintenance were alienated in the
Reign of King Edward, and the Vicar of the Parish not so charitable as to
celebrate these Obits gratis without any reward for the same.

Item, For a Processioner, and a Manual, twenty pence.

Item, For a Corporas-cloth, twelve pence.] This was a linen cloth laid over or
under the consecrated Host.

Item, To the Apparitor for the Bishops Book of Articles at the Visit^^ion, six
pence.] This Bishop was bloody Bonner, that corpulent Tyrant, full (as one
said) of guts and empty of bowels; who visited his Diccess before it was sick,
and made it sick with his Visitation. His Articles were in number thirty seven,
and John Fox Acts and Mon. page 1474.
Bale wrote a book against them. The Bishops chief care herein was the setting
up of complete Roods, commonly called (but when without his ear-reach) Bonners
Block-almightie. If any refused to provide such blocks for him, let them expect
he would procure fagots for them.

Anno 1556. Mariae tertio.
Imprimis, For coals to undermine a piece of the Steeple which stood after the
first fall, two shillings.] This Steeple formerly stood in the middle (now East
end) of the Church; and, being ruined past possibility of repair, fell down of
it self, only a remaining part was blown up by underminers. How quickly can a
few destroy what required the age and industry of many in long time to raise
and advance?

It sounds not a little to the praise of this Parish, that neither
burdensome nor beholding to the Vicinage for a collection, they rebuilt the
Steeple at the West end of the Church, on their own proper cost, enabled
thereunto, partly by their stock in the Church-box, arising from the sale (as
is aforesaid) of the goods of the Brotherhood, and partly by the voluntary
contribution of the Parishioners. This Tower-Steeple is eighty six foot high
from the foundation to the battlements, each The thirty three foot on the top
(difficulty and danger of climbing made it the dearer) cost forty shillings a
foot, as appears by the Churchwardens accounts, Anno 1563.
foot whereof (besides the materials preprovided) costing thirty three
shillings four pence the building. Three years passed from the founding to the
finishing thereof (every years work discernable by the discolouration of the
stones) and the Parish was forced, for the perfecting of the building, to sell
their Bells, hanging before in a wooden frame in the Churchyard; so that
Waltham, which formerly had Steeple-less-Bells, now had for some years a
Bell-less-Steeple.

The condition of the Church from the beginning of Queen ELIZABETH, to this day.
IN eleven full years, viz. from the last of King Henry the Eighth, Anno 1547.
till the first of Queen Elizabeth, 1558. this Church found four changes in
Religion; Papist, and Protestant; Papist, and Protestant again. The last turn
will appear by the Wardens following accounts.

Anno 1558. Elizabethae's primo.
Imprimis, For the taking down of the Rood-loft, three shillings two pence.] If
then, there living and able, I hope I should have lent an helping hand to so
good a work, as now I bestow my prayers, that the like may never in England be
set up again.

Item, Received for a suite of Vestments, being of blew velvet, and another
suite of Damask, and an Altar-cloth, four pound.

Item, For three Corporasses, whereof two white silk, and one blew velvet, two
pound thirteen shillings four pence.

Item, For two suits of Vestments, and an Altar-cloth, three pound.] Now was
the superstitious Wardrobe dispersed, and that (no doubt) sold for shillings
which cost pounds. They were beheld as the garments spotted with sin, and
therefore the less pity to part with them. But see what follows.

Anno 1562. Elizabethae quinto.
Item, For a cloth of Buckeram for the Communion Table, and the making, four
shillings.] Having sold so much could they not afford a better Carpet? Is there
no mean betwixt painting a face, and not washing it? He must have a fixed aim
and strong hand, who hits decency, and misseth gaudiness and sluttery, But
there is a generation of people who over-do in the spirit of opposition: such
conceive that a tressel is good enough for Gods Table, and such a Table,
Covering enough for it self.

Item, For Lattices for the Church-windows, fifteen shillings.] Fain would I
for the credit of our Church by Lattices understand Casements, if the word
would bear it. Yet surely it was not for covetousness wholly to spare glazing,
but thrift to preserve the glass, that these Lattices did fence them on the
outside.

Item, Paid for a Bay Nagge given to Mr Henry Denny for the Abbey wall, three
pound seventeen shillings.] This Nagge was rather a thankful acknowledgment of
Mr. Denny his propriety, then a just valuation of what the Parish received from
him, for it follows.

Item, To Laborers which did undermine the said wall, forty five shillings
nine pence.] What then may the materials of that wall be presumed worth in
themselves? I conceive this was a building which ranged East beyond the old
Steeple, the demolishing whereof brought much profit to the Parish, whose
Wardens for some years drove a great trade in the sale of Lead, Stone, and
Timber, all devoured in the roofing, flooring, and finishing of their Steeple.

Anno 1563. Eliz. 6to.
Imprimis, For an old house in the old Marketplace, thirteen pound six
shillings eight pence.] This Tenement low-rented yielded annually nine
shillings. Now the Parish sold it, (and another house in West-street) outright,
letting Leases also of their other Church Lands for twenty one years, such
bargains made a Feast for the present age, and a Famine for posterity.

Item, For the old timber in the little Vestiary of St Georges Chapel, fifteen
shillings.] In vain have I enquired for the situation hereof, long since
demolished, and no wonder if St George his Chapel cannot be found, when St
George himself is affirmed by Ph^^^ppus Melancthon in Apologia Articulo 21.
confessionis Augustana.
some as one never existent, in rerum natura.

Item, Received of Mr Denny for one Cope of Cloth of gold, three pound six
shillings eight pence.

Item, For two Altar-Cloaths of Velvet and silk, two pound.] It seems the
Parish did not part with all their gallantry at once, but made several stakes
thereof, and parcelled them out as their necessities did require.

Item, Received of Mr Tamworth twenty loads of timber ready hewed, which he
gave to the Parish.] This Gentleman by his bounty to the Public seems better
known to God then to me, having neither heard nor read of any of his name
living in or near to Waltham.

Item, For taking down the stairs in the Abbey, seven shillings eight pence.]
This was part of the Nag-purchase, whereby we collect that a large structure
was by this bargain conveyed to the Parish.

Item, For taking down the Lead from the Charnel-house, and covering the
Steeple, eighteen shillings.] The Steeple was conceived above the Charnel-house
as in height so in honor. Wherefore now the Lead taken from it b was a Which
is now but tiled
translated to the covering of the Steeple. Call this removing of this metal
from one part of the Church to another, only the borrowing of St Peter to lend
to St Paul.

Item, For the Archdeacons man coming for a Record of all the Inhabitants of
the Parish, four pence.] I know not on what Canon this was founded. It may be
her Majesty in those dangerous times desired (not out of Pride, but necessary
Policy) to know the number of her Subjects, and might enjoin the Archdeacons
in their respective Visitations, to make this inquiry.

But Day begins to dawn, and the light of our Age to appear, matters coming
High time to knock off.
within the memory of many alive. We will therefore break off, Waltham since
affording no peculiar observables. Only will add that Sr Edward (Grandchild
to Sr Anthony) Denny, was created by King James, Camdens Brit. in Essex.
Baron of Waltham, and since made by King Charles, Earl of Norwich. A Noble
person, who settled on the Curate of Waltham (to whom before a bare Stipend of
Eight pound did belong) one hundrod pound per annum, with some other
considerable accommodations, tying good Land for the true performance thereof.

The Abbey is now the Inheritance of this Earls Grandchild, by Honora his
James Earl of Carlisle present owner of Waltham. Nicholas the most eminent
Abbot of Waltham.
daughter) James Hay Earl of Carlisle, who Married Margaret, Daughter to
Francis, Earl of Bedford, by whom as yet he has no Issue, for the continuance
of whose happiness my prayers shall never be wanting.

The Reader may justly expect from me a Catalogue of all the Abbots of this
Monastery. But to do it falsely, I dare not; lamely, I would not; perfectly, I
cannot; and therefore must crave to be excused. Only let me observe, that
Nicholas, Abbot of Waltham was most triumphant in power, of any in his place;
he flourished in the Reign of King Richard the second, and was Hen de Knighton
de eventibus Angl. lib. v. page 2687.
one of the fourteen Commissioners, chosen by Parliament, to examine the
miscariages in that Kings Reign since the death of his Grandfather.

Amongst the Natives of Waltham for Statesmen, John de Waltham bears John de
Waltham.
away the bell. He was keeper of the Privy Seal in the Reign of King Richard c
Hen. Knighton ut prius. page 2685. Roger Waltham a learned writer.
the second, being the third in number, chosen amongst the fourteen
Commissioners aforesaid, empowered to examine all misdemeanors of State. And
now was not Waltham highly honored with more then a single share, when amongst
those fourteen, two were her Gremials, the forenamed Nicholas living in
Waltham, and this John, having his name thence, because birth therein.

But amongst Scholars in our Town, Roger Waltham must not be forgotten, Canon
of St Paul's in London, and a great favorite to Fulk Basset, Bishop thereof. He
wrote many learned books, whereof two especially (one called Bale de script.
Brit. cent. 4 page 302. Hugh Nevil buried in Waltham.
Compendium Morale, the other Imagines Oratorum) commend his parts and pains to
posterity.

Pass we from those who were Born, to eminent persons Buried therein. Here we
first meet with Hugh Nevile, a Minion of King Richard the first, he was
Interred in Waltham Church, says my Mat. Paris in Anno 122^. page 315. and
also Robert Pass lew.
Author, in Nobili Sarcophago Marmoreo and insculpto, in a Noble Coffin of
Marble engraved. If a Coffin be called Sarcophagus (from consuming the Corpse)
surely Sacriledg may be named Sarcophago-phagus, which at this day has
devoured that Coffin, and all belonging thereunto.

We spoil all, if we forget, Robert Passellew, who was Dominus fac totum, in
the middle, and fac nihil, toward the end of the Reign of Henry the third. Some
Parasites extolled him by allusion to his name; P^ss^le-eau, (that is, passing
the pure water) the Wits of those days thus descanting upon him;

Collect. of Mr. Camb. M: S. in Sr. Tho. Cottons Library.
Est aqud lenis, and est aqud dulcis, and est aqua clara,
Tu praecellis aquam, nam leni lenior es tu,
Dulci dulcior es tu, clara clarior es tu,
Mente quidem lenis, re dulcis, sanguine clarus.
But such who flattered him the fastest, whilst in favor, mocked him the most
in misery, and at last he died in his own House in Waltham, and was Matt. Paris
Anno. 1252. A heap of difficulties cast together.
buried in the Abby-Church therein.

And now because we have so often cited Matthew Paris, I never met with more
difficulties in six lines, then what I find in him; which because nearly
relating to this present subject, I thought fit to exemplifie^.

MATTHEW PARIS in Anno 1242. p. 595. Eodemque Anno, videlicet in crastino Sti
Michaelis dedicata est Ecclesia conventualis Canonicorum de Waltham, ab
Episcopo Norwicensi Willielmo, solemniter valde, asistentibus aliis plurimis
Episcopis, Praelatis, and Magnatibus venerabilibus, statim post dedicationem
Ecclesiae sancti Pauli Londinensis, ut peregrinantes hinc inde, indistanter
remearent.

And in the same year, namely the morrow after St Michaels day, the conventual
Church of the Canons at Waltham, was dedicated by William, Bishop of Norwich
very solemnly, many other Bishops, Prelates, and venerable Peers assisting him:
presently after the dedication of St Paul's in London, that Pilgrims and
Travelers up and down might indistantly return.

It is clear our Church of Waltham Abbey is intended herein, See Speed his
Catalogue of religious houses. Queries on queries.
England affording no other Conventual Church.

This being granted, how comes Waltham Church (built by Harold two hundred
years before) now to be first Dedicated, that Age accounting it as faulty and
fatal, to defer the Consecration of Churches, as the Christning of Children? 2.
What made the Bishop of Norwich to meddle therewith? an Office more proper for
the Bishop of London to perform, Waltham being (though not under) in his
jurisdiction. 3. What is meant by the Barbarous word indistanter? and what
benefit accrewed to Travelers thereby? I will not so much as conjecture, as
unwilling to draw my bow, where I despair to hit the mark, but leave all to the
judgment of others. But I grow tedious, and will therefore conclude.

Anno 1641. King CHARLES came the last time to Waltham, and went R. Charles his
last coming to Waltham.
(as he was wont, where any thing remarkable) to see the Church, the Earl of
Carlisle attending him; His Majesty told him, that he divided his Cathedral
Churches, as he did his Royal Ships, into three ranks, accounting St Paul's in
London, York, Lincoln, Winchester, etc. of the first form; Chichester
Lichfield, etc. of the second; the Welsh Cathedrals of the third, with which
Waltham Church may be well compared, especially if the Roof thereof, was taken
lower and Leaded.

The Earl moved His Majesty, that seeing this Ancient Church, (Founded
Conditionally grants the repairing of the Church.
by King Harold his Predecessor) was fallen into such decay, that the repair
was too heavy for the Parish, he would be pleased to grant a moderate Tole of
Cattle coming over the Bridge, (with their great Driftss, doing much damage to
the Highways) and therewith both the Town might be Paved, and the Church
repaired. The King graciously granted it, provided, it were done with the
privity and consent of a great Prelate, (not so safe to be named as easy to be
guessed) with whom he consulted in all Church Matters.

But when the foresaid Prelate was informed, that the Earl had applied to But
it miscarrieth.
His Majesty before addresses to himself, he dashed the design, so that poor
Waltham Church, must still be contented, with their weak walls, and worse Roof,
till Providence, procure her some better Benefactors. As for the Arms of
Waltham Abbey, being loath to set them alone, I have joined them in the
following draught, with the Arms of the other Mitred Abbeys, as far as my
industry could recover them.

SOLI DEO GLORIA.
FINIS.
THE SEALS OF ARMS OF ALL THE MITRED ABBEYS IN ENGLAND^
Edwino Rich Armigero uni e Magistres Curiae Cancellariae, Benefactori meo
munifico, in gratitudinis tesseram. J. F.

seal Tavestock.
seal Glastenbury
seal Midleton.
seal Abington.
seal St.^ames Reading
seal Battle.
seal St.Augustine Cant:
seal Gloucester.
seal Colchester.
seal Winch-combe.
seal St.Albans.
seal St.John's of Jerusalem.
seal Westminster.
seal Waltham.
seal Waltham
seal St.Edmondebury
seal Thorney
seal Ben^etts in ye Holme.
seal Ramley
seal Peterborrough.
seal Crowland.
seal Tewke^s;bury.
seal Shroesbury
seal Selby.
seal St. Maryes york.
seal Malmsbury
seal Cirencester
seal Bardney
seal Book 2. page. 123.

James Langham Bjq:
seal Book 2 p.138

Baldwine Hamey Dr. of Physic.
blank seal B:4.pa:177

Thomas Rich Esqr.
blank seal B:11. pa:197.

Giles Vandeput Nerehadt.
seal Ibidem.

Edward Clegar Merchant.
seal Hist:of Came: pa: 117.

Edward Palmer Esqr.
seal Hist: of Camb: pa: 137

Fra: Ask Esqr.
blank seal Know reader the Cutter in wood being sick, and the Press not staing
his recovery; the arms of my Patrons omitted in ye body of ye book are
supplied in these quarters.




