THE HARANGUES OR SPEECHES Of Several Famous MOUNTEBANKS IN Town and Country.

When Quack and Zany thus are met,
The Imperious Emperick seem to fret;
But looking round, the Crowd to see,
Are pleased to find such Company.
At last the Zany fetched the Wallet
Of -- no Man ever knew what to call it;
Promiscuous Sweeps of Druggist Shops,
Made into Plasters, Pills, and Slops,
All mixed, as you will hereafter see,
Up with Infallibility.
LONDON: Printed for T. WARNER, at the Black-Boy, in Paternoster Row.

Price One Shilling.



TO Mr. William Winter.
SIR,
THE following Sheets are exactly fitted for you, they treating of what you
used to divert your self with in Moorefields, Covent Garden, etc. And as it has
afforded you some Laughter to see the gaping Crowd be gulled by the enchanting
Tongues of Quack and Zany, who would unlock their Ears, and steal a Passage, by
a magic Pill, into their Pockets, and so send them away with a small
Apothecary's Shop, either to kill themselves or their Neighbors: So I hope
they will revive your former Mirth in the reading them.

As soon as his infallible Jewels are disposed of, he presents you with his
Jack Pudding, who mounts his hempen Fortune, flying like a Bird in the Air; and
when he has fooled it about half an Hour, he promises his mobbish Spectators
more Diversion the next Visit, honors them with a gracious Nod, and comes
down: And this the Noble Doctor gives them, and his infallible Packet, at so
small a Price as Sixpence.

So dear Friend, if by presenting you with their Speeches, I may administer a
Pill to purge Melancholy, and divert your Leisure Hours, I shall have gained my
End; and am proud of entertaining one for whom I have so great an Esteem.

I am, Dear Friend, Yours, D. G.

CONTENTS.
THE Quack. By Thomas Rands. Page 1 The High German Doctor and the English
Fool, Page 8 The Infallible Mountebank, or Quack Doctor, Page 11 Pharmacopola
Circumforaneus: Or, the Horse Doctor's Harangue to the credulous Mob, Page 13
The Harangue, or Quack Speech of Tom Jones at York, Page 19 Alexander Bendo 's
Quack Speech, Page 23 Joe Haines the Comedian's Quack Speech, Page 35 Robert
Wilmore 's Harangue, Page 44 Lopus 's Harangue at Madrid, Page 48 The Harangue
of the Famous Scoto of Mantuano, Page 55
THE HARANGUES Of several Famous Quack Doctors, etc.
The QUACK by Thomas Rands.
MY Name is Don Paraselsus de Curiandi; I live at the Sign of the Pestle and
Mortar in Glister-Pipe-Lane, near Bolus-Alley; my Business, in this famous
Nation, is to let my Fellow Christians know the excellent Qualifications of my
Medicines, which I sell to the Rich, but give away gratis to the Poor.

Imprimis, Is there any old Women amongst you, who are troubled with the
Pimple-Pamplins, whose Skin is too short for their Bodies, that they cannot
Sleep for Farting: See, here is my Antipamphastick Powder, or my Sovereign
Carminick, which discharges Ventiserous Humors, of what kind soever, and will
reduce you to Soundness of Body in the Twinkling of a Hobbyhorse.

Then see, here is my Balsamum Stobule Swordum, or an Ointment that is good
against all Cuts, green or cankered Wounds. Now, suppose any honest Man amongst
you has Hurt or Cut himself with either Sword, Gun, or Musket, Spit, Jack, or
Grid-Iron, Glass-Bottle, or Pint-Pot, by the Help and Application of this my
Celebrated Balsam, they are immediately cured, without giving themselves the
Trouble of sending for an illiterate Surgeon, who will sooner cleanse their
Pockets of its Money, than the Wounds of its Infection,

Then, here is my Unguentum Cataphon, or, an Ointment that is good against all
Strains, Sprains, or Bruises. Now, suppose any honest Farmer amongst you has
strained or sprain'd his Legs, Arms, or Ancles, by over lifting himself at a
Gate-Post, or Barn-Door, Dung-Pot, or Chart Wheel, or has got a Fall from a
Hay-Rick, or a Barley-Mow; by the Application of this my Medicating Unguent,
being properly used by Friction, and by the Hand of a Maid of Fifteen, you need
not doubt a Cure, my Life to an Apple-Pye.

Then, Gentlemen, see here is my Purando's Tankapon Tolos, that is to say, in
the Arabian Language, The Wonder-working Pills: The excellent Quality of which,
is hardly known, even to my self: But I can assure you, they are good against
all Sanguine, Melancholy, Phlegmatic, or Choleric Humors: They are
Sudorifick, Cathartick, Specific, Amaradulsick, Abstergick, Mundifick, and
Apperiatick.

They purge the Brain from all Crassick Cloudifying Humors which obstruct the
Senses of all Superanuated Maids. They immediately perform an Articulation of
Dislocated Junctions. They make the Curratick, directick, and the Directick
indirectick, in their Lives and Conversations. They cause the Old to appear
young, the Young handsome, and the Handsome witty.

Take Three of these Pills in a Morning, Jejuno Stomacho, with Two Quarts of
Aqua Gruellis, to force an Operation, by an immediate Evacuation, and you will
possess a perfect Deliveration for all inordinate Motions of the Mind, as
Trapidity, Anger, Melancholy, Mistrust, or the like.

They immediately dissipate the Spirit of Jealousy in the Young or Old. Now,
suppose any Person, here present, is troubled with this grievous and tormenting
Distemper, and fancies his Wife to be what she is, or what she really may not
be, let him take five of these Pills, as my printed Paper shall give
Directions, and attend the Operation; and if he has a just Occasion, it will
give him just five Stools; if on the contrary, it will have no more Operation
upon him than the like Quantity of Sugar Candy.

These wonderful Pills strengthen the Nerves, cleanse the Urinal Passages, and
purge the Stomach from all Distempers got by crude, raw, and undigested Meats.
In fine, there is no Distemper of the Body whatsoever, but what these Pills
will entirely eradicate, though it lies lurking in the Mass of Blood.

I shall say no more at present, only let you know that now is your Time to
furnish yourselves with my Medicines. The Price of them is small, though the
Operation wonderful.

I am none of those Fellows that set an extravagant Value upon themselves,
merely because they ride upon Spotted Horses, and express themselves in
ridiculous and unintelligible Terms, to amuse the Vulgar; but I am the Famous
Don Paracelsus, who, for several Years, have been known in this famous City;
and because I will encourage you to Buy, here is my Antipamphastick Powder, my
Balsamum Stobule Swordum, my Unguentum Cataphen, together with my Purandos
Tankapon Tolos, and all for the Price of Six Pence. My Medicines have made
themselves and me Famous throughout Asia, Africa, Europe, and America.

It was I that cured Prestor John's Juggler's Wife's Waiting-Gentlewoman of a
Fistula in her Elbow, of which she died.

It was I that prevented the Old Woman at Exeter, from running Headlong into a
Wine-Cellar.

It was I that cured the Morocco Embassaof a Lapsa Lingua.

It was me, and only me, that cured the French Dancing-Man, at Amsterdam, of
the Consumption in his Pockets.

I am as well known in the Terra Incognita, as in any Part of Europe, where I
performed an excellent Cure upon Captain Nonsuch, Commander of the Nonnomen
Galley, who had a Cannon-Ball lodged in his Little-Finger; likewise the
Carpenter of the same Ship, who had swollow'd a Handspike.

I resided for several Years in the great City of Moscow; where, by my internal
Medicines, and by my external and manual Operations, I became more Famous among
them, than ever the Learned Talicotius was among the Inhabitants of the Deserts
of Arabia; for which Reasons the Learned University of that City was pleased to
bestow this Distich in Favor of me.

Tantagores thetow, Phylosophia grandila Moscow,
Stanstephon Physica, Musica, Artibus Killcow.
Before I conclude my Discourse, I must let you know, that I understand, and
can read the Language of the Stars, and that I resolve all Manner of Lawful
Questions, and am profound in Physiognomy and Palmistry, and that I am
commenced Master of the Mathematics, Geometry, Trigonometry, Algebra,
Rhetoric, Logic, and Plain-Sailing.

Gentlemen, and Fellow Christians, my Hours are from Six 'till Seven, from
Seven 'till Eleven, and from Eleven all Day.

I.
Here Men of great Sense,
At a little Expense,
May furnish themselves with a Packet:
O^ if any one's poor,
That has been with a Whore,
For Sixpence he need not to lack it.
II.
Though Money be scant,
Yet Physic you will want,
If ever you come into Danger:
Then Beaus come, and Buy it,
Prove, Judge, and Try it,
Or privately come to my Chamber.
The High German DOCTOR and the English FOOL.
Gentlemen,
THOUGH I am an English Fool, yet, my Master has the Honor to be a High German
Physician; who, in his Travels round the Universe, has cured twelve Foreign
Ministers of State of those Twin Plagues, Bribery and Infidelity; Six Kings of
a Tyranical Fevers; the whole Conclave of Cardinals of Pride, Laziness, and
Hypocrisy; and the present Pope of the Antichristian Evil.

He was also three Years Oculist to the German Spread Eagle, and seven Years
Operator for the Teeth to the King of Spain's white Elephants: He is not only
Learned by his long Studies, but Reverend, as you may see by his Beard; and
Wife, as you may judge by his Silence: He has made himself, by his long
Travels, an absolute Master of all the Tongues in the whole World, (except the
Language of this Kingdom,) and at these Years has put himself into his English
A, b, c, in order to make himself an universal Scholar.

Amongst the many excellent Medicaments contained in his little
Health-preserving Packet, the first Thing that he presents you with, is this
minute Panpharmacon, which he calls, his Pillula infalibilis, or his infallible
Pill; though it is so small in Bulk, that it is scarce discernable without a
Microscope, yet, it is so mighty in its Operation, that it will raise the
weakest Patient out of his sick Bed, and make him strong enough, in two
Minutes, to encounter Conscience, Death, and the Devil.

In the next Place, he communicates to your View his most excellent umbellical
Sticking Plaster; which, if applied by the Wife, to the Pit of her Husband's
Stomach, disperses all manner of jealous Heartburnings, prevents the many
violent Evils that daily arise, from that predominant Monarchical Distemper,
such as, Grumbling in the Gizard, Murder, Imprisonment, and the like; these,
with all its evil Concomitants, it disperses in a Moment, and so strengthens
his Appetite toward Family Duty, that he will be able to Love wonderfully, and
beget a miraculous Progeny.

Here is, likewise, a Pot of Mollifying Ointment, for the suppling and
stretching of narrow and hide-bound Consciences, extraordinary useful for all
fashionable Zealots, who are desirous of making their Religion subservant to
their Interest; let them but outwardly apply this Balsam every Saturday Night,
and by Sunday Morning, they will find themselves such prevaricating Christians,
that they may go to Church in the Morning, and to Meeting in in the Afternoon,
and return Home as devout Hypocrites as if they had gone to neither.

Lastly, To Crown the whole Number of his admirable Secrets, here is that rich
and excellent Preservative, as well, as Antidote, his Orvietano: Take a small
Dose of this next your Heart in a Morning, and you may venture any Time of the
Day after into the most disaffected Coffee-House in London, without the Danger
of being poisoned with Rebellious Principles: It expels all Low Country Schism
by a Belch; carries off all Disloyalty in a Fart; and is the best Restorative
to strengthen weak Faith, and decayed Allegiance, that ever was yet discovered
since the Fall of Adam.

And all these Medicines, contained in this little Packet, the Doctor, through
his Bounty to the Public, is willing to let you have for the small Value of
Sixpence.

The Infallible MOUNTABANK, or, QUACK DOCTOR.
SEE! Sirs, see here!
A Doctor rare,
Who Travels much at Home!
Here, take my Bills,
I cure all Ills,
Past, present, and to come;
The Cramp, the Stich,
The Squirt, the Itch,
The Gout, the Stone, the Pox;
The Mulligrubs,
The Bonny Scrubs,
And all Pandora's Box.
Thousands I Have dissected,
Thousands new erected,
And such Cures effected,
As none e're can tell.
Let the Palsy shake ye,
Let the Chollick rack ye,
Let the Crinkums break ye,
Let the Murrain take ye;
Take this, and you are well.
Come Wits, so keen,
Devoured with Spleen,
Come Beaus who sprain'd your Backs;
Great Bellied Maids,
Old foundered Jades,
And peper'd Vizard Cracks
I soon remove
The Pains of Love,
And cure the Lovesick Maid;
The Hot, the Cold,
The Young, the Old,
The Living, and the Dead;
I clear the Lass,
With wainscot Face,
And from Pimginets free,
Plum Ladies red,
Like Sarazan's Head,
With toaping Rattafia;
This with a Jirk,
Will do your Work,
And scour you over, and over:
Read, Judge, and Try,
And if you Die,
Never believe me more.
Pharmacopola Circumforaneus; or, The HORSE DOCTOR's Harangue to the Credulous
Mob.
Gentlemen,
I Waltho Van Claturbank, High German Doctor, Chemist, and Dentifricator,
Native of Arabia, Deserta, Citizen and Burgomaster of the City of Brandipolis,
Seventh Son of the Seventh Son, Unborn Doctor, of above 60 Years Experience,
having studied over Galen, Hypocrates, Albumazar, and Paracelsus, am now become
the Aesculapius of this Age. Having been educated at Twelve Universities, and
traveled through Fifty two Kingdoms, and been Counselor to the Counselors of
several Monarchs, Natural Son of the Wonder-working Chemical Doctor, Signior
Hanesio, lately arrived from the farthest Parts of Utopia, famous throughout
Asia, Africa, Europe, and America, from the Sun's Oriental Exaltation to his
Occidental Declination: Out of mere Pity to my own dear Self, and languishing
Mortals, have by the earnest Prayers and and Entreaties of several Lords,
Earls, Dukes, and Honorable Personages, been at last prevailed upon to oblige
the World with this Notice;

That all Persons, Young and Old, Blind or Lame, Deaf or Dumb, Curable or
Incurable, may know where to repair for Cure, in all Cephalalgia's, Paralitick,
Paraxysms, Palpitations of the Pericardium, Empyemas, Syncopes, and Nasieties,
arising either from a Plethory, or a Cacochymy, Vertiginous Vapors,
Hydiocephalus Dissenteries, Odontalgick or Podagrical Inflammations, Iliack
Passions, Icterical Effusions, Exanthemata, the Hen-Pox, the Hog-Pox, the
Whores Pox, and the Small Pox; the Ascites, Tympanites, Anasarca, and the
entire Legion of Lethiferous Distempers.

Imprimis, Gentlemen, I have a never-failing Stiptick, coroborating,
odoriferous, anodinous, balsamic Balsam of Balsams, made of dead Men's Fat,
Rosin, and Goose-Grease, which infallibly restores lost Maidenheads, raises
demoish'd Noses, and by its abstersive cosmetick Quality, preserves
superannuated Bawds from Wrinkles.

Item, I have the true Carthramophra of the Triple Kingdom, my never-failing
Heliogenes, being the Tincture of the Sun, deriving Vigor, Influence, and
Dominion from the same Light; it causes all Complexions to Laugh or Smile, at
the very Time of taking it; is seven Years in preparing, and being completed,
secundum Artem, by Fermentation, Cohobation, Calcination, Sublimation,
Fixation, Philtration, Circulation, and Quidlibitification, in Balneo Mariae,
Crucible and Fixatory, the Athanor, Cucurbita, and Reverberatory, is the only
Sovereign Medicine in the World.

This is Natures Palladium, Health's Magazine; it works seven manner of Ways,
in order as Nature herself requires, for it scorns to be confined to any
particular way of Operation; so that it effects the Cure, either
Hypnotically, Hydrotically, Cathartically, Poppismatically, Hydrogogically,
Pneumatically, or Synechdochically; it mundifies the Hypogastrium, wipes off
abstersively those tenacious conglomerated sedimental Sordes that adhere to the
Oesophagus and Viscera; extinguishes all supernatural Fermentations and
Ebulitions; and, in fine, annihilates all Nosotrophical Morbifick Ideas of the
whole Corporeal Compages.

A Dram of it is worth a Bushel of March Dust: For if a Man chance to have
his Brains beat out, or his Head chopped off, two Drops, I say, two Drops,
Gentlemen, seasonably applied, will recall the fleeting Spirits, re-inthrone the
deposed Archeus, cement the Discontinuity of the Parts, and in six Minutes
restore the lifeless Trunk to all its prestine Functions, Vital, Natural, and
Animal; so that this, believe me, Gentlemen, is the only Sovereign Remedy in
the World.

I have the chiefest Antepudenda Gragran Specific in Venus Regalia, which
infallibly cures the French Pox, with all its Train of Gonorrheas, Bubo's and
Shankers, Carnosities, Phymosis, Paraphymosis, Christalline Priapismus,
Caudalomata, and Ragades, without Baths and Stoves, and that with as much
Pleasure as the same was contracted; so that it is worth any Person's while to
get the Distemper once a Fortnight, if it be to be had for Love or Money, to
enjoy the Benefit of so diverting a Remedy.

I have the Panchymagogon of Hermes-Trismegistus, an incomparable Spagyrick
Tincture of the Moon's Horns, which is the only infallible Antidote against the
Contagion of Cuckoldom.

Besides, my Vermifugus Pulvis, or Antivermatical Worm-conquering Powder, so
famous for destroying all Sorts of 'em, incident to human Bodies, breaking
their complicated Knots in the Duodenum, and dissolving the Phlegmatic
Crudities that produce these Anthropohagous Vermin: It has brought away Worms
by Urine, as long as the May Pole in the Strand, when it flourished in its
primative Prolixity, though I confess not altogether so thick.

Look ye, Gentlemen, I have it under the Hands and Seals of all the greatest
Sultans, Sophys, Bashas, Viziers, Chams, Serasquiers, and Mufties, etc. in
Christendom, to Verificate the Truth of my Operations, that I have actually
performed such Cures, as are really beyond human Abilities.

I cured Prestor John's Godmother, to the great Admiration of all the Court, of
a stupendous Dolor about the Os Sacrum, so that the good old Lady really
feared the Perdition of her Huckle-Bone; I did it by fomenting her Posteriors,
with a Mummy of Nature, alias, called Pilgrim's Salve, mixed up with the Spirit
of Mugwort, tartaragraphated thorough an Alembick of Christalline Transfluency.

Thence was I sent for to Sultan Gilgon Despote of Bosnia, who was violently
afflicted with the Spasmus: He came to meet me 300 Leagues in a Go-Cart: But I
gave him so speedy on Acquittance of his Dolor, that the next Night I caused
him to Dance a Saraband with Flipflaps and Somersets.

I restored Virility, and the Comforts of Generation, to above 150 Eunuchs in
the Grand Senior's Seraglio; and by a Pair of Prolifick Pills, lately caused a
Vintner's Widow, who had been Barren all her Days, to conceive of a Man Child,
in the twelfth Luster of her Age, without the Help of her Husband.

I cured likewise the Duchess of Boromolpho of a Cramp in her Tongue; and the
Count de Redomontado Corrept, with an Illiack Passion, contracted by eating
buttered Parships.

I also cured an Alderman of Grand Cairo, who had been sick seven Years of the
Plague in 46 Minutes: And by the like Empyrical Remedies I lately cured Duke
Philorix of a Dropsy, of which he died.

Venienti occurrite Morbo, Down with your Dust; Principiis obsta, No Cure, no
Money; Quar^nda Pecunia primum, Be not sick too late.

You that are willing to render yourselves Immortal, buy this Packet; or else
repair to the Sign of the Prancers, in Vico vulgo dicto, Rattlecliffero,
something South-East of the Teplum Danicum, in the Square of Profound-Close,
not far from Titter-Tatter Fair, and you may see, hear, and return Reinfecta.

The Harangue, or Quack Speech of T. JONES at York.
Gentlemen and Ladies,
YOU that have a mind to preserve your own and your Families Health, may here,
at the Expense of a Two-Penny Piece, furnish yourselves with a Packet, which
contains several Things of great Use, and wonderful Operation in human Bodies,
against all Distempers whatsoever,

Gentlemen, Because I present my self among you, I would not have you to think*
I am any Upstart Glister-Pipe, Bum-Peeping Apothecary: No, Gentlemen, I am no
such Person, I am a regular Physician; and have traveled most Kingdoms in the
World, purely to do my Country good. I am not a Person that takes delight, as a
great many do, to fill your Ears with hard Words, in telling you the Nature of
Turpet Mineral, Mercuri Dulcis, Balsamum Capiviet, Astringents, Laxations,
Hardboundations, Circulations. Vibrations, Salivations, Excoriations,
Scaldations, Urinations. These Quacks, may fi ly be called, Solimites, because
they prescribe only one sort of Physic for all Distempers, that is, a Vomit.

If a Man has bruised his Elbow; Take a Vomit, says the Doctor. If you have any
Corns; Take a Vomit. If he has torn his Coat; Take a Vomit. For the Jaundice,
Fevers, Flux, Gripes, Gout, Stone, Pox nay, even the Distempers that only my
Friend, the famous Doctor Tuff, whom you all know, as the Hocognicles,
Marthambles, the Mo^n-Paul, and the Strong-Fives; A Vomit; Tantum. Gentlemen,
These Impostors value Killing of a Man, no more, than I value drawing an old
Stump of a Tooth, which has long troubled any of you; so that, I say, They are
a pack of Tag-Rag, Assifatida, Glister-Pipe Doctors.

Now, Gentlemen, having given you a short Account of this spurious Race; I
shall present you with my Cordial Pills, being the Tincture of the Sun, having
Dominion from the same Light, giving Relief and Comfort to all Mankind: They
cause all Complexions to Laugh or Smile, in the the very taking them, they
presently cure all Dizziness, Swimmings, Dullness in the Head, and Scurvy.

In the next Place, I recommend to you my incomparable Balsam, which heals all
Sores, Cuts, Ulcers, new and old.

It Is good for Burns, Scalds, Swellings, Bruises, Strains, Aches, Weakness in
the Joints and Limbs, etc. it cures the King's Evil, sore Breasts, and scald
Heads; and it is taken inwardly for a Cough, Consumption, short Breath,
Weakness of the Back, or any inward Hurt.

The next unparalled Medicine, contained in this my Packet, is an admirable
Electuary, celebrated throughout all England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed. It cures all curable
Diseases, by very easy and gentle purging; it causes an Appetite, helps all
Distempers in the Eyes, Face, swelled Lips; and opens the Stoppage of the Liver
and Spleen, etc.

The next I present you with, is my Specific, which certainly cures all Agues
in a Minuet.

The next is my Red Plaster, which radically cures the most inveterate
Rheumatism and Gout in a few Day's Time.

The last, and most useful Medicine prepared throughout the whole World, is
this, my Pulvis Catharticus: Its Virtues are such, it will, equally with the
Unicorn's Horn, expel the rankest Poison; it is a perfect, safe, and speedy
Cure, for all venerial Maladies, of what Degree soever, and fortifies the Heart
against all Fainting.

I do assure you, Country Folk, these Medicines are as good as any Physician
can make, or Patient take; their Virtues are too well known, to say any more;
so I shall leave you to experience them. And so I wish you Health, and
Happiness.

You may come to my Lodgings, at the Barber's Pole Stone-Gate: At Home, from
Seven to Eleven.

To all Gentlemen and Ladies, and Others, whether of City, Town, or Country,
ALEXANDER BENDO wishes all Health and Prosperity.
WHereas this famous Metropolis of England; (and were the Endeavors of its
worthy Inhabitants equal to their Power, Merit, and Virtue, I should not stick
to denounce it, in a short time, the Metropolis of the whole World:) Whereas, I
say, this City, (as most great Ones are) has ever been infested with a numerous
Company of such, whose arrogant Confidence, backed with their Ignorance, has
enabled them to impose upon the People, either by premeditated Cheats, or, at
best, the palpable, dull, and empty Mistakes of their self-deluded Imagination
in Physic, Chemical and Galenick, in Astrology, Physiognomy, Palmestry,
Mathematics, Alchymy, and even in Government itself: The last of which, I will
not propose to discourse of, or meddle at all in, since it no Way belongs to my
Trade or Vocation, as the rest do; which (Thanks to my God) I find much more
safe, I think equally honest, and therefore more profitable.

But as to all the former, they have been so erroneously practiced by many
unlearned Wretches, whom Poverty and Neediness, for the most Part, (if not the
restless Itch of Deceiving,) has forced to straggle and wander in unknown
Paths, that even the Professions themselves, though originally the Products of
the most learned and wise Men's labourious Studies and Experience, and by them
left a wealthy and glorious Inheritance for Ages to come, seem, by this
Bastard-Race of Quacks and Cheats, to have been run out of all Wisdom,
Learning, Perspicuousness, and Truth, with which they were so plentifully
stocked; and now run into a Repute of mere Mists, Imaginations, Errors, and
Deceits, such as, in the Management of these Idle Professors, indeed they were.

You will therefore, (I hope,) Gentlemen, Ladies, and others, deem it but just,
that that I, who for some Years have with all Faithfulness and Assiduity
courted these Arts, and received such signal Favors from them, that they have
admitted me to the happy and full Enjoyment of themselves, and trusted me with
their greatest Secrets, should, with an Earnestness and Concern more than
ordinary, take their Parts against these impudent Fops, whose saucy impertinent
Addresses and Pretensions have brought such a Scandal upon their most
immaculate Honors and Reputations.

Besides, I hope you will not think I could be so impudent, that if I had
intended any such foul Play myself, I would have given you so fair Warning, by
my severe Observations upon others. Qui alterum incusat Probri, ipsum se
intueri oportet, (Plaut.) However, Gentlemen, in a World like this, where
Virtue is so exactly counterfeited, and Hypocrisy so generally taken Notice of,
that every one (armed with Suspicion) stands upon his Guard against it, 'twill
be very hard, for a Stranger especially, to escape Censure. All I shall say for
my self on this Score, is this; If I appear to any one like a Counterfeit, even
for the sake of that, chiefly, ought I to be construed a true Man? Who is the
Counterfeit's Example: His Original, and that which he employs his Industry and
Pains to imitate and copy. Is it therefore my Fault, if the Cheat, by his Wits
and Endeavors, makes himself so like me, that consequently I cannot avoid
resembling him? Consider, pray, the Valiant, and the Coward; the wealthy
Merchant, and the Bankrupt; the Politician and the Fool; they are the same in
many Things, and differ but in one alone: The valiant Man holds up holds up his
Head, looks confidently round about him, wears a Sword, courts a Lord's Wife,
and owns it: So does the Coward. One only Point of Honor excepted, and that is
Courage, which, (like false Metal, one only Trial can discover) makes the
Distinction.

The Bankrupt walks the Exchange, buys Bargains, draws Bills, and accepts them
with the Richest, whilst Paper and Credit are current Coin: That which makes
the Difference is real Cash; a great Defect, indeed, and yet but one, and that
the last found out, and still, 'till then, the least perceived.

Now for the Politician: He is a grave, deliberating, close, prying Man: Pray
are there not grave, deliberating, close, prying Fools.

If then, the Difference betwixt all these, (though infinite in Effect) be so
nice in all Appearance, will you expect it should be otherwise betwixt the
false Physician, Astrologer, etc. and the true? The first calls himself learned
Doctor, sends forth his Bills, gives Physic and Counsel, tells and foretells;
the other is bound to do just as much: It Is only your Experience must
distinguish betwixt them; to which I willingly submit myself. I Will only say
something to the Honor of the Mountebank, in case you discover me to be one.

Reflect a little, what Kind of Creature it is: He is one, then, who is fain to
supply some higher Ability he pretends to, with Craft; he draws great Companies
to him by undertaking strange Things, which can never be effected. The
Politician, (by his Example no doubt,) finding how the People are taken with
specious miraculous Impossibilities, plays the same Game, protests, declares,
promises I know not what, Things which he is sure can never be brought about:
The People believe, are deluded, and pleased; the Expectation of a future Good,
which shall never befall them, draws their Eyes off a present Evil. Thus are
they kept and established in Subjection, Peace, and Obedience; he in Greatness,
Wealth, and Power. So you see the Politician is, and must be, a Mountebank, in
State Affairs; and the Mountebank, no doubt, if he thrives, is an errant
Politician in Physic. But that I may not prove too tedious, I will proceed
faithfully to inform you, what are the Things in which I pretend chiefly, at
this Time, to serve my Country,

First, I will (by the Leave of God) perfectly cure that Labes Britannica, or
Grand English Disease, the Scurvy; and that with such Ease to my Patient, that
he shall not be sensible of the least Inconveniency, whilst I steal his
Distemper from him. I know there are many, who treat this Disease with Mercury,
Antimony, Spirits, and Salts, being dangerous Remedies, in which I shall meddle
very little, and with great Caution; but by more secure, gentle, and less
fallible Medicines, together with the Observation of some few Rules in Diet,
perfectly cure the Patient, having freed him from all the Symptoms, as
Looseness of the Teeth, Scorbutic Spots, Want of Appetite, Pains and La^^tude
in the Limbs and Joints, especially the Legs. And to say true, there are few
Distempers in this Nation that are not, or at least proceed not originally from
the Scurvy; which, were it well rooted out, (as I make no Question to do it
from all those who shall come into my Hands) there would not be heard of so
many Gouts, Aches, Dropsies, and Consumptions; nay, even those thick and slimy
Humors, which generate Stones in the Kidneys and Bladder, are for the most
Part Offsprings of the Scurvy. It would prove tedious to set down all its
malignant Race; but those who address themselves here, shall be still informed
by me of the Nature of their Distempers, and the Grounds I proceed upon to
their Cure: So will all reasonable People be satisfied, that I treat them with
Care, Honesty, and Understanding; for I am not of their Opinion, who endeavor
to render their Vocations rather mysterious, than useful and satisfactory.

I will not here make a Catalogue of Diseases and Distempers; it behooves a
Physician, I am sure, to understand them all; but if any one come to me, (as I
think there are very few, that have escaped my Practice) I shall not be ashamed
to own to my Patient where I find myself to seek; and, at least, he shall be
secure with me from having Experiments tried upon him; a Privilege he can never
hope to enjoy, either in the Hands of the grand Doctors of the Court and Town,
or in those of the lesser Quacks and Mountebanks.

It is thought fit, that I assure you of great Secrecy, as well as Gare in
Diseases, where it is requisite, whether Venereal, or other; as some peculiar
to Women, the Green Sickness, Weakness, Inflammations, or Obstructions in the
Stomach, Reins, Liver, Spleen, etc. for I would put no Word in my Bill that
bears any unclean Sound; it is enough that I make myself understood. I have
seen Physicians Bills as bawdy as Aretine's Dialogues, which no Man, that walks
warily before God, can approve of; but I cure all Suffocations in those Parts
producing Fits of the Mother, Convulsions, nocturnal Inquietudes, and other
strange Accidents, not fit to be set down here; persuading young Women very
often that their Hearts are like to break for Love, when, God knows, the
Distemper lies far enough from that Place.

I have likewise got the Knowledge of a great Secret, to cure Barrenness,
(proceeding from any accidental Cause, as it often falls out, and no natural
Defect; for Nature is easily assisted, difficultly restored, but impossible to
be made more perfect by Man, than God himself had first created and bestowed
it,) which I have made use of for many Years with great Success, especially
this last Year, wherein I have cured one Woman that had been married twenty
Years, and another that had been married one and twenty Years, and two Women
that had been three Times married; as I can make appear by the Testimonies of
several Persons of London and Westminster, and other Places thereabouts. The
Medicines I use, cleanse and strengthen the Womb, and are all to be taken in
the Space of seven Days. And because I do not intend to deceive any Person,
upon Discourse with them, I will tell them whether I am like to do them any
Good. My usual Contract is, to receive one Half of what is agreed upon, when
the Party shall be quick with Child, the other Half when she is brought to Bed.

Cures of this Kind I have done signal, and many; for the which, I doubt not,
but I have the good Wishes and hearty Prayers of many Families, who had else
pined out their Days under the deplorable and reproachful Misfortunes of Barren
Wombs, leaving plentiful Estates and Possessions to be inherited by Strangers.

As to Astrological Predictions, Physiognomy, Divination by Dreams, and
otherwise, (Palmistry, I have no Faith in, because there can be no Reason
alleged for it,) my own Experience has convinced me more of their considerable
Effects, and mavelous Operations, chiefly in the Directions of future
Proceedings, to the avoiding of Dangers that threaten, and laying hold of
Advantages that might offer themselves; I say, my own Practice has convinced me
more than all the sage and wise Writings extant of those Matters; for I might
say this of myself, (did it not look like Ostentation,) that I have very seldom
failed in my Predictions, and often been very serviceable in my Advice. How far
I am capable in this Way, I am sure is not fit to be delivered in Print: Those
who have no Opinion of the Truth of this Art, will not, I suppose, come to me
about it; such as have, I make no Question of giving them ample Satisfaction.

Nor will I be ashamed to set down here my Willingness to practice Rare
Secrets, (though somewhat collateral to my Profession) for the Help,
Conservation, and Augmentation of Beauty and Comeliness; a Thing created at
first by God, chiefly for the Glory of his own Name, and then for the better
Establishment of mutual Love between Man and Woman; for when God had bestowed
on Man the Power of Strength and Wisdom, and thereby rendered Woman liable to
the Subjection of his absolute Will, it seemed but requisite that she should be
endued likewise, in Recompense, with some Quality that might beget in him
Admiration of Her, and so enforce his Tenderness and Love.

The Knowledge of these Secrets, I gathered in my Travels Abroad, (where I have
spent my Time, ever since I was fifteen Years old, to this my nine and
twentieth Year) in France and Italy. Those that have traveled in Italy, will
tell you to what a Miracle Art does there assist Nature in the Preservation of
Beauty; how Women of Forty bear the same Countenance with those of Fifteen:
Ages are no ways distinguished by Faces; whereas here in England, look a Horse
in the Mouth, and a Woman in the Face, you presently know both their Ages to a
Year. I will therefore give you such Remedies, that, without destroying your
Complexion, (as most of your Paints and Daubings do,) shall render them purely
Fair, clearing and preserving them from all Spots, Freckles, Heats, Pimples,
and Marks of the Smallpox, or any other accidental ones, so the Face be not
seam'd or scared.

I will also cleanse and preserve your Teeth white and round as Pearls,
fastening them that are loose: Your Gums shall be kept entire, as red as Coral;
your Lips of the same Color, and soft as you could wish your lawful Kisses.

I will likewise administer that which shall cure the worst of Breaths,
provided the Lungs be not totally perished and imposthumated; as also certain
and infallible Remedies for those whose Breaths are yet untainted; so that
nothing but either a very long Sickness, or Old Age itself, shall ever be able
to spoil them.

I will besides (if it be desired) take away from their Fatness who have
overmuch, and add Flesh to those that want it, without the least Detriment to
their Constitutions.

Now, should Galen himself look out of his Grave, and tell me these were
Baubles below the Profession of a Physician, I would boldly answer him, That I
take more Glory in preserving God's Image, in its unblemished Beauty, upon one
good Face, than I should do in patching up all the decayed Carcasses in the
World.

They that will do me the Favor to come to me, shall be sure, from Three of
the Clock in the Afternoon, till Eight at Night, at my Lodgings in Tower-Street
next Door to the Sign of the Black Swan at a Goldsmith's House, to find

Their humble Servant, ALEXANDER BENDO.

Thesaurum and Talentum ne abscondas in Agro.
JOSEPH HAINES 's SPEECH, High-German Doctor and Astrologer in Brandipolis.
Hoc juris publici in communem utilitatem publicum fecit.
WHO by the Blessing of Aesculapius, on his great Pains, Travels, and nocturnal
Lucubrations, has attained to a greater Share of Knowledge than any Person
before him was ever known to do.

Imprimis, Gentlemen, I present you with my Universal Solutive, or Cathartick
Elixir, which corrects all the Cacochymick and Cachexical Diseases of the
Intestines; cures all internal and external Diseases, all vertiginous Vapors,
Hydrocephalous Giddiness or Swimming of the Head, Epileptick Fits, Flowing of
the Gall, Stoppage of Urine, Ulcers in the Womb and Bladder; with many other
Distempers, not hitherto distinguished by Name.

Secondly, My friendly Pill, called, The never-failing Heliogenes, being the
Tincture of the Sun, and deriving Vigor, Influence and Dominion from the same
Light; it causes all Complexions to laugh or smile, even in the very Time of
taking it; which it effects, by dilating and expanding the Gelastick Muscles,
first of all discovered by my self. It dulcifies the whole Mass of the Blood;
maintains its Circulation, reforms the Digestion of the Chylon, fortifies the
Opthalmick Nerves, clears the Officina Intelligentiae, corrects the Exorbitancy
of the Spleen, mundifies the Hypogastrium, comforts the Sphincter, and is an
excellent Remedy against the Prosopo-Clorosis, or Green Sickness, Sterility,
and all Obstructions whatever. They operate seven several Ways, in order, as
Nature herself requires; for they scorn to be confined to any particular Way of
Operation, viz. Hypnotically, by throwing the Party into a gentle Slumber;
Hydrotically, by their Operative Faculty, in opening the Interstitia Pororum;
Carthartically, by cleansing the Bowels of all Crudities and tartarous
Mucilage, with which they abound; Proppysinatically, by forcing the Wind
downward; Hydragogically, by exciting Urine; Pneumatically, by exhilirating the
Spirits; and lastly, Synecdochically, by corroborating the whole Oeconomia
Animalis. There are twenty or more in every Tin-Box, sealed with my Coat of
Arms, which are, Three Glyster Pipes erect, Gules, in a Field, Argent; my
Crest, a bloody Hand out of a Mortar, Emergent; and my Supporters, a Chemist
and an Apothecary. This Tinctura Solaris, or most noble Offspring of
Hyperion's Golden Influence, wipes off abstersively all those tenacious,
conglomerated, sedimental Sordes, that adhere to the Oesophagus and Viscera,
extinguishes all supernatural Ferments and Ebullitions; and in fine,
annihilates all the nosotrophical or morbifick Ideas of the whole corporeal
Compages.

Thirdly, My Panagion Outacousticon, or auricular Restorative: Were it possible
to show me a Man so deaf, that if a Demiculverin were to be let off under his
Ear, he could not hear the Report, yet these infallible Drops, (first invented
by the two famous Physician Brothers, St. Cosmus and St. Damian, called the
Anargyri in the ancient Greek Menologies; and some forty Years ago,
communicated to me by Anastasio Logotheti, a Greek Coloyr at Adrianople, when I
was invited into those Parts to cure Sultan Mahomet IV. of an Elephantiasis in
his Diaphragm) he would recover his auditive Faculty, and hear as smartly as an
old fumbling Priest, when a young Wench gives him account of her lost
Maidenhead at the Confessional.

Fourthly, My Anodyne Spirit, excellent to ease Pain, when taken inwardly, and
applied outwardly, excellent for any Lameness, Shrinking or Contraction of the
Nerves; for Eyes, Deafness, Pain and Noise in the Ears; and all odontatalgick,
as well as podagrical Inflammations.

Fifthly, My Antidotus Antivenerialis; which effectually cures all Gonorrheas,
Carnosities in the delinquent Part, Tumors, Phymosis, Paraphymosis,
Chrystalline, Priapisms, Hemorrhoids, Cantillamata, Ragades, Bubos,
Imposthumations, Carbuncles, genicular Nodes, and the like, without either
Baths or Stoves as also without Mercury, so often destructive to the poor
Patient, with that Privacy, that the nearest Relations shall not perceive it.

Sixthly, My pectoral Lozenges, or Balsam of Balsams, which effectually carries
off all windy and tedious Coughs, spitting of Blood, Wheezing in the Larynx and
Pthyalismus, let it be never so inveterate.

Seventhly, and lastly, My Pulvis Vermisugus, or Antevermatick Powder, brings
up the Rear, so famous for killing and bringing away all sorts of Worms
incident to human Bodies, breaking their complicated Knots in the Duodenum, and
dissolving the phlegmatic Crudities that produce Anthropophagous Vermin. It
has brought away, by Urine, Worms as long as the May Pole in the Strand, when
it flourished in its primitive Prolixity, though, I confess, not altogether so
thick. In short, it is a specific Catholicon for the Cholick, expels Winds by
Eructation, or otherwise; accelerates Digestion, and creates an Appetite to a
Miracle.

I dexterously couch the Cataract or Suffusion, extirpate Wens of the greatest
Magnitude, close up Hair-Lips, whether treble or quadruple; cure the Polipus
upon the Nose, and all scrophulous Tumors, Cancers in the Breast, Noli me
tangeris, St. Anthony's Fire, by my new invented Unguentum Antipyreticum,
Excrescences, or superfluous Flesh in the Mouth of the Bladder or Womb;
likewise I take the Stone from Women or Maids without cutting.

I have Steel-Trusses, and Instruments of a new Invention, together with
never-failing Medicines and Methods to cure Ruptures, and knit the Peritonaeum.
And here I cannot forbear to communicate an useful Piece of Knowledge to the
World, which is, that which the learned Villipandus, in his excellent Treatise,
De congrubilitate materiae primae cum confessione Augustana. I take a Rupture
to be a Relaxation of the natural Cavities, at the bottom of the cremaster
Muscles. But this, en p^ssant, I forge all my self, nay, my very Machines for
safe and easy drawing Teeth and obscure Stumps. Mrs. Littlehand, Midwife to the
Princess of Phlegethon, can sufficiently inform the Women of my Helps, and what
I do for the Disruption of the Fundament and Uterus, and other strange
Infirmities of the Matrix, occasioned by the bearing of Children, violent
Coughing, heavy Work, etc. which I challenge any Person in the Acherontick
Dominions to perform but my self.

If any Woman be unwilling to speak to me, they may have the Convenience of
speaking to my Wife, who is expert in all feminine Distempers. She has an
excellent Cosmetick Water, to carry off Freckles, Sun-burn, or Pimples; and a
curious red Pomatum to plump and color the Lips. She can make red Hair as
white as a Lilly; she shapes the Eyebrows to a Miracle; makes low Foreheads as
high as you please; has a never-failing Remedy for offensive Breaths, a famous
Essence to correct the ill Scent of the Armpits, a rich Water that makes the
Hair curl, a most delicate Paste to smooth and whiten the Hands; also, A rare
Secret that takes away all Warts,
From the Face, Hands, Fingers, and Privy-Parts.


Those who are not able to come to me, let them send their Urine, especially
that made after Midnight, and on sight of it, I will tell them what their
Distemper is, and whether curable, or no. Nay, let a Man be in never so perfect
Health of Body, his Constitution never so vigorous and athletical, if he shows
me his Water, I can as infallibly predict what Distemper will first attack him,
though perhaps it will be thirty or forty Years hence, as an Astronomer by the
Rules of his Science, can foretell Solar or Lunar Eclipses the Year before they
happen. I have predicted miraculous Things by the Pulse, far above any
Philosopher. By it, I not only discover the Circumstances of the Body, but if
the Party be a Woman, I can foretell how many Husbands and Children she shall
have; if a Tradesman, whether his Wife will fortify his Forehead with Horns;
and so of the rest. This is not all, but I will engage to tell any serious
Persons what their Business is on every radical Figure, before they speak one
Word; what has already happened to them from their very Infancy, down to the
individual Hour of their consulting me; what their present Circumstances are;
what will happen to them hereafter; in what part of the Body they have Moles;
what Color and Magnitude they are of; and lastly, how profited, that is,
whether they calminate Equinoctially or Horizontally upon the Mesogastrium;
from which Place alone, and no other, as the profound Trismegistus has observed
before me, in his elaborate Treatise De erroribus Styli Gregoriani, all solid
Conjectures are to be formed.

I have likewise attained to the green, golden, and black Dragon, known to none
but Magicians and hermatick Philosophers; I tell the Meaning of all magical
Panticles, Sigils, Charms and Lameness, and have a Glass and Help to further
Marriage; and what is more, by my Lear^ing and great Travels, I have obtained
the true and perfect Seed and Blossom of the Female Fern; and infinitely
improved that great Traveller Major John Coke's fomous Necklaces for breeding
of Teeth. The Spring being already advanced, which is the properest Season for
preventing new, and renewing old Distempers, neglect not this Opportunity --

My Hours are from Nine till Twelve in the Morning, and from Two in the
Afternoon till Nine at Night, every Day in the Week, except on the real
Christian Sabbath, called Saturday.

It may be of Use to keep this Advertisement.

The HARANGUE of ROBERT WILMORE.
Gentlemen and Ladies,
BEHOLD this little Viol, which contains in its narrow Bounds, what the whole
Universe cannot purchase, if sold to its true Value: This admirable, this
miraculous Elixir, drawn from the Hearts of Mandrakes, Phoenix Livers, and
Tongues of Mairmaids, and distilled by contracted Sunbeams, has besides the
unknown Virtue of curing all Distempers both of Mind and Body, that Divine one
of animating the Heart of Man to that Degree, that however remiss, cold and
cowardly by Nature, he shall become Vigorous and Brave. O stupid and insensible
Man! when Honor and secure Renown invites you, to treat it with Neglect, even
when you need but passive Valor to become the Heroes of the Age; receive a
thousand Wounds, each of which would let out fleeting Life; here is that can
snatch the parting Soul in its full Career, and bring it back to its native
Mansion, baffles grim Death, and disappoints even Fate.

Gentlemen, If any of you here present was at Death's Door, here is this, my
Divine Elixir will give you Life again: This Will recover whole Fields of Slain,
And all the Dead shall rise and fight again.


'Twas this that made the Roman Legions numerous,, and now makes France so
formidable; and this alone may be the Occasion of the Loss of Germany.

Come, Gentlemen, buy this Coward's Comfort, quickly buy: What Fop would be
abused, mimick'd and scorned, for fear of Wounds that can be so easily cured?
Who is it would bear the Insolence and Pride of domineering great Men, proud
Officers, or Magistrates? Or who would cringe to Statesmen out of Fear? What
Cully would be cuckol'd? What foolish Heir undone by cheating Gamesters? What
Lord would be Lampoon'd? What Poet fear the Malice of his Satirical Brother? Or
Atheist fear to fight for Fear of Death? Come, buy my Coward's Comfort, quickly
buy.

Here, Gentlemen, is my little Paper of Powder, whose Value surmounts that of
Rocks of Diamonds, and Hills of Gold: 'Twas this made Venus a Goddess; and
given her by Apollo; from her derived to Hellen, and in the Sack of Troy lost,
till recovered by me out of some Ruins of Asia.

Come buy it, Ladies, you that would be Fair and wear eternal Youth; and you in
whom the amorous Fire remains, when all the Charms are fled: You that dress
Young and Gay, and would be thought so, that Patch and Paint, to fill up
sometimes old Furrows on your Brows, and set your selves for Conquest, though
in vain; here is that which will give you aubern Hair, white Teeth, red Lips,
and Dimples on your Cheeks: Come, buy it all you that are past betwitching, and
would have handsome, young, and active Lovers.

Come all you City Wives that would advance your Husbands to be Lord-Mayors,
come, buy of me new Beauty: This will give it though now decayed, as are your
Shop Commodities; this will retrieve your Customers, and vend your false and
outof-fashion'd Wares: Cheat, lie, protest, and cousen as you please, a
handsome Wife makes all a lawful Gain. Come, City Wives, come buy.

Here is my famous Bottle of Powder, this is the Life and Soul of Man: This is
the Amorous Powder which Venus made and gave the God of Love, which made him
first a Deity: You talk of Arrows, Bows, and killing Darts; Fables, Poetical
Fictions, and no more: It Is this alone that wounds and fires the Heart, makes
Women kind, and equals Men to Gods; it is this that makes your Great Lady dote
on the ill-favored Fop; your Great Man be jilted by his little Mistress; the
Judge cajoled by his Sempstress, and your Politician by his Comedian; your
young Lady dote on her decrepid Husband; your Chaplain on my Lady's
Waiting Woman, and the young Woman, and the Squire on the Laundry-Maid. In
fine, Sirs, It Is this that cures the Lover's Pain,
And Celia of her cold Disdain.


I need say nothing of my Divine Baths of Reformation, nor the Wonders of the
old Oracle of the Box, which resolves all Questions which sufficiently declare.

You that come to my Lodgings may have Advice Gratis: My Hours are from Eight
to Twelve, and from Three to Six.

LOPUS 's HARANGUE at Madrid.
MOST illustrious Dons, and egregiously beautiful and Virtuous Madona's, with
the rest of my gentle Friends and Auditors: Behold your humble most officious
Servant Lopus, arrived from the most ancient and stately City of Saragosa, on
purpose to make a Present of the wonderful Effects of his Physical and Chemical
Arts to your fair Acceptance, in this most glorious and courtly Town of Madrid.

I protest to you, Gentlemen, I and my Wife, with all my Servants, are not able
to make of this precious Oil you see in this Glass, half so fast as it is
fetched away from my Lodgings, by Gentlemen and others of this famous Town; and
sent for by many of the greatest Dukes and Condees of this much-celebrated
Nation, some of which have detained me to their private and particular Use a
while, since my Arrival, by their splendid Liberalities, and worthily; for what
avails it your Rich Man to have his Cellars stuffed with the purest Grape, and
his Tables furnished with the rarest Variety of dainty Acetes, when his
Physicians prescribe him (on pain of Death) to drink nothing but Watergruel, or
over-stew'd Herbs in a thin heartless Broth? O Health! the Blessing of the
Rich! the Riches of the Poor! who can buy thee at too dear a Rate, since they
cannot enjoy any Happiness in this World without thee?

Be not then so sparing of your Purses, honorable Gentlemen, as to abridge the
natural Course of your Lives; for when a humid Flux, or Catarrh, by the
Mutability of the Air, falls from your Head into an Arm, or Shoulder, or any
other Part, take you a Ducat or a Castilion of Gold, and apply it to the Place
affected, and see what good it will do. No, no, it is this blessed Unguento,
this rare Extraction, that only has the Power to disperse all malignant
Humors, from whatsoever ill-effected Causes they shall proceed.

It has Power to fortify the most indigest and crude Stomach in the World,
though it be of one that (through extreme Weakness) vomits Blood, applying only
a warm Napkin to the Place, after the Unction and Fricace: For the Vertigo in
the Head, putting but a Drop into your Nostrils, likewise behind your Ears; a
most sovereign and approved Remedy; the Mal Caduco, Cramps, Convulsions,
Paralysies, Epilepsies, Tremor Cordis, retired and shrunk Nerves, evil Vapors
of the Spleen, stopping of the Liver, the Stone, the Strangury, Hernia Ventosa,
Iliaca Passio; stops a Dysenteria, immediately eases the Torsion of the small
Guts; and cures Melancholia Hypochondriaca, being taken and applied according
to my printed Receipt; for this is the Physician, this the Medicine, this
counsels, this cures, this gives the Direction, this works the Effect, and, in
sum, both together may be termed an Abstract of the Theorick and Practick in
the Esculapian Art.

The Price is but four Ryals, that is the Price; and less I know, in courtesy,
you cannot offer me, take it or leave it; howsoever, both I and it are at your
Service. I ask you not near the Value of the Thing, for then I should ask you a
thousand Ducats; so several Grandees and Grandeza's have given me: But I
despise Money, only to show my Affection to you, Honorable Gentlemen, and this
most inclyte Town. I have neglected the Messages of diverse Princes and Nobles,
and directed my Journey hither, only to present you with the Fruits of my
Experience and Travels.

I have here likewise a most inestimable Vegetable, which is equally to be
valued with my Oil, of both which, if I had but Time to discourse to you, the
miraculous Effects, with the countless Catalogue of those I have cured of the
aforesaid, and many more Diseases; the Patents and Privileges of the most
Catholic and Christian Kings, as also of all the Princes and Commonwealths of
Christendom, or but the Depositions that have appeared on my Part, before the
most learned College of Physicians, where I was authorized, upon Notice taken
of the admirable Virtues of my Medicaments, and my own Excellency in Matter of
rare and unknown Secrets, to disperse them publicly for the common Good; and
though diverse professed to have as good and experimented Receipts as my self;
and have assayed to make both of this Oil and Water, bestowed great Cost in
Furnaces, Stills, Alembicks, continual Fires, and Preparation of Ingredients,
(as indeed there goes to each of them six hundred several Simples at least,)
yet they ever lost their Labor and Cost, both for Want of that large Talent of
Knowledge, requisite to such a Work. For my self, I have always hunted after
the most recondite Secrets; and to get them I have spared no Rest or Labor,
but taken indefatigable Pains therein; insomuch, as Gentlemen, I will undertake
(by Virtue of Chemical Art,) out of the Honorable Hat that covers your Head,
to extract the four Elements, that is to say, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, and
return you the Felt without Burn or Stain; for whilst others have been at the
Balloo, I have been at my Book, and am now past the craggy Parts of Study, and
come to the flowery Plains of Honor and Reputation.

Here is likewise a Powder concealed in this Paper, of which, if I should speak
to the Worth, five thousand Volumes where but as one Page, that Page as a Line,
that Line as a Word: So short is this Pilgrimage of Man, (which some call
Life,) to the expressing of it; or, if I would reflect upon the Price, why, the
whole World were but as an Empire, that Empire as a Province, that Province as
a Bank, that Bank as a private Purse, to the Purchase of it: I will only tell
you, it is the very Powder that made Venus a Goddess, (given her by Apollo,)
that kept her perpetually Young, cleared her Wrinkles, firmed her Gums, filled
her Skin, colored her Hair; from her derived to Hellen, and at the Sack of
Troy unfortunately lost, till now in this our Age it was as happily recovered
by a studious Antiquary, out of some Ruins of Asia, who sent a Moiety of it to
the Court of France; but much sophisticated; the rest at this present remains
with me, extracted to a Quintescence; so that wherever it but touches in Youth,
it perpetually preserves, in Age restores the Complexion, sets your Teeth as
firm as a Wall, makes them white as Ivory, that were as black as Jet; and with
the Addition of a most wonderful Bath, of my own Preparation, it will tinct a
gray Hair a pure Auburn, and make it grow so; make you cast your old harsh Skin
for one as fresh and smooth as Lada's, and so supple and quicken your Joints
and Nerves, as but seldom using it, you shall ever enjoy your Juvenal
Activities, Gusto's, and total Abilities, to the Admiration of all that
formerly knew you.

Many other rare Effects there are of this Powder and Bath, too tedious to
reckon in this Place; but whosoever has a Mind to try them, if they please to
repair to me at my Lodgings, shall be more particularly informed; only this I
shall add at this present: This Powder, has likewise a wonderful Variety of
Amorous Effects belonging to it, which are not here to be enumerated; and for
my rare Oil, though I impart to the Rich for Money, I often Cure the Poor for
God's sake.

And so God preserve his most Catholic Majesty.

The HARANGUE of the Famous SCOTO of Mantuano.
Most noble Gout, and my worthy Patrons,
IT may seem strange, that I, your Scoto Mantuano, who was ever wont to fix my
Bank in Face of the public Piazza, near the shelter of the Portico, to the
Procuratia, should now (after eight Months Absence from this illustrious City
of Venice) humbly retire my self into an obscure Nook of the Piazza.

Let me tell you, I am not (as your Lombard Proverb says) cold on my Feet, or
content to part with my Commodities at a cheaper rate, than I accustomed; look
not for it. Nor that the calumnious Reports of that impudent Detractor, and
Shame to our Profession, ( Alessandro Buttone I mean,) who gave out in public,
I was condemned a' Sforzato to the Galleys, for poisoning the Cardinal Bembo's
-- Cook, has at all attacked, much less dejected me. No, no, worthy Gentlemen,
(to tell you true,) I cannot endure to see the Rabble of these Ground
Ciarlitani, that spread their Cloaks on the Pavement, as if they meant to do
Feats of Activity, and then come in lamely with their moldy Tales out of
Boccacio, like stale Tabarine the Fabulist: Some of them discoursing their
Travels, and of their tedious Captivity in the Turks Galleys, when indeed (were
the Truth known) they were the Christian Galleys, where very temperately they
eat Bread, and drunk Water as a wholesome Penance (enjoined them by their
Confessors) for base Pilferies.

These Turdy, facy, nasty, petty, lousy, farcical Rogues, with one poor Groat's
Worth of unprepared Antimony, finely wrapped up in several Scartoccio's, are
able, very well to kill their twenty a Week, and play; yet, these
meager-starv'd Spirits, who have half stopped the Organs of their Minds with
earthy Oppilations, want not their Favorers among your shrivel'd,
sallad-eating Artizans; who are overjoyed, that they may have their Half-perth
of Physic, though it purge 'em into another World, it makes no matter.

Well, let 'em go: And Gentlemen, honorable Gentlemen, know, that for this
Time, our Bank, being thus removed from the Clamours of the Canaglia, shall be
the Scene of Pleasure and Delight: For, I have nothing to sell, little or
nothing to sell.

I protest, I, and my six Servants are not able to make of this precious
Liquor, so fast as it is fetched away from my Lodging by Gentlemen of your
City, Strangers of the Terrafirma, worshipful Merchants, ay, and Senators too,
who ever since my arrival, have detained me to their Uses, by their splendidous
Liberalities; and worthily: For, what avails your rich Man to have his
Magazines stuffed with Moscadelly, or of the purest grape, when his Physicians
prescribe him (on Pain of Death) to drink nothing but Water cocted with
Aniseeds? O, health! health! the Blessing of the Rich! the Riches of the Poor!
who can buy thee at too dear a Rate, since there is no enjoying this World
without thee: Be not then so sparing of your Purses, honorable Gentlemen, as
to abridge the natural Course of Life. --

For, when a humid Flux, or Catarrh, by the Mutability of Air, falls from your
Head into an Arm or Shoulder, or any other Part, take you a Ducat, or your
Cecchine of Gold, and apply to the Place affected; see, what good Effect it can
work? No, no, it is this blessed Unguento, this rare Extraction, that has only
Power to disperse all malignant Humors, that proceed, either of hot, cold,
moist, or windy Causes. --

To fortify the most indigest and crude Stomach, ay, were it of one that
(through extreme Weakness) vomited Blood, applying only a warm Napkin to the
Place after the Unction and Fricace; for the Vertigine in the Head, putting but
a Drop into your Nostrils, likewise behind the Ears; a most sovereign and
approved Remedy: The Malcaduco, Cramps, Convulsions, Paralysies, Epilepsies,
Tremor-Cordia, retired Nerves; ill Vapors of the Spleen, Stopping of the
Liver, the Stone, the Strangury, Hernia Ventosa, Iliaca Passio; stops a
Dysenteria immediately; eases the Torsion of the small Guts; and cures
Melancholia Hypocondriaca, being taken and applied, according to my printed
Receipt: Pointing to his Bill and his Glass.
For, this is the Physician, this the Medicine; this Counsels, this Cures; this
gives the Direction, this works the Effect: And (in sum) both together may be
termed an abstract of the Theorick and Practick in the Aesculapian Art. 'Twill
cost you eight Crowns. And, Zan Fritada, prithee sing a Verse extempore in
Honor of it.

SONG.
HAD old Hippocrates or Galen,
(That to their Books put Medicines all in)
But known this Secret, they had never
(Of which they will be guilty ever)
Been murderers of so much Paper,
Or wasted many a hurtless taper:
No Indian Drug had e're been famed,
Tobacco, Sassafras not named;
No yet, of Guacum one small stick, Sir,
Nor Raymund Lullies great Elixir.
Nor had been known the Danish Gonswart,
Or Paracelsus, with his long Sword.
No more. Gentlemen, if I had but Time to discourse to you the miraculous
Effects of this my Oil, surnamed Oglio del Scoto, with the countless Catalogue
of those I have cured of the aforesaid, and many more Diseases; the Patents and
Privileges of all the Princes and Commonwealths of Christendom; or but the
Depositions of those that appeared on my Part before the Signiory of the
Sanit^, and most learned College of Physicians, where I was authorized, upon
Notice taken of the admirable Virtues of my Medicaments, and mine own
Excellency in Matter of rare and unknown Secrets, not only to disperse them
publicly in this famous City, but in all the Territories that happily joy
under the Government of the most pious and magnificent States of Italy. But may
some other gallant Fellow say, Oh! there be diverse that make Profession to have
as good and as experimented Receipts as yours: Indeed, very many have assayed,
like Apes, in Imitation of that which is really and essentially in me, to make
of this Oil; bestowed great Cost in Furnaces, Stills, Alembicks, continual
Fires, and Preparation of the Ingredients, (as indeed there goes to it six
hundred several Simples, besides some Quantity of human Fat, for the
Conglutination, which we buy of the Anatomists;)but when these Practitioners
come to the last Decoction, blow, blow, puff, puff, and all flies in Fumo! Ha,
ha, ha, poor Wretches! I rather pity their Folly and Indiscretion, than their
Loss of Time and Money; for those may be recovered by Industry; but to be a
Fool born, is a Disease incurable. For myself, I always from my Youth have
endeavored to get the rarest Secrets, and book them, either in Exchange, or
for Money: I spared not Cost nor Labor, where any Thing was worthy to be
learned. And Gentlemen, honorable Gentlemen, I will undertake (by Virtue of
Chemical Art,) out of the Honorable Hat that covers your Head, to extract the
four Elements, that is to say, the Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, and return you
your Felt without Burn or Stain; for whilst others have been at the Balloe, I
have been at my Book, and am now past the craggy Parts of Study, and come to
the flowery Plains of Honor and Reputation.

But to our Price: You all know (honorable Gentlemen) I never valued this
Ampulla, or Villa, at less than eight Crowns, but for this Time I am content to
be deprived of it for six; six Crowns is the Price; and less, in courtesy, I
know you cannot offer me, take it or leave it; howsoever, both it and I am at
your Service. I ask you not as the Value of the Thing, for then I should demand
of you a thousand Crowns; so the Cardinals Montalto, Fernese, the Great Duke of
Tuscany, my Gossip, with diverse other Princes, have given me; but I despise
Money: Only to show my Affection to you, honorable Gentlemen, and your
illustrious State here, I have neglected the Messages of these Princes; mine
own Offices framed my Journey hither, only to present you with the Fruits of my
Travels. Tune your Voices once more to the Touch of your Instruments, and give
the honorable Assembly some delightful Recreations.

SONG.
YOU that would last long, list to my Song,
Make no more Coil, but buy of this Oil,
Would you be ever fair and young,
Stout of Teeth, and strong of Tongue;
Tart of Palate, quick of Ear;
Sharp of Sight, of Nestril clear;
Moist of Hand, and light of Foot;
(Or I will come nearer to it,)
Would you live free from all Diseases,
Do the Act your Mistress pleases;
Yea fright all Aches from your Bones;
Here Is a Medicine for the Nones.
Well, I am in a Humor (at this Time) to make a Present of the small Quantity
my Coffer contains; to the Rich in courtefy, and to the Poor for God's sake.
Wherefore now mark; I asked you six Crowns; and six Crowns at other Times you
have paid me: You shall not give me six Crowns, nor five, nor four, nor three,
nor two, nor one, nor half a Ducat, no, nor a Muccinigo; Sixpence it will cost
you, or six hundred Pound: -- Expect no lower Price; for by the Banner of my
Front, I will not bate a Bagatine; that I will have only as a Pledge of your
Loves, to carry something from amongst you, to show I am not contemned by you.
Therefore now toss your Handkerchiefs cheerfully, cheerfully; and be
advertized, that the first heroic Spirit that deigns to grace me with a
Handkerchief, I will give it a little Remembrance of something beside, shall
please it better than if I had presented it with a double Pistolet.

Lady, I kiss your Bounty; Celia at the Window throws down her Handkerchief.
and for this timely Grace you have done your poor Scoto of Mantua, I will
return you over and above, my Oil, a Secret of that high and inestimable
Nature, shall make you for ever enamored on that Minute, wherein your Eye
first descended on so mean (yet not altogether to be despised) an Object. Here
is a Powder concealed in this Paper, of which, if I should speak to the Worth,
nine thousand Volumes where but as one Page, that Page as a Line, that Line as
a Word: So short is this Pilgrimage of Man, (which some call Life,) to the
expressing of it: Would I reflect upon the Price, why, the whole World were but
as an Empire, that Empire as a Province, that Province as a Bank, that as a
private Purse, to the Purchase of it: I will only tell you, it is the Powder
that made Venus a Goddess, (given her by Apollo,) that kept her perpetually
Young, cleared her Wrinkles, firmed her Gums, filled her Skin, colored her
Hair; from her derived to Hellen, and at the Sack of Troy (unfortunately) lost,
till now in this our Age it was as happily recovered by a studious Antiquary
out of some Ruins of Asia, who sent a Moiety of it to the Court of France, (but
much sophisticated,) wherewith the Ladies there now color their Hair; the rest
(at this present) remains with me, extracted to a Quintescence; so that
wherever it but touches in Youth, it perpetually preserves; in Age restores the
Complexion, seats your Teeth, did they dance like virginal Jacks, firm as a
Wall, makes them white as Ivory that were black as --

FINIS.

