To the Honble, the COMMONS of England, In Parliament Assembled: The Humble
Petition of WILLIAM FULLER.
SHOWS,
THAT Your Petitioner has long groaned under intolerable Misfortunes,
occasioned through the Immaturity of his Judgment, which was too easily Imposed
on, by the Perfidiousness of Coll. Thomas Dalleval, and Mr. George Hayes; for
whose Appearance Your Petitioner Engaged to the Honorable House,
(intentionally for the Nation's Service, though the Event proved contrary;) and,
for their Failure, incurred the Displeasure of the Same.

YOUR Petitioner humbly presumes, That most in this House were present, when
his Information was Read; as also, the Lord Preston's, and Mr. Crone's
Confessions; which did Both Confirm, what Your Petitioner Affirmed;
perticularly, Mr. Crone Asserts it upon Oath.

YOUR Petitioner submissively flings himself on the Justice and Wisdom of This
Honorable House; Humbly conceiving, That he can have no Redress from the
Wrongs he suffers, but by Your Wise Examination of the Whole Management of the
Affair; into which Your Petitioner was so Cunningly ensnared, by the Artifices
of the French Court, and their Private Adherents in this Kingdom; by whose
subtle Device, the Honorable House (as well as Your Petitioner) was Abused; It
being, at that Time, the greatest Design, and most for the Interest of the
French-Court, and their Friends in England, to stifle what ever Discovery
should be then made: For, the April following, they purposed an Invasion; and
accordingly provided all necessary Provisions at La-Hogue, etc.

And, for as much as Your Petitioner can plainly prove, That Dalleval and Hays
did Come-over; and the Method of their whole Intriegue in this base Design, in
which they had great Assistance in this Kingdom; as also, the manner of their
Going-off;

YOUR Petitioner, with entire Submission, most heartily wishes, (for the
Nations Present, as well as Future Security) That this Honorable House will
examine into the Management of the whole Intriegue; which cost the French-Court
so much Pains and Money.

BY this Inspection, You will plainly find, who they are that have so long,
and, I fear, part of them, yet continue to betray His present Majesty's
Council, and this Kingdom in General.

THAT Your Petitioner was the First, which discovered to King WILLIAM Colonel
Parker's, and Chevalier Granvil's Design of Assassinating His Most Sacred
Majesty, Your Petitioner can fully prove.

And, That his former Informations were a true Narrative, even of the last
intended Invasion and Conspiracy, in most Particulars: And, That those Former,
and these Latter Designs, were much alike managed by the same Conspiring Hands
and Hearts; will plainly appear, on the Perusal of the said Information.

YOUR Petitioner, after all this, has been reduced to the most extreme
Miseries, and suffered Public Disgrace, occasioned by Other's Villainies; and
has also been exposed to several hard Shifts, and Extremities.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly Prays,
THAT (for the Nation's Good [whose Representatives YOU are] as well as for his
Vindication from the intolerable Injuries Your said Petitioner has so long
groaned under) He, Your Petitioner, may have some Redress, by Your Mature
Consideration of his unhappy Case; That Justice, and Truth, may appear on every
Side; and, That such necessary Provision may be made for Your Petitioner, (who
left his Friends, Interest, and Employ in France) to Serve this present
Government) as to Your Highly Judicious Wisdoms shall seem expedient: -- Your
Petitioner further prays, That he may have Leave of the House, to publish A
full and perfect Account of all he knows, relating to the former Conspiracies
against the present Government.

And Your Petitioner, as in Duty bound, shall ever Pray,etc.


