To the Supreme Authority, the right Honorable the Commons of England assembled
in PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of Godfrey Goodman, late Bishop of
Gloucester.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner has suffered in these times, as much proportionably, and
in as hard a manner as any other man has done (as verily he believes.) Though
no man can produce better Certificates, or give greater assurance of his
innocence, than your Petitioner can do; That his Pockets have been twice
searched, all his Letters perused, and much enquiry made to find out
accusations against him: Yet he humbly thanks God that he has ever been found
innocent; That he has not only lost in effect, all his own Moneys, But very
much what belongs to others, insomuch that for Orphants alone he has past over
a Lease which in former times would have yealded fouteene or fifteen hundred
pounds, besides great Arreares which are behind and unpaid, and for which he
should make satisfaction to a great value; though he used all possible means
to preserve them, sending moneys beyond Seas to Hamborow by Bill of Exchange,
yet were they called back again, and paid to the use of the Parliament, as may
appear by the Acquittance, the like whereof he conceives has not befallen any
other man though the greatest delinquent. That notwithstanding all his former
sufferings, yet he still cannot be freed. Lately there came an Officer to
demand Ninty six pound, pretending it to be a debt due to your Pet. and that he
was to receive it for the use of the Parliament. Within this month two of his
neighbors were brought up to London living above 40 miles distant, only to be
examined what debts were due to your Pet. that others might receive them. Your
Pet. holding one Personage in Commendam, one Mr. Newbery now for some years
has enjoyed the whole benefit, upon pretense that your Pet. is Sequestered,
and his serving the Cure there. Whereas your Petitioner is freed from
Sequestration by the Articles of Anglesey; neither has he discharged the Cure,
for that he has not administered the Communion all his time, nor Baptized their
children: The Parishioners have generally made their Certificates in the
behalf of your Pet. who in his wants desiring to have some relife out of his
Parsonage, it being well worth 180 l. per annum. Mr Newbery gave him him this
answer, that he ought to have none, because he had neither wife nor children,
though indeed your Pet. had very well deserved of him. That while he enjoyed
his preferments, he takes God to witness, that he never thought it lawful for
him to enrich himself by any Church means, but did ever desire God to direct
him, that he might spend his Church means in a Church-like manner, and to the
best uses: Insomuch that being of himself meanly provided, and having lived
seven years without Rents, upon his own stock; which being now wholly
exhausted, he wants means to subsist, and does humbly beg some maintenance
for his Relief, and that he may be freed from Sequestrations or any
Delinquency, protesting that wittingly and willingly he never did, nor ever
shall offend the Parliament.

August 31. 1649. And your Petitioner shall daily pray God to reward you.
Godfrey Goodman.

Quarto Aprilis 1649.
WE whose names are hereunto subscribed do hereby certify; That Godfrey
Goodman late Bishop of Gloucester, has lived in this Country and County, now
for the space of six years or thereabouts, in effect during the whole time of
the War, in which time there have been here diverse and several Armies,
some for the King, some for the Parliament: Yet we neither know, nor ever heard
that the said Godfrey Goodman, did ever enterpose or intermeddle in any matters
of War; but has ever lived quietly and privately. And this we can do no
less than testify at his request, now at his departure out of this Country.

Tho: Madrin. Vic. Car. Tho: Williams John Owen. Io. Parry.


WE also whose names are hereunto subscribed, do hereby testify that the
above mentioned Godfrey Goodman, for the space of a year last past since our
residence in Carnarvon, has not intermedled with any business concerning
Warlike affairs; but has demeaned himself as is above specified by the
Gentlemen of that Country.

Tho: Mason. Mark Mould.


To the Honorable William Lenthall, Speaker of the Parliament of England and
Recorder of the City of Gloucester, and to the Knights Citizens and Burgesses
of the said City and County of Gloucester. attending in PARLIAMENT.
Honorable,
AT the earnest request of our late Bishop Doctor Goodman, who by his own
relation has suffered in these times as much proportionably as any man has
done; Yet has Certificates from the high Sheriff, Justices, Committees,
Governors of Castles where he lived, that he never inteposed in any matter of
War. Having lost in effect all his means, and not only his own, but very
much what belonged to others, by whom he was entrusted, and for which he must
make satisfaction, to a very great value. Though we write nothing in
commendations of him (which he in his Modesty desires may be forborne) Yet
surely we can do no less than give him this Testimony, that he has lived
very quietly and lovingly amongst us for these twenty years. And considering
the course of his expense, we conceive he could not enrich himself by his
Bishopprick. And having now lived for the space of Seven years wholly upon his
own stock, and that now utterly exhausted. Our humble desire is, that ye move
the Honorable House of Commons, that he may have some means wherewith to
subsist, and that ye would be pleased to further him in his Petition, which we
hope will be done, the rather upon our recommendations whom you represent in
Parliament; And this we earnestly desire, ever resting

Your humble and faithful Servants, Gentlemen of Gloucester-shire.
William Shepherd William Stafford Edward Kingscot Richard Yate John Brain
John Giffard John Corwell Anthony Gifford William Selvyn Thomas Hylwey Arthur
Fonler William Leigh William Mewe Thomas Estcourt
Citizens of Gloucester.
Henry Cugly Major. William Singleton John Hanbury Thomas Hill Edward Nourse
Laurence Singleton De: Wise John Madocke Ias. Clutterbooke James Stephens John
Dorney William Clarke, Richard Tailor Richard Harware Nathaniell Hodges Edward
Collett John Wood Robert Tyther Robert Pewin Thomas Pierce Iam. Commelin Thomas
Cook.
Burgesses of Tukesbury.
John Man Chr: Atkinson Baylifes. William Wilson Richard Mince Thomas Hale
Edward Ienings Thomas Hales, Senior. William Whitledge John Orrell John Schiter
John Millington Phillip Hilly John Carver Henry Robins William Fowler John
Brown William Scudamore
Burgesses of Cirencester
Andrew Solace Giles Handcox Amos Dansey John Broad Thomas Roberts John
Woodball Thomas Deacon Edmond Freeman John Kenible Thomas Gibbs Richard
Massinger John Shingleton Thomas Witcombe Thomas Trippett John Maddockes John
Screven William Starr John Tomes William Russell Ieffery Beale

Windsor and some other Gentlemen of Bark-shire have written to the same
effect, but because they writ some thing in commendation, etc. therefore they
are not published. In regard of my age being near 70. and a great infirmity,
I cannot solicit my own business, but do desire that what favor shall be
showed me, may be ascribed under Gods mercy and providence, to your own
goodness and compassion, and not to my importunity.




