A REPLY of two of the Brethren TO A. S.

WHEREIN YOU HAVE OBSERVATIONS ON HIS CONSIDERATIONS, ANNOTATIONS, etc.

Upon the Apologeticall Narration.

WITH A Plea for Liberty of Conscience for the Apologists Church way; Against
the Cavils of the said A. S.

Formerly called M. S. to A. S.

Humbly submitted to the judgments of all rational, and moderate men in the
world.

With a short survey of W. R. his Grave confutation of the Separation, and some
modest, and innocent touches on the LETTER from ZELAND, And Mr. PARKER'S from
New England.

The second Edition, corrected, and enlarged.

Nec Imperiale est dicendi libertatem negare, nec Sacerdotale, quod sentias non
decere. Ambr. Ep. 17. Licenced and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed by M. Simmons, for H. Overton. 1644.

A Word to the READER, showing the Causes of this second Edition, VIZ.
NOt mere importunity of friends (though many) but 1. To undisplease (if it may
be) some of the contrary judgment, by blotting out some sharp expressions;
though extorted, forced and wrung forth by the violent hammering and
inculcating provocations of A. S. as may be seen in several passages of his
Observations, etc. 2. To please the Author in rectifying the accidental leaving
out; as also the insertings in of some things, that gave not that self-content
as some may deem. 3. For the explanation of some things to the Reader. Brevis
esse laboro, obscurus fio: haste causes brevity, brevity obscurity. The want,
or change of an and, the, not, or that, etc. oft-times makes a Sentence go
heavy and harsh. 4. To set right some material mistakes in printing. 5. And
lastly, to tell A. S. why no names at length were put to their book; viz.
because he did not put his name at length to his, nor has he any wherein
print owned it that we know of. Therefore have the two brethren (who only for
dispatch, joined in this Reply to A. S.) forborne also in this second Edition to
subscribe their names, though they doubt not by Gods grace to make good any
thing they have written.

Farewell.
A. S. SOME OBSERVATIONS AND ANNOTATIONS UPON THE APOLOGETICALL NARRATION,
Humbly submitted to the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT, the most Reverend and
learned DIVINES of the Assembly, and all the Protestant Churches here in this
Island and abroad.
M. S. IF A. S. his heart be rent with discontent in two pieces (as he says in
his Epistle) at the innocent bleatings of that wronged Lamb the Apology;
surely our hearts more justly may be rent in twenty pieces to hear and see
this roaring Lyon-like Reply, with his many claws of Observations, Annotations,
Considerations, and Notes, renting and tearing that modest and innocent thing,
and no man saying to him, Why do thou so? Is this the use men make of
pressing Sermons, and printed Considerations to stay and wait what the Assembly
would do; that some preach, and others print for their own way, on the one
side, whilst the other stand still to be beaten, muffled and bound up from
speaking by Pen and Press without much striving? The Apology did but tell men
with as gracious words and as much sweetness as a thing could speak, how
far they did recede from, and disclaim Separation and Brownisme; and how
near they did cloze with the present reformed Churches, even beyond
expectation, and see how many stinging flies are, and about to a light upon
this youngling newly eaned. One buzzing to the other, as one Raven inviting
another, at this lambing-time of the year, that the young brood at the same
minute may see the light and lose their eyes.

How many Replies in a few weeks, appearingly have turned the world, if not
the Church, upside down; most men seeming to be resolved before the Arguments
are solved.

Believe it, it works more upon the spirits of the best men, then ever any
thing yet that befell this Kingdom. Things before were irregular enough, but
now preposterous; before resolute enough, now violent; before the body of the
Kingdom, the Commonwealth, was sore sick, now the soul, the Church.

THE TITLE OF THE BOOK.
The Title of the Book in the Title page and the first page is, Some
Observations, Annotations, and General Considerations upon the Apologeticall
Narration, humbly submitted to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, the most
reverend and learned Divines of the Assembly, and all the Protestant Churches
here in this Island, and abroad.

A title carrying a great breadth with it, and soaring high, as if A. S. were
confident that in his book he speaks learnedly, as a Scholar, truly, as an
honest man, gravely, as a serious man, and lovingly, as a Christian man; and
that all these ways he did make good that title, which if it be shaped to
the book, and read according to the rode thereof, I speak it seriously and
with a sad heart (these being no times nor things for jesting or jearing, which
is the fault of A. S.) A. P. M. said A. S. jeered. Another Gentleman said, he
liked not the spirit of the man, yet neither of them Independents.
may most justly be read thus: In Observations and in Considerations simply
committed against the Honorable Houses of Parliament, the reverend Assembly of
Divines, and the Protestant Churches at home and abroad.

For this one single simple A. S. now starts up by himself, peremptorily to
state, and determine the Questions, for the resolution whereof the Parliament
thought the Assembly of Divines few enough to undertake; and therefore called
all them together for that purpose, who are now most intent upon the pin of the
controversy; yet as if A. S. would take the work out of their hands, he will
anticipate, and forejudge the five Ministers as utterly erring throughout (for
he sifts them corn after corn) which if true, the dispute is at an end. Go
then A. S. and carry, if you dare, your platform to the Parliament, and
entreat the learned Assembly to dissolve.

But, A. S. will go his own way, and thereby he has given great offense to
the Protestant Churches, to charge them all of dissenting from the five
Ministers, and awakening men's spirits into replies, when before they were
drowsing with long expectation these two years of a public determination, and
I wish this might have been the last Reply, before all things were sweetly
composed. How ever this intends only to take off aspersions, not to lay down
assertions. We will but barely answer A. S. who has so lasht the five
Ministers with so much sharpness of spirit, for telling the world how far off
they are from Brownisme and Separation, and how close they come to the more
reformed Churches in Scotland and England. Many very good men have wondered that
the five Ministers closed so much; yet A. S. is bitterly angry they close no
more, before the point be disputed. O, it was a fault of the Cynick Philosopher
in his high shoes so to dance on the Platonic Philosophers Bed and Arras
Coverlet, with boasting, that he danced on his brother Philosophers pride, as
that the patient Philosopher could justly reply, yea, says he, Thou dancest on
my pride with thy greater pride.

How much of this is A. S. I say not; but sure it was the unseasonablest, if
not the most unsavory book to multitudes of spiritual palates, as ever wise
man put forth.

Yet James Cranford is quoted by the Printer in the page before the Title, as
approving it and the book with a licentious approbation, in these words; These
judicious Observations and Annotations, etc. as being at this time necessary
and seasonable for the vindication of all Protestant Churches, defending the
authority of Parliaments and Synods, and prevention of division amongst our
selves, (though I reverence the persons of the Apologists, yet) I approve to be
impressed.

Mr. Cranford, if the Printer has dealt faithfully with you, let me entreat
you (and the Lord help you) to see your self, ask your conscience, ask your
reason, ask the book it self, whether there be one true clause in all that you
have said?

Are these Observations, etc. of A. S. judicious, that are extra-judiciall and
prejudicial to the public peace and order, and ordinance for dispute,
prejudging and adjudging them, who jointly with the grave Assembly, A. S.
acknowledges the Arbitrator in the matters in question? Are they at this time
necessary, when the grave Commissioners of Scotland had with far more
prudence and solidity then A. S. said by way of reply so much to the Apology,
Nemine reclamante, none replying till A. S. was abroad? Is there any need to
bring a great printing Press, to squeese to death a poor worm trodden on
before? Or to bring many leavers to break an egg, that makes small resistance?
The truth is, A. S. his Observations are like a man with a Pole-axe, knocking a
man on the head to kill a fly lighting on his beard.

For though he says, He humbly submits to the Protestant Churches, yet he
lays about him as if he would knock them all down unto a submission to A. S.
whosoever they be that will not stoop to his book. For though he thinks that
all Protestant and Christian Churches are for him rather then for the five
Ministers, as he intimates in the beginning of his Epistle, and therefore in
all likelihood professes a submission to them, yet he will find many Churches
in London (he would wonder if we should name how many) that will not submit to
his book, and yet come to the public Ordinance, do not separate, but are most
willing to submit to the truth, regularly discussed, cleared, and brought down
to them. Yet still James Cranford stands fixed in the license page, in black
and not blush, for asserting that A. S. his Observations, etc. are judicious
and necessary; when as they are neither, unless preposterousnesse, abuse of
good men, and the disturbance of the people, be judicious and necessary. For
though the ensuing answer will prove them evil, yet they will never be proved
necessary evils. They are not so much as civilly necessary, either necessitate
praecepti, as commanded by Parliament, or Assembly, or necessitate medii, as
useful to compose, but indispose the minds of men, to embrace things
prejudiced with the violence of private spirits. Men will not be so easily
whipped and compelled by one inferior.

Again, are the Observations seasonable, which do but interstrepere, make a
noise, whilst the Divines are disputing, drawing the people together in heaps,
there taking up their parts, to defend one against another, and pre-ingage
themselves before they come to hear what the Assembly will say? For such a
book cannot come forth, but it makes a thousand dispute in a week, every one
then contending for his own, when it is so irregularly and illegally taken
from him. Are they for the vindication of all Protestant Churches, when as in
condemning the Apology, they condemn many, very many Churches in England, many
in Holland, generally all in New England, notwithstanding some private Letters
and Manuscripts sent over, to which we shall answer afterward. Are they for
the defense of the authority of Parliament, in opposition to the Apology? Does
the Apology touch one hair of the honorable heads of the Parliament? Are not
the five Ministers chidd^n some where in print, for saying, They allow more to
the civil R. ^.
Magistrate, then they think others principles can? Does not A. S. snib them
too for going (as he thinks in their Apology) to the civil Magistrate? Page 4.
Does not A. S. in his Book give a negative vote against the civil
Magistrates directive power in matters of Religion? Let me Page 5.
say what I think, seeng I think no harm, viz. If the resolutions of the
Divines be not digested by the reason and graces of the Houses of Parliament,
and so made as their own sense, for ought I know they will never be turned
into a Statute.

If the Parliament have no directive power in matters of Religion, or
Ecclesiastical, under any notion; then A. S. will condemn them for voting down
the new Canons, and prescribing the Oath or Covenant.

Are these Observations for the defense of the autboritie of Synods, in
opposition to the Apology? What Synods? Scripture-Synods? Where does the
Apology whimper against them? or do you mean Classical ones? If so, that is
the question. And so you proclaim a defense of that which yet has no
existence. The question is not resolved. Lastly, are these Observations for
prevention of sad division amongst our selves?

Well. Mr. Cranford, you have by this endeavored to set Divines together by
the ears More Ecclesiastico, your licentiating has enabled men to give the
second blow, upon which the Common Law lays the breach of the peace. And
notwithstanding you license these Annotations, yet you say you reverence the
persons of the Apologists. A pin for such complements; Love me, and love the
truth. Let us measure your respects to them, whilst the advantage of the higher
ground whereon it stands be removed. Away with your dare verba, your froathy
words; This is the truth, so much you respect them, as A. S. respects them. And
so much have you spoken judiciously, truly, and seasonably, as A. S. has
spoken, and no more. If he be cast, you will be condemned. Stand by Mr
Cranford, and hear A. S. tried, and in him your self.

THE EPISTLE.
A. S. To the right reverend Divines, the Authors of the Apologetical Narration.

M. S. The Authors of the Apologeticall Narration desire more of your right,
though they have less of your reverence. Had I written a book with so much
unreverence, I would either have blotted out my title Right Reverend, or else I
should never have put in that Episcopal style, Most Reverend, and Right
Reverend, seeing the Bishops are going. For to stroke in the title, and to
strike in the book, is but flattery, if not gross dissimulation. Or as to say,
Art thou in health my brother? and in the mean while to strike under the fifth
rib.

A. S. The high esteem I have ever had of your persons, etc. except only in
your particular opinions, wherein the dissent from al Protestant, yea all
Christian Churches in the world.

M. S. Now let the Protestant Churches (to whom you say you submit) judge
whether in these words, there be not a notorious untruth. For wherein do the
five Ministers and their Churches differ from many Churches in England, diverse
in Holland, and generally all within the Patent of New England, if you account
these places Protestant?

It may be you will object, Mr. Parkers Letter and some Manuscripts from
New England, and the Letter from Zeland. To Mr. Parker his Letter we need say
little, the Letter will answer for us, though Mr. Parker little thought when he
wrote it, to find an A. S. in England, or that his brother Bailey would have
printed his Letter seemingly to anticipate the disputation of the Assembly, as
if he meant to beg the question, though but with shows and shadows.

1. Mr. Parker says not one word for a Classical Presbytery, (the maine
difference in hand) but for a Congregationall, that he would have in some
things more managed by the Presbyteries of every Congregation, without putting
every thing to the vote of the people of the Congregation* because some
confusion has followed upon it. Does in necessaries abuse take away the use?
There was confusion in the Church of Corinth. Or is there any mention of this
in the Apology, that all businesses of the Church must be put to the vote of
the Congregation?

2. That in that thing only there has been an arguing on both sides. M. Parker
and Mr. Noise only are mentioned in the letter, to be on the one side and all
the other Churches on the other, against Mr. Parker and Mr. Noise. And 3ly. Mr.
Parker does not say he won the day, but as he answered their Arguments (as he
says) so he confesses they answered his Arguments, and the thing is left to
consideration. Yea a godly man of New England told me that the Churches of
New England did conceive that Mr. Parker had received full satisfaction from
them in that point. How ever it were, all amounts but to a private letter
subscribed by one man, yet Imprimatur says I. C. as if much to the purpose.
But look but a little afterward to our answer to a Letter from Zeland, and you
shall find the judgment of New England in Letters newly come over.

To any private copies or Manuscripts from New England, one Mr. Rutherford has
answered, as too much jumping with the Apology and opposite to Classical
Presbytery. Another, if it had come forth, would have been keener against A.
S. then the Apology is. So that if ^he Apology do differ from that, it is
only because the Apology more agrees with the reformed Churches of this
Island. And for the third, it has nothing at all for Classical Presbytery,
but some things touching the ordering of Congregationall Presbyteries, and all
these are but private intelligencers, and mutual advisers, not determination,
or national No more then, I suppose, Mr. Cranford or A. S. will account the
strange Queries on the Apology and Scotch Commissioners Reply, to be the
sense of New England, though made by one of that Country.

As for the letter of Zeland, I cannot tell how to speak all the truth, and not
offend some, whom by my will I would not in the least displease. Sure this will
not offend to tell A. S. that in Holland, if not in Zeland, are some Churches
that are fully with the five Ministers, unto which some of them do relate. And
to speak these things to the Letter it self, being matters of fact, I hope
cannot justly offend. 1. That that Letter came admirably punctual upon the
very nick after the first reply to the Apology was out. 2. That a Scottish
Knight (as it was informed) nine or ten days before it was known abroad, that
the letter was to come, said, What if ye receive a Letter from Zeland,
disliking the Apology? or to that effect. 3. That there is a Scottish Church
(of which one Spang is a very busy agent) at Trevere hard by Middleborough,
whence the letter came. 4. That there are in it many high passages seeming to
some so prejudicial to our worthy Magistracy, that it justifies that of the
Apology, saying, That the five Ministers, etc. give more to the Civil
Magistrates, then tbe principles of some Presbyterians do. The said letter
giving so too little to the Magistracy, that the State of England, I think,
cannot approve it here among us. Verbum sapientisat est. More may be thought,
upon evident grounds, but not spoken here. 5. Most happily by almost a
miraculary providence, in this nick of time, came two letters from New England
to countermand Mr. Parkers Letter thence, and the other from Zeland.

The first from Mr. Winthorp Governor of New England, To his reverend and very
good brother, Mr. Hugh Peter's Minister of the Gospel, these deliver in London.
Our late Assembly of about forty Elders met, wherein the way of our Churches
was approved, and the Presbytery disallowed.

Winthorp Governor. December. 10. 1643.

The second from another of New England, to another Minister in Old-England
about the same time, wherein we have these passages. We have had, says he, a
Synod lately in our College, wherein sundry things were agreed on gravely, as,
That the votes of the people are needful in all admissions and
excommunications, at least in way of consent; all yielding to act with their
consent. 2. That those that are fit matter for a Church, though they are not
always able to make large and particular relations of the work and doctrine of
faith, yet must not live in the commission of any known sin, or the neglect of
any known duty. 3. That consociation of Churches in way of more general
meetings yearly, and more private monthly or quarterly, as Consultative
Synods, are very comfortable and necessary for the peace and good of the
Churches. 4. It was generally desired that the exercitium of the Churches power
might only be in the Eldership in each particular Church, unless their sins
be apparent in their work. 5. That Parishes, Churches in old England, could
not be right without a renewed Covenant at least, and the refusers excluded.
And were not New England so far, the Churches of New England would soon send
a third, punctually to approve the Apology, unless it be for their nearer
compliance with them who notwithstanding have written against them.

We have been the longer in answer to this clause, because we find A. S. to
be but the Text of other men's Commentary-discourses; who say, That the five
Ministers will oppose all the visible Christian Churches in the world. If they
did, it were not such a wonder, as for one Wickliff in one age, one Husse in
another, and Luther in a third to oppose all the world.

The truth is, all Churches generally, partly by tyranny, and partly by
Security, are grown so corrupt, that to apologize for a through reformation,
seems to reprove all, and so all are ready to be offended, that are less
reformed. We have heard of sad stories of late, but true, (not teld in a
corner) of the lamentable over-spreading of Popery, Atheism, drunkenness in
some kingdoms, and adultery, formality, etc. in others. If we reform but in
part, by halves, imitating Hen. 8. toward the Pope, cutting off the head of
Prelacie, and sitting down in their Chair (similia non sunt contraria) as Mr
Davenport meeting with a Classical Presbytery in his way to New England, said
they were but thirteen Bishops for one) the cry of the sin against our light
and opportunity, will call back our reeling Reformation (like will hasten to
like) an unblest posture will leave us unhealed of our sins, and our sins will
make us become any thing. Had not the Abbeys been pulled down, the Priories
since had had opportunity to have risen. Therefore Moses grinds the Idol to
powder, that it might be quite abolished. I speak all this by way of
supposition, what shall upon full debate be found to be the Idol, the nest of
Popery, the Chair of Prelacy, the half-reformation.

Thus of your charging the five Ministers with dissenting from all Protestant
Churches. The expression that follows, is a most gross one. That they differ
from all Christian Churches. I say gross, in two things: 1. To call them
Churches, and Christian, that are not Protestant (and ergo are Popish) now
since the Council of Trent wherein they gave Christ a bill of divorce (as the
learned assert) anathematizing most of his main truths. The Popish
(notwithstanding a few Saints in secret here and there) are in a dependence on
Antichrist. 2. To charge it as a crime on the five Ministers to differ from
them, when as it is a sin and shame not to dissent from them. If you dissent
not from them, you will never kindly dissent from the entitled Mo. R. A. BB.
and Rt. Rev. BB. I observe that men in their Replies, secretly before they are
aware,
run to the Popish marks of a Church, viz. Visibility, Succession,
Universality.

A. S. You as my self are but men, yet ye know but in part, and consequently
may err.

M. S. Yet this one man thinks he has more knowledge to his part, then the
other five Ministers, or else sure he would not so boldly condemn them of
erring, in a point which all the Assembly have not yet determined; and so
peremptorily acquit himself.

A. S. I thought this which is the question between you and all the Churches in
the Christian world.

M. S. This untruth comes thick upon us, that the Apol. differs from all the
Christian world. It is intimated in the title. It is expressed in the very
beginning of the Epistle, and here again, and once more in 3. page of the
Epist. and once in Consid. 5. and how often more in the book I do not yet know,
till I find as I go. We have answered it once for all in the threshold of this
Epistle.

A. S. I esteemed it no less a part of my duty and Christian liberty, as a
man to oppose my self to five men: then for five men to oppose five hundred
thousand, etc.

M. S. Hear ye, O all ye men on earth, that A. S. says it is his Christian
liberty to oppose the five Ministers: but the whole scope of his book is to
rebuke them upon supposition that they do oppose others. whiles they tell them
wherein they agree with them. One instance follows at the he^l of his Christian
liberty; to which by and by. Mean while, Reader, observe how this man's words do
smell popishly (though I think the man to be a real Protestant) as if they came
from Rome, intimating as if visibilitie, universalitie, and so plurality of
voices of learned men, might be an unerring, or very certain argument. He
speaks as if he had forgot or never heard of Wickliff, many years after him
Husse, long after him Luther justly opposing the whole world, as we all
religiously maintain at this day. And that one Paphnutius opposed a whole
Council (mistaken in a point) which is upon record of History, to his great
honor to this day.

A. S. Five men to oppose so many learned men, so many holy Divines, hundreds,
and thousands for one of you, no way inferior to the learnedest and best among
you, and not only to particular men and Divines, but to so many; yea, and those
the most pure, and most reformed Churches of the world, amongst whom there have
been found so many thousands who have sealed Christ's truth with the loss of
their goods, imprisonment of their bodies, by exile of their persons, yea with
their dearest blood, and lives, who if they wrote not miracles, yet God
declared his almighty power in working miracles about them, etc.

M. S. Here we have in form (and I will not say how much more) a Popish
argument, I will not say a mopish argument; I abhor flying on men instead of
matter. To this I will speak, and then they that will be deceived, let them be
deceived. First, you Doctrines and practices prove men good, not men, doctrines
and practices good
dub such a number of men and people Saints, most reformed, learned, no way
inferior to the learned, and best among the five Ministers, as if you knew
perfectly all men's spirits, men's lives in all places in the world, and the five
Ministers parts, etc. intus and incute. Then secondly, as before you came, what
R. Reverend and most Reverend (I desire to speak it no other way then with a
Christian grief and anger against such Sophismes) so now you Cant to us as it
were the Popish Prelaticall Letanie, and Te Deum, As if by the temptations and
fastings, by the passions, by the deaths and burialls of suffering Christians;
The noble army of Martyrs praising the holy Church throughout all the world
acknowledging, you would conjure us to yield any thing upon plurality of
voices, or topic arguments, that may and are turned every way, and used by all
sorts good and bad for their own ways.

1. Men living in a notorious sin of gross usury, unjust enclosures,
monopolizing, etc. First, They will tell you of several Ministers, etc. very
holy men; and then secondly, They will tell you that those Ministers do
approve of those things.

2. The Malignants now cry, that so many good Lords, so many Parliament men,
most of two Kingdoms are for the King, Ergo, the King does well; believe it
who so will.

The Papists proclaim, that they have plurality of voices, Martyrs, etc.
Ergo, they are in the right.

So the Prelacie tell us, that of Bishops were many Martyrs (to which
Sm^ctymnuus answers) by them was composed the Liturgy, and they have a
thousand for one of them, (so they had formerly) and most of the learned
Doctors, etc. Scholars, Divines and Lawyers were for them, therefore they were
in the right.

Then some of our respected brethren of the reputed godly Non-Conformists come
in a title of a Book thus, A most grave and modest Confutation A touch on W.
R. his book, called The grave Consutation, etc.
of the errors of the sect commonly called (as W. R. says) Brownists or
Seperatists (so his skill writes it for Separatists) agreed upon long since by
the joint consent of sundry godly and learned Ministers of this Kingdom, then
standing out and suffering in the cause of Inconformitie, and now published in
a time of need What now all, or the greatest part of them, come to our publik
meetings, and the Apol. disclaims Separation, and Brownisme? unless you would
drive them to corners again.
etc. against that pernitions evil. Published by W. R. As if their sufferings
were a seal of the just length of reformation, how far we must go, and no
further. When as the most of them stood only upon the negative part, What they
would not have, but only a few declared positively, of which some for a
Congregationall presbytery or Church Way, be it, or be it not, a pernicious
evil, as W. R. calls it. God forbid, that if we have suffered for Christ, in
the behalf of any piece of truth, that therefore we should pride up our selves
as having done so much; or stint our selves from proceeding further in
knowledge, or affright our selves from suffering more, if more truths be to be
contended for, as the Apostle speaks; or least of all through the sides of
Brownisme or Separation, to wound the truth and Saints of Jesus Christ, just in
the nick of such reproachings cast upon them that disclaim in words and
practice all pernicious Brownisme, etc. It cannot be forgotten that the
choicest doctrines held in England, have been called pernicious heresy. And
therefore it is an high peremptorinesse in a general title to call all those
things pernicious evils, some of which are truths. We have, and do disclaim
Separation and Brownisme, properly so called.

But if the Pope or the Devil Mar. 1. 24.
confess Christ, we will not therefore call that truth, a pernicious evil. I
suppose all that W. R. book sets forth in heads, and Chapters, as to be
confuted, are some of those things he means are pernicious evils. As, 1. That
page 8. Many Parish-Churches are not rightly gathered. 2. That p. 11. That they
Communicate in a false and idolatrous worship, as stinted prayers, Homilies,
Catechismes. 3. That p. 17. They want that Discipline and order which Christ in
his Testament has appointed for the government of his Church. 4. That p. 50.
That it is objected against them, that the ignorant and profane multitude are
admitted to all privileges of the Churches.


Are these (we give but a taste) perni^ious evils? Then you condemn
Smectymnuus for writing, the Parliament and Assembly for removing and about to
remove these exceptions; And most presbyterian Ministers in London for
forbearing to give Communions to such multitudes. Mr. Calamy said that an
imposed, Liturgy was idolatry. And our worthy brethren of Scotland justly
stood up against these enormities. No wonder therefore if W. R. book abound
with weaknesses and impertinencies; in stead of Confutation of such thing as
these. For I patronage not any false or unadvised speeches of Barrow, or etc.
there used.

3. A. S. Saying, That the Apologists differ from the most reformed Churches in
the world. Some of which he knows are in Holland, more in England, most in
New England, all public Churches, if he speaks not falsely, or ignorantly;
yet begging the Question, whether the Churches named, or the Classical
Presbyterian are most reformed?

To close our answer to this, tell us no more of your multitudes, the Lord
keep us all from the broad way that leads to destruction, though many there
be therein. One Phinees, one Elijah left alone in the eye of the world, two
against thousands, viz. Caleb and Josuah in the truth are more to be honored,
then swarms of swarvers (I judge none.) The time is at hand, that ten men
shall take hold of one Jew Zech. 8. 23.
, and so on one true christian. Godly men may be hunted out of a Kingdom, not
of the truth, mean while such a Kingdom may be without them, but near the
more without judgments. England was never quiet, but worse and worse, since it
hunted away almost a little Nation of Saints to New England, though W. R.
joining issue with A. S. will follow them, with a blotting pen in print, even
to that Kingdom too. Yea and take in his way many Churches in old England, and
some that are and lately were in Holland, and then have at New England, none
comes amiss that have gone an inch in reformation beyond W. R. his
Non-Conformitie. Like him who would strike all that were next him, who e're
they were that injured him. And all this work he cuts out for himself in his
book he calls a Narration of some Church courses in New England.

O that all Readers that will not be wilfully blind, would by the way observe,
how A. S. condemns the Apologists, as guilty of dissenting from the Churches
in New England. And W. R. condemns them for agreeing with the Churches of
New England. So that A. S. and W. R. do not agree between themselves. But you
shall have an Answer to that book of W. R. in a distinct treatise by it self,
ere long God permitting. Mean while we go forward with A. S.

A. S. I am persuaded in my conscience, that your opinion of Independency, etc.
if it were admitted (pardon my expression till I be better instructed) could
not but prove the root of all sorts of Schism and Heresy, and consequently
the utter overthrow of Christ's universal militant Church.

M. S. If you speak cordially, as supposing indeed that you may be better
instructed, it had been best for you to have stayed for the Assemblies
determination, or to have conferred with some of them you write against, before
you had written and printed that desperate speech, lest the ink seem letters
of blood to you at your dying pillow. I warrant you, if what one, or many say
only, would make an argument, a multitude would say, that a coactive
classical Presbytery would be the root of couched Prelacy, and
Ecclesiastical tyranny. But I will not be one of them to say so. Probatum
est; in New England, that which you call Independency, has not procured, but
cured, or purged out heresies, schisms, formalitie, profaneness, more then
some other Kingdoms that so hate and hit at mis-called Independency.

A. S. You sue for a Toleration, and consequently for a Separation.

M. S. So then, where Papists are tolerated, there they are Separatists too.
It Is but the Noun of multitude between, but that the Independents in England
might tolerate, and the Presbyterians might be tolerated, would they then be
Separatists? Who desires separation? but rather union in the truth. If any hold
the truth, and stumble, though of weakness, at some smaller matters, (as you
count them) it is your duty to suffer them, and to bear with the weak, and not
offend the consciences of Brethen; or Gods woe is by him pronounced against you.

A. S. I may add to all these, your undervaluing of the Parliaments great
favor toward you. For ye know, brethren, how they, notwithstanding your
former separation from all other Churches, etc. invited you to be members of
this Assembly, had they not given you the capacity, ye had been altogether
incapable. And not only that, but they honored one of you with the high favor
of sending one of you with their Commissioners to Scotland.

M. S. O abominable accusation, O sycophantising insinuation! Who art. A. S.
Cujas. Can an Englishman, unjesuited, or any Minister unprelatised, or any man
honestised, say thus? I am distressed how to put home to this, and yet
prudently. I tell thee, A. S. Thy accusation is a gross falsehood. For their
respect to the Parliament, and their respect from the Parliament, let many of
the choice members of both Houses speak, they will soon prove thee a gross --.
Thy probation a silly fantasy. Did ever any Vote of the Parliament, or of the
Assembly, accuse the Apology of undervaluing the Parliaments favors? None but
he that has A. S. as part of his name, would say so. For all discreet men see
plainly, that as the form and style of the Apology is most sweet; so the
matter now in hand so much as is there intimated, is the Question. Can that be
an offense to the Parliament, for the five Ministers to propound that of the
things they are to debate (by Ordinance of Parliament) which is to them the
question, making it ready, and leaving it for debate in the Assembly? Yea,
whether the whole draught of the Apology be to be condemned or commended by
the Parliament, that is also a question yet unresolved, by Parliament,
Assembly, and a considerable part of City and Kingdom. Therefore why does one
A. S. presumptuously make it a crime against the Parliament? Since the thrice
worthy Parliament had it in debate in the House, being put on March. 13. 1643.
by the Letters from Middleborough in Zeland, and upon the speech of learned
Mr. Seldom, and others, they resolved with a general acclamation, that the
Apology was to be left as it was found, unblamed. The God of heaven in much
mercy bless the Parliament, as for all the good they have done, so for their
uprightness therein, They joy of the Churches is now as high as their sorrows
would have been deep, had it been condemned. For it would to them have been not
only a doleful ante, or anti, but-anticipating-presage. But blessed be our
Parliament-guiding God; that as they had no hand in the Apology, so they would
have no hand against it. Therefore away A. S. Operam and oleum perdidisti (as
the Starling said to the Emperor, having saluted him in vain with (...)) you
have lost your labor. The Parliament despise sycophantising colloguing; (Are
you as wise as that Bird to see that, it said?) And on the other side they do
not repent of what honor they conferred on Mr. Nigh, and through him on his
brethren of the same For the Parliament in wisdom chose some Episcopal men to
be of the Assembly, to plead their own cause if they could. Some of which since
cast out themselves, and others were cast out.
judgment. They could not but think (what ever you dream) but that the five
Ministers were in as near a capacity to be of the Assembly, etc. being native
Englishmen, and against Episcopacie, as either those of other Nations, or
those of our own, in judgment holding for Episcopacie; and standing for the
just and lawful authority of Magistracy as either.

A. S. The Apol. Narration containing (how ever you name it) a singular desire
of separation from them, that so cherish you, with some unworthy nicknames put
upon them, who style you by no worse names then Brethren.

M. S. What ever names A. S. puts upon this his Book, as Annot. Consid. Notes
sure enough (Nigro carbone notandus. Hic Niger est, hunc tu Roman caveto,) it
is not candid, but holds forth A. S. his singular desire of making division, if
he could, either between the Parliament and the Brethren, or between them and
our dearest brethren of Scotland, if M. S. do rightly divine what he means by
them. God and man hates this thy design (O A. S.) Six things the Lord bates,
yea, seven are abomination to him: A proud look, a lying tongue, an heart that
devises wicked Prove. 6. 16.
imaginations, a false witness, that speaks lies, him that sows discord
among brethren, etc. (for I have named enough for A. S. to make his choice.)
And I am informed, that the worthy Commissioners of Scotland (nobly done) do
utterly dislike A. S. his Book. From whom we have far more evident and
effectual symptoms of their cordial love, then ^he word Brethren. Which with
A. S. in his Book is nothing but Complementall dissimulation; For his Epistle
begins, as it were, with kissing, viz. Right reverend and dear Brethren. And
his book is biting. So that as he uses the word Brethren, it is much to the
same sense, as a parasiticall Minister being to preach an odd fellows
funeral, did use the words of that deceased man's Will, viz. In the name of
God, Amen: (this story is proper for A. S. if he has any skill in the law, for
I cannot yet be certain what he is:) says the Priest (being put to it for
matter for his Trentall Panegyric) See the devotion of this deceased brother;
he begins his Will, with In the name of God, Amen. A silly Goose; for it is as
common for all good and bad to begin their Wills so (as A. S. knows if a
Lawyer) as for A. S. to call Brethren, and to bawl forth reviling all along his
book.

As for the Nicknames A. S. charge upon the five Ministers, with which they
should nickname, I know not whom, he names them not; which makes me think, he
has no skill in Law. He knows that Dolus latet in universalibus, or to use his
own words, p. 47. Sermones generales non movent, we cannot answer to generals;
nor can he find them in the Apology. What a Pharisee may fantasy, that will
not have men's defects intimated as they stand in the crowd of all Christendom,
I am sure the worthy Commissioners piously confess their Churches may be yet
further reformed; and what religious men will not sigh forth the same, touching
their own native Countries?

A. S. What else have ye done, but erected one Assembly in the Assembly, by
private authority against public; taking private resolutions against public?

M. S. O gross! yet he will follow Machiavels counsel that said, Calumniare
audacter, aliquid adhaerebit, If men must not speak, write, or preach any
thing that may relate to something in debate in the Assembly, then, (as it was
excellently spoken in Parliament,) Ministers may write and say nothing at all.
Diverse print and preach for the Presbytery, yet of the Assembly. Are they all a
private particular Assembly?

A. S. Sundry reasons made me to suspect, that ye would say more then ye say.

M. S. And what then? Did you think by this your Reply, to hush them? No
readier way to make them or their friends to say more then either they
intended, or you would willingly hear. Yet confess one truth; That there has
been two replies to them already, yet they have printed no reply (that we know
of) for that you mean (I suppose) by saying more. Else, God forbid, but they
should speak, and speak in the Assembly too; though one said, He had much ado
to forbear moving to have one of them to be cast out of the Assembly, for
propounding his Reason to the Question, to which he was called by order of
Parliament.

But for you, A. S. you would make a stone speak (as they say.) If you believe
not the Poet, Si natura negat, facit indignatio versum; yet believe the
Scripture: Oppression would make a wise man mad. Eccles. 7. 7. M. R.


But let me tell you now of one that is of your judgment for the Presbytery,
but by far a more solid and discreet man then your self, that said, There was
this good by the Apology, that therein the five Ministers had wrapped up
themselves, that they could not say more in substance oftener then was therein
expressed. Nor could they recede from that compliance with you they had therein
professed. So you see you Presbyterians may differ among your selves, no wonder
therefore, if from the five Ministers.

A. S. I love you all from my heart.

M. S. Good Reader, compare this man's book with his heart. And good Writer, (if
I do not mis-call thee) judge whether in your book you act the part of a loving
Physician, were your potion never so cordial, in that you administer it
scalding hot, though you flatter till it is powered down the throat.

A. S. The will is but a blind faculty.

M. S. Now, where is your Philosophy? Is there an unreasonable faculty in the
reasonable soul, that has no light but by participation? This is news to
considerate Philosophers, that do not take things upon trust, by tradition, of
speculative untried principles.

A. S. My main aim has been, Gods glory, and the edification of weak brethren,
who may have been misled by your most learned Discourse.

M. S. Yet this man in his 1 Annot. page 4. says, It comes very short, is weak
and slender, and no way satisfactory. The man makes nothing of contradictions,
upon contradictions; for even here also is a contradiction or two more. Are the
five Ministers discourse most learned, and yet error too, as you said in the
beginning of your Epistle? And are they most learned, and yet less learned then
you?

But indeed (says one) He makes a great noise of learning in his book,
rattling his Sophistry-terms, so that though he has failed in his Divinity,
Physic, and Philosophy hitherto, yet he will make us know that he is a
notable Logician; or he will make our ears ring with unenglished Ergoes, with A
genere ad speciem affirmative, with A posse ad esse non valet consequentia; Non
possibile est esse, possibile est non esse, totum, totaliter, materialiter,
Page of his book, 53, 54.
dispositive; with his modifications, assumptions, etc. and multitudes of such
lumber to the weak brethren. O, said one, that some body would earnestly
entreat him to speak seriously, whether he thinks in his conscience this to be
his direct way to that end he here professes, namely, to edify weak
Brethren? Alas, such things to them, if Englished, are but gibberish, and as
charms.

A. S. Esteeming that during the rest of my pilgrimage, which cannot be long,
having no other thing to do, I shall do well to do this.

M. S. I Will tell you what one said to this. Would God he had rather no patient,
then he should have no patience, then the Church should be his patient (seeing
he has no more skill in her grief;) that he had no client, then that he
should be a treacherous Advocate; that he would rather do nothing, then evil.
For it is a sad thing, said he, that good men near their end should write some
sorry piece, to be a monument of their declining in their last days, and of
their disgrace before they are buried. As a worthy man a little before his
death, wrote in defense of ceremonies, for which formerly he had suffered. A
warning to A. S. and all good men, that their good works should be more at
last, and so to leave that character to the hypocrites, as one observes, to
live smoothly, toward his end to do sorily, and then to die suddenly.

A. S. HIS CONSIDERATIONS.
M. S. Truly called Interrogatories which A. S. puts to the five Ministers, as
if he were already gotten into the Chair, etc.

A. S. His first Consideration. Whether in any Ecclesiastical or Politic
Assembly of the Christian world, wherein things are carried by plurality of
voices, it be ordinary for any inconsiderable number thereof to join in a
particular combination among themselves, and therein to take particular
resolutions?

M. S. We have heard of some Parliaments in Europe, that the House of Peers is
so constitute, that if a vote pass where somes consciences amongst them cannot
yield to, they may modestly enter in the House their dissent from it. But
whether this be so or not, the five Ministers did not take particular
resolutions and publish them in print, to cross the proceedings and Disputes
of the Assembly; or state a question yet unresolved by the Assembly, but only
told the Kingdom de facto, what they had held and practiced, and therefore in
the Apology speak in the past time, with some very few and short touches upon
what ground.

Wherein they declare themselves to close nearer with the Assembly, were they
all Presbyterian (as we know the contrary) then thousands ever thought they
would.

And withal they do profess themselves so unwedded to their former See Apol.
p 10. It is their second golden rule by which they walked.
practices, and so far from overweening their present judgments, that upon
discovery of more light, they are most willing to open their eyes upon it, and
let it in. And therefore you A. S. have done very ill, to discourage them as
much as in you is, from that sweetness of spirit, that has appeared in all
their writings and carriages.

But our main answer to this your Consideration (which makes it a gross
inconsideration, if not untrurh) is this, That the Assembly of themselves are
not to conclude things by a mere plurality of votes, if you dare bele^ve the
Ordinance of Parliament, whose words are, To confer and treat amongst
themselves of such matters and things touching and concerning the Liturgy,
Discipline, and Government of the Church of England, or the vindication Ordin.
for the calling of the Assembly. Page. 4. 5.
and clearing of the doctrine of the same, from all false aspersions, and
misconstructions, as shall be proposed unto them, by both or either of the said
Houses of Parliament, and no other, and to deliver their opinions and advices
of our touching the matters aforesaid, as shall be most agreeable to the word
of God, to both or either of the said Houses from time to time, in such manner
and sort, as by both or either of the said Houses of Parliament shall be
required. And in case of difference of opinion among the said Divines, they
shall present the same, together with their reasons thereof, to the Houses of
Parliament.

Which words, besides confutation of your plurality of voices, do more then
allow so much as is done in the Apologeticall Narration, that being but a
narration of past things.

A. S. his second Consideration, Whether in taking such resolutions, they
should not consequently resolve themselves to quit the Assembly, and to appear
as parties.

M. S. The antecedent was denied before on the first Consideration: therefore
the consequence is destroyed. And for the consequence or Proposition it self,
of the five Ministers quitting the Assembly, and to appear as parties, for
setting forth the Apology; I utterly dislike your motion, as striking at the
worthy Commissioners of Scotland, as if they likewise should quit the Assembly
for replying to the Apology. Men of a far better spirit then you are. And
though they be somewhat engaged in a settled Presbytery, yet carry themselves
more sagely and moderatly, then many of our own men; an honor for them, and a
shame for us.

A. S. His fourth Consideration (and for the third vanishes upon our answer to
the first and second) Whether this Apologeticall Narration was necessary, when
ye found the calumnies, mistakes, mis-apprehensions of your opinions, and
mists that had gathered about you, or were rather cast upon your persons in
your absence, begin by your presence again, and the blessing of God upon you,
to scatter and vanish, without speaking a word for your selves and cause?

M. S. Yea it was: For look but to the next full period before; and you shall
find that this you repeat as touching that scattering and vanishing of mists,
does but relate to the people, and only to some of them, viz. Those that
profess or pretend the power of godliness. These men's serene spirits only
were the beams that began to scatter the mists. And therefore the Apologists
speak distinctly and punctually (and not indefinitely as you) in the words you
seem to quote; viz. they say that they found many (mark) many of those mists,
not all; and did but begin to scatter, as you your self repeat. The Apologists
say, They did but begin to scatter. For in the apprehension of the Apologists,
their motion was like the lowrings of an inconstant morning, the mists ascend,
and anon descend, and by and by ascend, and turn into a Scottish-mist, as the
Englist Proverb is, That will wet an Englishman to the skin. The mist went up
by the hills; but (as the other Proverb is) down by the Mils, they turned into
rain. What mean else those words of the Apo. page 1
Apology; Our ears have been so filled with a sudden and unexpected noise of
confused exclamations, in the interpretation of most reflecting on us, that
awakened thereby, we are enforced to anticipate a little that discovery of our
selves, which we otherwise resolved to have left to time.

And those words of the Apology: Whereas your silence upon all the
forementioned Apol. p. 27.
grounds, has been by the ill interpretation of some, imputed either to our
consciousness of the badness and weakness of our cause, or to our inability to
maintain what we assert in difference from others, etc.

And those words of the Apology; Since the change of times from our exile,
Apol. p. 31.
we have endured that which to our spirits is no less grievous; the opposition
and reproach of good men, even to the threatening of another banishment. No
doubt but the Apologisers know what they say, and what they can say, if called
to speak out. Besides, if the people had let them alone, should seem some
Ministers would not. O, it was an unhappy Anticipation (O, if the will of God
had been to have prevented it) that in the very nick, before the Assembly met,
that two Books should forestall the Market, the one penned by a learned Scot,
and the other by a learned Englishman, that set the tongues of men so a wame.

First, to vomit out upon the five Ministers Tenet, and next to asperse their
persons, before the Assembly had made one Syllogism, Hinc illae lachrymae.
Hence the Apology (poor meek thing) was forced to speak; and thereupon A. S.
so fiercly breathed (I had almost said brayed) out against it so many bitter
words.

A. S. tells us in this his 4th Consideration, of the honor the Parliament
showed the Apologists, in calling them to be members of the Assembly, which was
enough to justify their persons from all aspersions, without any Apology.

M. S. To this we answer; That they and their friends will ever acknowledge the
Honorable Parliaments great respect to them. And so much the more, in these
times wherein great A. S. and little, etc. do so labor to render them odious.
But I think I should not cross the sense of the Parliament if I should not make
it an universal major proposition: That all whom the Honorable Parliament
shall call to be members of the Assembly, are ipso facto vindicated from all
aspersions; and so to conclude, that all Episcopal Prelaticall men that in
life and practice have been -- if they should be called to be of the Assembly,
were eo nomine vindicated from all aspersions. I am sure de facto that some
very learned men were called by the sweet indulgence of the honorable
Parliament for the common good to be Members of the grave Assembly, who since
upon better knowledge of them, are by the Parliament purged out of the Assembly
(a good rid, the Assembly is the better for their absence) and some are at
Oxford, see how terse they be; and some in prison, see how their membership of
the Assembly have vindicated them. Be sure of it, that the choice of men for
the Assembly was to find men good, not to make them so. And two worthy
Parliament men of a County may not know at first all the faults in every Town,
or the lint on every black coat. And therefore since that, the worthy
Parliament has well brusht some.

If the Parliament put never so much honor upon the five Ministers in calling
them to the Assembly; yet since many have aspersed them, or some labored how
to make them odious to Kingdoms and Nations, and who but the order of A. S.
mainly instigating? And therefore this fully answers to your last Quere in your
fourth Consideration. Whether this Apology was necessary after the first cloud
was near over? every night must be cleared by a new rise of the Sun.

A. S. his 5th Consideration, says, That the five Ministers do blame all
Protestant Churches as not having the power of godliness, and the profession
thereof, with difference from carnal and formal Christians, advanced and held
forth among them as among you, which is commonly thought to be particularly
intended against the Scots.

M. S. Sure it is no otherwise commonly thought to be particularly intended
against the Scots; and generally to blame all Protestant Churches, then in or
by your common sense deriving species, vain seemings to your fantasy, from
your outward senses an evil eye ill affected. For the Apology calls our dear
brethren the Scots, the more reformed Churches. And for the words all, and
among you, whereby you would present them setting themselves as an opposite
member of distinction to all Protestant Churches, and blaming them all as
undistinguished from carnal and formal Christians, in comparison of them and
their five Churches; the words all and you, are forged and foysted in by your
self, and so must go for very falsehoods charged upon them. The words of the
Apology are, 1. That Apol. p. 4.
they, and many others had but observed touching the non-advance of the power
of godliness, etc. among some, what themselves had generally acknowledged. The
five Ministers do not charge it, but repeat it as confessed by themselves. 2.
It is not said it was confessed, and they observed there was no power of
godliness, but i^ was not advanced. 3. Nor is it said it was not advanced, but
not advanced as in this our Island. This Island being a common phrase, yea, and
your phrase too in the title of your Book, to signify Scotland and England
both.

And then where is that particular intendment against Scotland; or the five
Ministers laying their Churches in the balance against other Churches?

Fourthly and lastly, they speak but indefinitely in a contingent matter, and
therefore can be construed but of some particulars; and therefore did not aim
at all. You know how highly they esteem of New England, and therefore that is
not excluded from the advance of the power of godliness, as in this Island of
great Britain English and Scots are included. However, as no man that is a
knowing man either by hearsay or travel over the next Sea, will accuse
Scotland as most carnal and formal (it were well for the world if in that,
etc. others had not far exceeded them) so none of us, except Pharisees, will
excuse our Nations of remissness in advancing the power of godliness in
apparent view above carnalitie and formalitie.

You see by our answer to the Apology, that not that Apology but your will
caused you to speak that which is not by wise men once to be mentioned at
this time, as if the Apologists intended to say any the least thing to grieve
our brethren the Scots.

A. S. his seventh Consideration (for the sixth is nonsense, unless we put
the interrogatorie point at Anabaptists, and so A. S. to take unto him and
them, he ranks himself with all, calling them us, I say, to take to him and
them the Brownists and Anabaptists to be of his party. Reader, view his sixth
Consideration, whether you can make sense of it, I cannot, nor any thing of
consequence; therefore answer not unto it) his seventh Consideration, I say,
interrogates thus: Many are desirous to know whether this Apologeticall
Narration published by you five alone, be in the name of your five alone, or of
all those also, or apart of those whom ye pretend to hold your tenets: if in
the name of you five only, whether ye five can arrogate a power unto you
selves to maintain these tenets as the constant opinion of all your Churches;
having no general confession of their faith thereabouts. If in the name of all
the rest, we desire you would show your Commission from all your Churches, etc.

M. S. Good Reader do but turn about these interrogatories, and put them to
A. S. and put A. S. in stead of the five Ministers, and you may kill Goliath
with his own sword; if five Ministers have arrogated in the Apol. one A. S.
much more in his Reply. If A. S. does not like the conversion; we answer
positively.

1. It Is no arrogating for any Christian upon just occasion to make his
confession of faith.

2. The confession of faith in doctrine that is in all the best reformed
Churches is theirs; For one touching pure Discipline, it was not found in
Scotland whiles the tyranny of the Bishops prevailed. Whiles things are in
fieri, a wise man will not expect them in facto esse. Faith may be when
confession dares not appear. A. S. is angry with that confession of faith in
the Apology, and has opened the mouths of many others (as we hear) ready to
bark too at it, they do but stay their turns, why then does he call for more
confession?

3. The godly learned Fathers, Tertullian, Justin Martyr, etc. produced no
authority from men to Apologize for the truth; the Scripture they Apologized
for, bore them out.

4. The Parliament allow the five Ministers more, viz. to show their reasons;
therefore the less, to show their opinion.

5. A thousand and a thousand good Christians were glad to hear how the five
Ministers dissented from the rigid Separation, and closed with the best
reformed Churches (the sole business of the Apology in effect) and thought
that no good Protestants would have been sorry for them.

A. S. His eight Consid. interrogates the five Ministers thus; Whether ye
desire a toleration for you five alone in your (mark your) Religion, for all
the rest? Item, if a toleration in public, in erecting of Churches apart? or
to live quietly without troubling of the State? As for the last, appearingly ye
may have it unsought. But for the rest, the Parliament is wise enough, and
knows what is convenient for the Church of God.

M. S. An Apology for the Apologists Church Way. Toleration, properly so
called, is (says learned Capel) of things unlawful: His words are, The Law I
know permitted usury to the Jews, to the stranger, what of that? It follows
the rather, yet it is of it self a sin, because permission is of sins, not
of duties. Cap. Tempt. of Usury. We are not, friend A. S. come to that yet. To
yield the one, or beg the other. We challenge it as your duty that are
Protestants, to allow us our liberty that are Protestants, and hold with you,
in Doctrine and Discipline, also in substance; the difference being an
accident. 1. The quantity; you would have it extended to Colloquies,
provincial Classes, etc. over every Church, which appears not in Scripture,
either name or thing. We would have it bounded within every particular Church
made up to competent hundreds, with a sufficiency of Church Officers for parts
and number. And 2. Necessity of constraint, for in appeals you would cite and
constrain men to appear before the said Colloquies and Classes, etc. For
which there is not the least in the Scriptures; we would have a free voluntary
recourse out of conscience to the brotherly advise of neighbor Churches, or a
Synod, dogmatically to declare Christ's mind unto us, and in case of refusal
to submit to their judgment, having no ground in Scripture to refuse; the
Advising Churches to renounce communion with the offending Church; and the
particular Church to pronounce excommunication against their offending brother.
So that the difference is not in ente, sed modo: not in the thing, but the
manner rather. We say therefore, it is your duty to give us our own, our
liberty, as much (if not more) as we to let you alone, whiles both parties
avouch that they are unconvinced as yet, of a possibility of a nearer
agreement. We know not of the least clause of a sentence, or piece of an
example in all the Scriptures, for any to constrain men's consciences by outward
violence, positively to act contrary to their principles conscientiously held,
or for any to yield thereunto. We have many passages to the contrary in
Scripture.

The Amorites gently entreated Abraham and his family, and were confederate
with them, Genesis 14. 13. So did the Philistines, or men of Gerar, Genesis 20. And
before both, the Egiptians, Genesis 12. 19. So did the men of Gerar deal with
Isaac, Genesis 26. The Sechemites said they would kindly entreat Jacob and his
sons, because they were peaceable, Genesis 34. 20, etc. The Egiptians appoint
Goshen for the Israelites, to dwell peaceably in the midst of Egypt. The
Chaldeans or Babylonians at length allow the Jews the liberty of their
religion, with all accommodations thereunto, Nehem. and Ezra throughout.
Compare 2 Chronicles. 36. The Romans likewise bare with the Jews, and their
Judaisme for many years both before and after Christ's time. How much more
therefore should Protestants bear with Protestants, who have spent their
estates and blood in winning their joint liberty from the common enemy,
Atheists, Papists, Neuters, Prelates, etc. Christ's rule is to win men by
instruction, and not to force men with destruction in matters of religion,
Matthew. 10. 14, 15. and v. 27, 28. Luke 9. 54. 1 Cor. 7. 23. 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25.
and 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. with infinite more places. Nor do we find in
Scripture persecution to be raised by the Jewish Church against Religion, but
only when the divinely instituted ceremonies, which had got such esteem in the
Jews hearts, were about to be taken down by the preaching of the liberty of
the Gospel, and a spiritual worship, unknown as yet to the whole world. For in
the Jewish Church before, and in Christ and the Apostles times, 1. were the
Sadduces, Matthew. 16. 1. who denied the resurrection, Angels and Spirits, Acts
23. 8. 2. The Pharisees, Matthew. 23. who (though they confessed those) held
Fate, Free Will, and humane Traditions. See Joseph. lib. 3. and Chem. in exam.
Conc. Trident. part. p. 20. on 1 Timothy 5. 23. 1 Timothy 4. 3. Coloss. 2.
3. The Assideans, Chasidim, or Good men, Romans 5. 7. (which Assideans mentioned
in the Apocrypha, 1 Maccab. 7. 13. are translated by Joseph, (...), Good men,
lib: 12. cap. 16.) who studied to add to the Scriptures, and professed to be
holy above the law. 4. The Essenes, who held it unlawful to drink wine, forbad
marriage, and commanded those dogmata, (therefore Coloss. 2. the Apostle uses
(...), and (...), being the Esseans words) Touch not, taste not, handle not;
because the junior Esseans might not touch the Elders or Seniors, nor might
taste, save only bread, salt, water, and hyssop. 5. The Pythagoreans, who held
that the soul of the last departed, rose in the body of the next that was
born. Herod seems to be of this opinion, Mat. 14. 1, 2. See the Geneva notes on
that place; yet we find no public persecution raised by the Jewish Church
against these, or of these one against another. So in the Church of Corinth
were diverse odd, and some dangerous opinions, as doubting of the resurrection
to come, conceiving it to be past already, yet no persecution moved against
them. So in the Church of Galatia, so in the 7. Churches of Asia. The Churches
force not them that are without, by persecution, but are rebuked for not
excommunicating, or neglect of convincing and reproving them that are within.
For later times, if the Turks allow Christians that are peaceable, the liberty
of their conscience, both Greeks, English, etc. and the Spaniards, Germans,
etc. permit the Jews; no wonder if the Low-countrey-men permit several
opinions of Protestants among them. We are worse then the Indians, if we should
not deal kindly with orthodox Christians.

We justly abhor the ten persecutions, against the injustice whereof Aristides,
Justinus, Mileto Sardensis, Apollinaris, Athenagoras, Tertullianus, and others
wrote Apologies in behalf of Christian religion. And we justly abhor the
Spanish inquisition, the English Marian persecutions, and the Bishops high
Commission; against all which many worthy men have writ learnedly. And we have
seen the event of endeavoring to force conscience in matter of opinion or
worship. On the one side, in England it made many thousands of hypocrites,
Church-papists, time-servers, etc. And on the other side, in Holland and
Scotland it justly caused State-insurrections; and for the same reason we also
are legally now up in arms to obtain assurance that we shall have the liberty
of conscience and law.

I speak not this as if on the one hand I did now charge this upon the
intentions of the State, God forbid. His meliora spear. But only I seasonably
answer A. S. and prevent what I can anyes turning A. Ssians in their opinions
or instigations. I hope it shall never be known in the world, that ever any
persecuted the miscalled -Separatists or Independents, that are sound in
opinion, pure in discipline, and holy in practice, save only Papists and
Prelaticall men. These were the first, and I hope shall be the last that ever
persecuted the Saints of the most high. Nor on the other hand do I speak this
as to intimate that I a prove a toleration of the broaching of all opinions, or
any toleration of some practices.

1. The least venting of any opinion against fundamentalls; as Judaisme,
denying Christ to be the true M^ssi^s; Arrianisme and Socinianisme, opposing
the Deity of Jesus Christ; Arminianisme, that questions the person of the Holy
Ghost: Papisme, holding Justification by works; or that Anabaptisme that denies
the derivation of Adams original corruption to us, and the power of Christ's
grace to be conveyed to us without any spiritual power of our free will,
(falsely supposed to be in us) or of the like opinions, ought to be suppressed
by due proportion, to that rule That no man, or Prophet, etc. might entice his
kindred, friend, or neighbor to Idolatry, on pain of death, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. to
12. much less is the practice of Idolatry or any impiety by proportion to the
prohibition of blasphemy on pain of death, Levit. 24. 11. to be tolerated. Yet
to prevent Idolatry, the sword may be taken up, Josh. 22. 11. Negatively, the
outward act, either of speaking such evil opinions, or doing such evil facts,
may be restrained, and yet no violence done to the conscience to act contrary
to it is inward dictates and persuasion, being not yet convinced they are evil.
This being only a suspension and intermission of the outward man from acting
toward others, not a coaction or subversion of the inward acts of judgment
and understanding in himself. And so Jews, or etc. may be permitted among
Christians; so as they do not manifest their errors and defiance against the
fundamental truths; that so they may hear, and believe, and be converted, or
how else shall they be won to the truth; and the promise of God fulfilled
touching their call?

2. The spreading and practicing of opinions that apparently tend to
Libertine-licencious ungodliness, ought not quietly to be permitted. They
cannot be suffered, but with sin and reproof from Christ to the sufferers of
them, Rev. 2. v. 14. to v. 21. where two Churches, viz. Pergamos, and Thyatir^,
are charged with sin, and reproved by Christ for having among them and
suffering Balaamines, Nicolaitans, and Jezabellians to vent such opinions, viz.
1. That under pretense of liberty and charity, wives were to be common. 2.
Under pretense of avoiding scandals and perils, it was lawful for Christians
to be present at the the sacred things, Idolatries and joviall banquettings of
Pagans, as Vide Port. in 2 Revel
things indifferent. These in the Churches ought to have been excommunicated
(if refractory) out of the Churches. These, not of any Church (if they will not
be convinced by conference with the Churches) ought to be restrained from their
evil practices by the Magistrate, according to the examples of the pious Kings
reforming abuses, upon the ground of Moses penning of politic laws to punish
them that could not be accounted me^t members of a Church, for their lewd lives.

3. For those opinions that are neither against fundamentals, nor tend to
licenciousness; but strive to beat out truths, thereby to creep closer to the
rule, to walk more evenly, in the path, both of Doctrine and Discipline; and
will in both by a strict bond amongst themselves walk as exactly as by any
power Ecclesiastical without them, set above them a (their own will shall be in
stead of others laws) I say, such opinions are not to be restrained, either
from all divulging or practicing, that we can find by any Scripture. We wave
the question now; Which is the only true form of Discipline? and put the case
in general, What opinions and practices that are conscienciously taken up
ought to be left unrestrained? To which our answer is, that this sort here are
they; or else how shall there be a trying all things, a trying of the spirits,
a discovery of new light and present truths prophesied to be revealed in their
several periods of times? If any be contrary-minded, we shall be glad to hear
their grounds; till they produce those, and make them clear to the Churches,
we ask our due, a quiet permission to enjoy that liberty which Christ has
bought, and the Gospel brought; and not to be jeered by any A. S. as here; who
tells the five Ministers that to live quietly without troubling the State, they
may have it appearingly unsought. Let the world judge, whether here be not a
saucy jeer, both in matter and form of speech. I would A. S. had made use of
that toleration, and then he had not so intolerably troubled a Kingdom. Or
else if he had no stomach at first to be quiet, if for some days he had but had
somewhat appearingly allowed him to bite upon, somewhat appearingly to quench
his thirst, he would have had a stomach rather to eat and drink, then bite and
jeere. He is so passionate, that he does not remember what he says in one
page, so as it may be reconciled to another. Here he says, the Parliament is
wise enough, and knows what is convenient for the Church of God: (you may
perceive his meaning by reading his Interrogatory) yet in his Annotation upon
the inscript of the Apology, page 5. He supposes that the Parliament should
arrogate, if it should take upon it any directive power in matters of Religion.
If he has any Scholastic quillet to reconcile this within himself, it is more
then the common people and weak brethren he writes to know of.

M. S. Note that A. S. bath one Consideration more; But were it not that it it
did answer it self, I should have been too weary of his former inconsiderate
considerations to have staid here, being eager to come to his book.

1. He says, that they aim at separation (he means the five Ministers,
though they disclaim it in their Apology, unless to separate as our brethren
the Scots did from Prelaticall coaction) should tolerate some small pretended
defects (they are but pretended) yet he says not approved by those from whom
they desire to separate.

2. He says, the Church (from which the five Ministers would separate)
testifies a great desire to reform defects, yet those defects, says he, are
but pretended to be in it.

3. He thinks that the five Ministers should do better to stay in the
Church, to reform abuses, then by separation to let the Church perish in
abuses. Now he supposes, destroying abuses; and would have the five Ministers
stay to help reform; yet he is angry with their Apology, that does but sigh
forth an intimation of need of reformation. And so angry that he would (as ye
heard in his second consideration, its so long since that he has forgotten it)
have the five Ministers quit the Assembly.

A. S. his Annotations upon the inscription of the Apologists Narration.
M. S. If I thought A. S. had any skill in Physic, I would ask him whether by
Annotations, he means, as the Physicians speak, Annotationes incompressas,
becticarum febrium indicia, violent annotations are signs of an hectic fever
in his vital parts.

A. S. All Apologies suppose some accusation, which here appears none.

M. S. Not to meddle with your English, which is scarce grammatical, you are
entreated to speak true. Does not the Apology begin and end with sad
complaints? Remember our answer to your fourth Consideration.

A. S. If intended for an Answer to that which has been written against your
opinions, it comes very short, weak, and slender.

M. S. Why then would you fight with a fly? The Mouse told the Elephant, that
he would never get honor in killing a silly Mouse. Why did you bestow so much
Oratorie and Logic, to clap it and fisticuffe it?

A. S. Neither is it a mere Apologeticall Narration, but also a grievous
accusation against all our Churches, as destitute of the power of godliness.

M. S. This indeed is a false accusation, as we have cleared it in our Answer
to your fifth Consideration.

A. S. The Apology says, humbly submitted etc. So humbly submitted to the
honorable Houses of Parliament, as if they submit not themselves to your
desires, etc. for any thing I can see, ye seem no ways minded to submit your
selves to theirs.

M. S. I am sorry your eyes should be so dim, or your self so to dote. All
indifferent men can see in the Apology abundance of propensitie to submit to
them according to truth; far more then there is in one A. S. to submit to
five Ministers, whose holiness you admire, and whose learning you extol.

A. S. You being Divines, ye should rather first have consulted with the
Assembly of Divines, your brethren, then so ex abrupto gone to the Civil
Magistrate, that arrogates not to himself any directive power in matters of
Religion, this is more convenient to the spirit and power of godliness, that
the spirit of the Prophets in such matters should be subject to the Prophets,
then unto the spirit of the Civil Magistrate.

M. S. Mark how this fellow A. S. 1. supposes it arrogancy in the Parliament
to have any directive power in matters of Religion, in case the Assembly (which
God forbid) should mistake. Surely by this bold expression he would not have
the Parliament judge of the reasons of the Assembly in case of dissent. Least
of all does A. S. consider that the Parliament are Members of many excellent
Churches; That they laid down the Common Prayer book in their houses before
some Presbyterians could see reason to do so. That the Parliament so looked on
the Assembly chosen by them, as not to take things merely upon trust, but see
with their own eyes.

2. He dreamingly supposes that either our Assembly is like the Assembly of
Scotland for breadth and strength; or else he takes them for a Church, and in
the act of prophesying; which last I wonder A. S. being a rank Presbyterian
should in the least allow of, and call the five Ministers to the rule thereof.

3. A. S. supposes that it is less convenient to the power of godliness for
the wronged five Ministers to appeal to the Civil Magistrate in Parliament.

4. A. S. supposes, that because the Parliament have chosen the Assembly, that
therefore some men in some cases at least, should wave the Parliament, and go
to the Assembly. This is A. S. his fine intimation prompted to all scandalous
and false teaching erroneous Ministers, to take up and learn, in their cases
relating to Religion, to wave the Parliament, and to go to the Assembly.

5. A. S. supposes that the Assembly would be so unwise (see what a silly
fellow A. S. is) as to go beyond their Ordinance, to judge one anther. When as
they will take upon them no such thing, not so much as to cast out, or take in
one member, without the Parliament: much less will they judge persons that
shall wrong the five Ministers that are not of the Assembly.

The rest of his Annotations on the Inscription are but meare paper blots, and
therefore I omit them.

A Preface to the READER, by way of Introduction, to the ensuing part of the
Discourse, which respects the Book it self.
READER,
HAving diligently perused the Cacologeticall or rough commentaries of A. S.
upon the smooth Apologeticall Narration of the five Ministers, I find the
greatest difficulty, that he is like to encounter, who by a sober Answer shall
desire to make the world amends for that injury, which that writing has done
it, is this, how to make his answer soft' enough. For the truth is, that here
is much more anger or passion, then reason, to turn away, and the Wiseman
informs us, that it is A soft Answer that turns away wrath, Prove. 15. 1. If
A. S. could be but redeemed out of the hand of that great jealousy, wherewith
he burns over his present apprehensions in re Presbyterali, though all the
arguments, and strength of discourse, wherewith his judgment is supported
therein, were left entire to him, he would be found in a sufficient posture
himself, to do himself the right of giving satisfaction unto the world, for the
wrong he has done it, in that discourse, and to make his atonement with his
own pen. Though in many cases Anger is able to do more then reason can undo;
yet in matter of argument or writing, the little finger of a man's reason is
commonly able to pull down what the loins of his passion has in a tumultuary
way and method built up. Any man that shall but diligently observe the endless
variety and multitude of keen expostulations, imperious interrogations, the
importune, peremptory, and insulting charges, criminations and aspersions, the
wrigglings, wringings, wrestings, wranglings, the strainings, stretchings,
stingings, stinglings, the captious, crooked, and cross-grained Interpretations
of things, wherewith that piece is farced in an unreasonable proportion to the
bulk of it, cannot lightly but conclude, that Indignation was the chief Oracle
consulted with, about the framing of it.

But because I would willingly decline all occasions of heat and recrimination,
as far as a sober and just vindication, not so much of the persons, as of the
cause so evill-intreated therein, will bear, I shall chiefly confer with A. S.
about his Reals, and leave men of common civility to determine and judge of his
personalls; unless (possibly) somewhat in this kind shall now and then
occasionally fall in. I make no question but that the Apologists will be well
able to bear it, that the cause which they maintain, should have the
preeminence of their persons, in point of defense; nor are they so scanted in
the consciousness of their own worth and innocence, but that they are very well
able to be out, and bear the want of so much of their reputation for a time, as
the Observations and Annotations of, I know not who, have unjustly taken from
them; especially, in case they shall see it bestowed by their friends upon the
accommodation of that honorable cause wherein they are engaged and declared.

Since the former impression of this Discourse, I perceive there is yet more
anger and indignation broke forth into the world against that harmless,
gall-less and Dove-like Apologeticall Narration; concerning which, that may be
truly said (though in a different sense) which Ausonius said of none of the
worst Emperors in his Epitaph: Marcus Antonius. Auson. de duodecim Caesaribus,
etc.


Hoc solo Patriae, quod genuit, nocuit. All the harm it has done to the World
or its Country, only is this, it has begotten, and that not in its own
likeness, children of sweet, sober, and temperate spirits, but rough blustering
Borean Observations and Annotations, Aelian. lib. 1. cap. 29.
ghastly Anatomies, with some such other Heterogeneall fiery impressions.
Aelian makes report of a strange prodigy once happening in a Grecian Island,
viz. That a Sheep brought forth a Lion; This Lion brought forth with this
remarkable and eminent contrariety to the course of nature, presaged (as the
same Author relates) tyranny. I had much rather be a benefactor to the world
by the communication of my hopes to it, when I have any that may befriend it;
then to draw any man into pain or trouble with my self, by imparting my fears.
But when Sheep bring forth Lions, and Doves Serpents, and calm Christian-like
spirited discourses, invective, bitter, and high rising raging Answers and
Replies, Difficile est prophetiam non scribere; Who can but prophecy? God of
his mercy destroy the sign, and make the prediction vain.

As for the Author of the black Observations and Annotations, (...), he has
his wages well paid into his bosom for his work, in the precedent and
subsequent of this Discourse:

(...)!

As for Levi the Anatomist, who has joined himself with his brother Anatomy
of Independencie, etc.
Simeon the Annotator, to massacre the innocent Narration, though for the
present he has taken sanctuary under the shadow of the Figure Anonymi, and
for fear of the worst, I mean dishonor and disgrace, (for fear of authority in
this case, swimming with the Presbyterian stream, he could have none) plays
least in fight with his name, yet I make no question but his day also is in
coming, wherein his false translation of straight actions into crook'd reports,
will be corrected and amended according to the original, and the mystery of
his intentions in that translation, truly translated into the knowledge and
understanding of all men. This Anatomicall or cutting Discourse, according to
my A. S. his calculation, wants nothing of a perfect libell, but only that it
has the formality of an Imprimatur to cover that nakedness of it; otherwise,
as well in the Privatives of it, as Positives, I mean, as well in respect of
the want of the Authors name, as of the matter and content of it, quantus
quantus est, sapit libellum eumque famosum. Suppose his Narrative of
Independent infirmities and miscarriages, would abide the touchstone; yet was
it a grand oversight in a man pretending to so much knowledge and wisdom, as
he seems to do in this piece, not to consider, whether the dung-hils of
Princes as well as of Peasants do not afford rags to them that will rake in
them: whether the independent story, though written by an adversary, yields
that proportion in weakness, which the Presbyterian Commentaries, if but
unpartially penned, would do in wickedness. I am not afraid to refer it to the
conscience of the Anatomist himself to judge and say, under which of the two
governments, the throne of Satan is lift up the higher; and whether thefts,
rapines, murders, drunkenness, blasphemies, sorceries, witchcrafts, etc. reign
(and are like to continue reigning) more in the Independent, then Classique
territories. But I trust the men, upon whose faces that dirt is cast, will wipe
themselves clean in due time, and wrest the dissecting knife out of the
Anatomist's hand. I hear a bird sing, that the bird in their breasts sings a
note of innocence from those aspersions: For the present, I shall leave this
Author to the reward of those that intend to do God service in persecuting his
Saints.

There is another Advocate for the Presbyterian cause stepped forth lately upon
the Stage, who adventures his name upon the confidence (it seems) which he has
of his work: It Is entitled, A Confutation of the Anabaptists by T. B. This man
with a party of his discourse, faces the Anabaptists, whilst with the main
body of it he falls in upon the quarters of the Independents; in which respect,
though I cannot justify him in his intentions, yet, as touching matter of
execution, I judge him innocent: Animum nocentem, calamum innocentem gerit,
Independencie (if I mistake not very much) will never fall by the edge of his
sword.

But (Reader) when shall we see an end of these disputes in the world? and when
shall the names of Presbyterian and Independent (with all others of the like
troublesome and jarring importance) cease from amongst us?

I cannot prophecy unto thee the justness of the time, when this great wonder
shall be; but some few signs of this time approaching (if ever it shall
approach) I conceive I am able to inform thee.

First, when men shall begin to grow to a clearness, singleness, honourableness
and Christian-like greatness in their ends, making themselves and their own
interests, their footstool, and the glory of God, and the public
accommodation of the world, their throne; this is one great sign that that
golden age we speak of, is at the door. The reason is, because there is no hope
(scarce a possibility) of a general accord amongst men in any degree
conscientious, but in the truth, or mind of God revealed in the Scriptures. No
other band is like ever to gather them all, or hold them longer fast together.
The reason of this is, because in a great society or communion of men,
worshipping God aright, (I mean with uprightness of heart) it is seldom or
never sound, but that some of them, fewer or more, have the truth of God
revealed to them, some in one point, and others in another, and that with such
assurance, or evidence of understanding, that no arguments or reasonings to the
contrary whatsoever are able to remove them, or alter their judgments therein.
So that except all the rest shall come over unto them, and join with them in
such particulars as these, there is no possibility of a thorough union in
judgment between them. Now there is no way, means, or method more probable and
hopeful to bring men to the knowledge of the truth, or (which is the same) of
the mind of God delivered in the Scriptures, in all things, then that
simplicity or Christian nobleness of spirit (which we spoke of) in their ends.
The reason is, because the tenor, frame and constituting principles of the
Scriptures are cast, molded and ordered by him that is the great Author of
them, on purpose to comport and fall in with such ends, as were mentioned, viz.
his own glory, and the public accommodation of men from every particular: and
on the contrary, to oppose, thwart, and cross every man in all his personal
and particular ends whatsoever, which have not a perfect and entire consistence
with those other. So that he that is inspired, acted, and led by those high and
noble ends, the magnifying of God, and doing good to the community of men, can
have no occasion or tentation at any time upon him to bow, strain, force, or
wrest any Scripture, because in their native and proper sense and tendencie,
they comply with him, and (as the Hebrew phrase is) speak to his heart; whereas
on the contrary, if men be engaged in self ends and aims, which are incompliant
with the glory of God, and the general good of men, as when they make these
their footstool, and their own honor or greatness, their throne, they have a
strong tentation, amounting to little less then a necessity upon them, to deal
violently with the Scriptures, to bend and strain, and force them out of their
own rectitude and streightness, because otherwise they will not countenance or
comply with them in their crooked ends, but condemn them.

He that intends to make hoops of a clean streight-bodies tree, must in the
working of it alter the comely shape and straightness of it, wherein it grew,
and bend, and crook, and bow quite round, all that he imployeth of it to such a
purpose, whereas he whose Art and intent is to make Javelins, Lances, Pikes, or
the like, of such a tree, has no occasion to alter the native shape or figure
of it in point of straightness, because Nature it self had fitted it to his
hand in this respect for such uses and purposes as these; nay, this man should
do against himself, if he should alter them: In like manner, they who seek
themselves in ways and ends which contradict the lawful peace and comforts of
other men, if withal they desire to have their proceedings countenanced and
attested by the Scripture for just and good, they must of necessity suborn
them, and make them speak what the holy Ghost never meant they should speak;
whereas those men who value not, regard not themselves but in their order and
due subordination, and are willing to gird themselves and serve, til God and
men have first eaten, and can be content with the reversions and broken meat of
their table, be they never so mean; these men (I say) need not solicit or
importune the Scriptures for their testimony or compliance with them in their
way, because their native inspiration from God, leads them willingly, yea
rejoycingly, yea triumphantly hereunto. Such men should but prevaricate with
themselves and their own ends, if they should go about to make one hair of the
head of the Scripture, either black or white, which the holy Ghost has not
made such to their hand. Therefore whiles some men shall seek to adorn their
own names and reputations with the plunder and spoils of other men's, and lay
the foundations of their own greatness in the rulnes of the lawful comforts
and peace of others, there is no hope of a general or through accommodation in
matters of religion. It is impossible that such men should comport with the
truth in their way, and consequently with those who embrace the truth. Nor will
any method of violence, as either imprisoning, fining, crushing, suppressing,
banishing cutting off by death, or the like, be able to advance that unity and
accord which we al lust after, though some in Gods way, others in their own:
the very ghosts, and shadows, and memories of those that shall suffer in any of
these kinds, for conscience toward God, will be as so many spirits of
divisions, dissentions, and distractions amongst those that will choose no other
Arbitrators to comprimize, their differences, but the Sword and Blood.

Another figne of those Halcyon days approaching, so much desired by us all,
wherein all gusts, and winds, and storms of contrary doctrines, opinions, and
Sects in religion, shall be turned into a sweet calm of an universal unity and
accord, is this: when Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers,
shall be no more turned into Councels, Synods, and secular Arms: I mean, when
men shall be freely permitted, without fear or danger of molestation, to
consult with the Apostles, Prophets, etc. of what religion it were best for
them to be, without having their judgments emancipated, forestalled and
overawed by the definitive, and compulsory determinations, and allowances of
other men*

The reason hereof is, because the writings of the Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, with the Ministry of faithful Pastors and Teachers, are
sanctified and set apart by God, for this very end and purpose, namely, the
perfecting the Saints, etc. till they all come into the unity of the Faith,
etc. Therefore whilst Councels, Synods, etc. shall intrude, or step in, as new
Apostles, Ephesians. 4 13.
Prophets and Evangelists, of another order, between those Apostles, Prophets
and Evangelists, and those Pastors and Teachers, which Christ has given for
the settling of an universal peace and unity throughout all the Churches of his
Saints, in due time, to interrupt and intercept them in their work and way, so
that they can never have the judgments and consciences of men in their native
ingenuity and freedom to work upon, but still upon the disadvantage of
Synodical impressions and forestallments, partly with fear, partly with favor,
partly with hope and conceit of the truth, there is little hope of seeing the
vision of joy and glory in the world, I mean the Saints and Servants of Jesus
Christ universally kissing and embracing one another in the arms of unity,
truth and peace. It is in vain to wash in Abanah or Pharphar, when only the
waters of Jordan are sanctified for the cure. To commit adultery, is not the
way to increase, though flesh and blood should determine for it. They shall
eat (says God) and not have enough: they shall commit adultery and not
increase, because they have left off to take heed unto the Lord, that is,
because they had substituted their own wisdom and inventions in stead of his,
for bringing their desires and ends to pass, Hos. 4. 10.

Thirdly (and lastly) when the generality of men professing godliness and
religion, shall be content to furnish themselves with religion (I mean with
knowledge in religion) by smaller parcels, as the stock of their own judgments
and understanding shall be able from time to time to accommodate them, and
shall make scruple of taking it up by whole sale from Synods, Councels, and
Books, only for ease and cheapness sake: this also is as the putting forth of
the Fig Tree, which shows the Summer of an universal accord amongst the
Saints, to be at hand. The reason is, because God has promised (and will
perform accordingly) that if men shall apply their heart to understanding, and
shall cry after knowledge, and seek her as silver, and search for her as for
hid treasure, they shall then understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God, Prove. 2. 2, 3, 4. But there is no promise made, that they who
to favor themselves, and to gratify the flesh, and to save the labor of
seeking and searching after knowledge, shall take in the dictates and
resolutions of men, and call them knowledge and understanding, without any more
ado, shall either find the fear of the Lord, or true knowledge of God. Now
till men shall generally find the fear of the Lord, and the true knowledge of
God, (which is not like to be out of that way, which the promise of God
mentioned has sanctified thereunto) there will be little hope of the general
meeting of men in the bond of peace, as was formerly argued in another of these
signs.

Fourthly and lastly, when Christian States, and men of soundest judgment,
greatest learning, parts and abilities therein, shall give free liberty to men
looked upon as opposite in judgment to the truth, to publish and openly declare
the grounds and reasons of their judgments in each particular, and not compel
them either to keep them burning or glowing in their own breasts, or else to
propagate and vent them privately, and amongst persons that have neither
learning nor abilities in any kind, to encounter or oppose them; this is
another hopeful sign that the days of a general accommodation in matters of
religion, are coming upon the world.

The reason of this is plain, because till truth reign among the Saints, Peace
is not like to reign, (the reason whereof has been already given) nor will
Truth ever reign like unto herself, till all her enemies (I mean errors and
misprisions in matters of Religion) be subdued and brought under her feet. Nor
is there any likelihood in a way of reason or ordinary providence, that such
enemies of the truth should ever be subdued, til they come to look those sons
of Truth in the face, who are anointed by God with a spirit of wisdom and
understanding, for the confutation and utter abolishment of them. Doubtless
one main reason why errors, and fond and foul opinions do still propagate and
prevail with so high an hand amongst us, is, because these Ministers and
Teachers are suffered to have none other vent for them, but only amongst people
that are children in understanding, and not furnished with strength of
knowledge, or parts of learning to withstand them. The common proverb has
somewhat in it to this purpose; Inter eaecos etiam luscus potest regna^e, A man
with one eye will make a goodly King over those that are blind.

Reader, the Preface has done with thee, and recommends thee to the Book,
where it wishes a happy greeting between thy judgment and the truth.

Chap. 1.
Concerning the directive power in matters Ecclesiastical, and which concern
Religion; whether, how, or in what sense, it may be conceived to reside, in the
civil Magistrate, Synods or other men.

Sect. 1. A. S. Page 5. has this left handed expression concerning the civil
Magistrate, That he arrogates not to himself any directive power in matters of
Religion The Reader must do him a courtesy in finding him out a very soft
sense for the word arrogate; otherwise, he will be found in a misprision of a
foul insinuation against the Civil Magistrate, as, viz. that he arrogates, i.
(in the ordinary construction of the word) proudly assumes to himself, when he
claims or exercises that executive, coercive, and external power, in and
about matters of Religion, which yet A. S. himself in the very next page, knowing
on which side to butter his own bread, ascribes unto him: For, as he that
should say of A. S. by way of commendation, that he never corrupted a matron,
or woman in marriage, should yet hereby reflect a shrewd suspicion upon him,
that his innocence in this kind could not so well be avouched, in respect of
Virgins, or others of that sex, out of matrimonial relation: in like manner, A.
S. himself intending an honorable purgation or vindicatio^ of the civil
Magistrate in these words, That he arrogates not to himself any directive power
in matters of Religion, does he not by the same rule of Antithetical relation
(or implication) imply that he does arrogate another power, which stands in a
Relative opposition to it, which (according to his own distribution) is an
executive, coercitive, and external power, in and about matters of religion?
but I marvel, that the man should here so cleanly wipe the civil Magistrate of
a directive power in matters of Religion, when as but a few pages before, in
his 8. Observe. he had pleaded wisdom enough in the Parliament to know what is
convenient for the Church of God. If the Parliament be wise enough to know what
is convenient for the Church, I know no reason why that Directive power here
spoken of, should be derogated, or taken from them, especially by those, who
(it is much to be feared) are much straightened in respect of a spirit of that
wisdom themselves. Surely A. S. in saying that the Parliament is wise enough
to know what is convenient for the Church, has sifted the Synod or Assembly,
with a sieve of vanity, and broke the head of the necessity thereof; and so is
guilty of a far higher misdemeanour against it, then the Apologists are in any
thing that they have done, or said, yea or then himself lays to their charge;
which yet is his rod of scorpions to scourge them from place to place.

Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. Sect. 2. But let us consider a
little more narrowly, whether A. S. has quited himself like a Doctor of the
Chair, in stripping the civil Magistrate of a Directive power in matters of
Religion, and putting on him in stead thereof, the purple robe of an executive,
coercitive and external power only. page 6.

1. By such an umpirage and decision as this between the civil Magistrate, and
himself, with his fellow Presbyters, has he not made the one Iudex, and the
other Carnifex: the one must give the sentence, the other must do the
execution? The Civil Magistrate is much beholding to the Presbyter, for giving
of him a consecrated sword to fight the Presbyterian battles; and for
persuading him to pull out his own eyes, upon this presumption, that he shall
see better with his. I perceive Presbytery is policy in the highest: and seeks
to put the Magistrate between it self, and the envy and discontent of the
people; and yet nevertheless, hopes to gain from the hand of the Magistrate
such an interpretation of this practice, as thereby to be esteemed the best and
faithfullest friend it has in all the world. This cunning of the spirit we now
speak of, puts me in mind of the Ape, that took the Spaniels foot to pull the
Chess-nut out of the fire. Surely the frame and constitution of Presbytery is
exactly calculated for the meridian of this present world; but whether it will
indifferently serve for that which is to come, totus dubito, I am in doubt all
over. And indeed, A. S. himself is somewhat ingenuous in acknowledging, that
this government has little or no relation unto, or compliance with, the world
which is to come, professing, p. 13. the external peace of the Church, to be
the adaequate end thereof.

2. I would gladly be informed, whether A. S. thinks it reasonable, A. S. will
not arrogate unto himself, nor to his Assembly, an infallibility, though (in
some places) I find him very loath to abate this in the reckoning (if it would
be allowed;) and the truth is, that the whole fabrique (well-nigh) of his
discourse, to make it rational, and any thing to purpose, requires such a
supposition for the bottom and foundation of it, as this. Yet page 8. he
condescendeth so low, as to number himself amongst those, who know that they
know but in part: and page 9. amongst those that are conscious of their own
infirmity: which principle if he would please to follow home, it would teach
him to cast away the greatest part of his discourse with indignation, and to
say unto it, get thee hence. If he grants a possibility of error or
unrighteousness in the results and awards, whether of his Presbytery or
Assembly, which are supposed to be transmitted to the Magistrate for execution;
he cannot, speaking like a man, deny him a lawfulness of power, no nor yet a
necessity by way of duty, to examine and judge them, whether they be lawful
or meet to be put in execution, or no. And he that has a power to judge and
to determine, what is meet to be done, or not done, executed, or not executed,
in matters of Religion, may be said to have a Directive power in such things
(at least in the common sense and notion of a Directive power) as well as an
Executive. But

3. A. S. should be friend my intellect very much, to tell me plainly Directive
power in matters of Religion; being (as it should seem) a dainty morsel,
which he would feign complement away from the Parliament and civil
Magistrate, and snatch away from all others, for himself and his friends
(Presbyteriall Ecclesiastiques) to make merry with. 1. If by a Directive power,
he means a liberty or power of considering, advising, and proposing of what
may be expedient to be done in matters of Religon, and for the good of the
Church; I know no man but is interessed in such a power: As when the Tabernacle
was to be built, every man had power to bring and offer what he had, and what
his heart served him to part with for such a purpose, toward the edification
and furnishing of it. But why this liberty or power should be denied unto the
Parliament or Civil Magistrate, upon whom principally the charge lies to
provide quietness and peace for the Churches within the verge of their
temporal jurisdiction; reason (doubtless) on this side the Moon there lies
none; and A. S. must be very Seraphicall to find any.

2. If by a Directive power, he means an authoritative power, to conclude, in
matters of Religion, I know no subject capable of such a power, but only he
that is above all the Predicaments in Logique, or he to whom all power is
given, both in Heaven and on earth. Certain I am, that neither the one nor the
other can be invested with any greater power, then this. If the Presbyterians
demand such a Directive power as this, let them ask the Crown, Throne, and
Kingdom of Christ also.

3. If by a Directive power he means, a prudentiall faculty or ability, A. S.
his Presbytery or Synod, (always provided that the constituting members of
either, be of a sound constitution, as well for spiritual wisdom, as for
meekness and humility) so is it not by A. S. to be denied to many private
members of particular Churches; daily experience teaching us, that God gives of
this prudentiall faculty unto many of these, by the Ephah, whereas to many
Pastors it is given but by the Omer. And if this be the Directive power which
he means, though he seeks to allure the Parliament from the claim of it, by
fastening a complementall commendation of modesty upon them, by way of exchange
for it, proclaiming it unto the world, that they do not arrogate it to
themselves; yet they do claim it, yea, and exercise, act, and make use of it,
from day to day, as occasion requires. 1. In contriving and publishing their
Ordinance for calling the Assembly (formerly mentioned) they exercised such a
power, as we now speak of. 2. In limiting those that were to be of the
Assembly, to the subject or Argument, on which it was permitted unto them to
debate and treat (as appears by the Ordinance they did) they did no less. 3.
In appointing and ordering them not to determine or conclude of things as they
pleased by plurality of votes, but to deliver their opinions and advices as
should be most agreeable to the word of God (another proviso in the Ordinance)
they did the same. 4. In injoyning them, in case of difference of opinions
between them, to present the same, together with the reasons thereof, unto both
Houses (another member of that Ordinance) they did every whit as much. 5. In
their nomination and calling such and such Ministers or Divines by name, and
not others, to be of the Assembly, they acted the same power. 6. In framing
the temper and constitution of the Assembly, allaying it with such and such
members of their own, they steered the same course. 7. And lastly (to omit many
other particulars of like consideration) in their messages or directions sent
unto them from time to time, how to proceed, what particulars to wave for the
present, what to fall upon, and to debate, to hasten the issue of their
consultations, with the like, what do they else but claim and exercise such a
Directive power in matters of Religion, as we last distinguished?

If A. S. has any other notion of his Directive power in matters of Religion,
besides these three, my soul has not yet entered into that his secret; but
waits for his opening a door unto me by which it may. He taxes the Apologists
once and again for generalities, and obscurities in their expressions: But he
that says, A man should not steal, commits sacrilege himself.

4. Whereas harping still upon the same string, (the sound whereof going
against the Parliaments intention, in case they think, that they should judge
of questions in debate between them and their brethren; surely he speaks rather
as he would have it, then as he has any ground to speak. If he had plowed
with their Heifer, consulted with their expressions of themselves in reference
to their intentions in this kind, he would have assoyled their riddle far
otherwise. For to what purpose should they injoyne the Assembly (as we lately
heard they do in the Ordinance mentioned) in case of difference of opinions
between them, to present the same, together with the reasons thereof, unto both
Houses of Parliament, if they had no intention to umpire or judge between them?
Have they a desire to look upon such differences as some rare sight, or
pleasant spectacle, only to solace and delight themselves with them? And why
does the tenor of their delegation of power to the Assembly, run in this
strain, To deliver their opinions and advices, as should be most agreeable to
the word of God? Does any man desire the opinion and advice of another in any
matter that concerns him, without any intention of considering or judging of
them?

But A. S. is as cunning as A. C. and would fain commend his care peace, by
insinuating unto them a non-vocation from God, to do any thing with their
judgments and understanding in matters of Religion, but all things (without
exception) with their hand and power, that the Assembly, whether out of their
judgments or affections, shall propose or dictate unto them. A. S. (I believe)
is a brother of the stronger side of the Assembly; otherwise it is every whit
as much to be feared, that he would have Arminianiz'd as much, if not far more
then the Apologists have done. But if the Parliament has no calling from God,
to judge of matters between the Apologists and their Brethren (the Assemblers)
I would willingly know who has? or whether it be reasonable, that the
Apologists matters yet remaining undecided, and unjudged between them and their
Brethren, should suffer as men convicted, only because their adversaries and
accusers (the Brethren ye wot of) are more in number then they, and will needs
continue adversaries to them? Our Saviors testimony concerning himself and
his own cause, was a thousand times more authentic and valid then the
testimony of never so many men, take the best of the whole generation, is in
theirs; and yet he said, If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not
true, (Joh. 5. 31.) That is, it is not formally, or in a legal interpretation,
true; it is not true upon any such terms, but that you may reasonably wave it,
if you apprehend that you have grounds to do it. But (says he) there is
another that bears witness of me, etc. The testimony of a thousand men in a
case which equally (or though it be with some inequality) concerns
themselves, is of no more validity or authority, then of a particular man, in
a case relating only to himself. Yea, a good man's conscience, in matters
relating unto himself, is never in more danger of suffering, then in a crowd,
concerned in the same manner with him. It is the saying of one, that etiam ex
timidissimis animalibus acris multitudo cogi potest, that is, you may make a
fierce company of the fearfullest creatures that are, if you put enough of them
together; so frequent experience shows, that etiam ex aequissimis hominibus
iniqua multitudo cogi potest; you may make a bad assembly, of the best men.

Besides, A. S. himself affirms, p. 38. That to be both Judge and Party in one
cause cannot be granted to those that have no authoritative power one over
another: and that Par in Parem non habet imperium. Therefore why should the
Apologists fall in judgment by the hand of those that are parties, and but
equal to them? Again, It is his own reasoning, page 45. If all Churches were
equal (as for ought I know, or that A. S. alleges to the contrary, they are)
there can neither be superiors nor inferiors, and consequently no obedience
or disobedience. And if Justice consists not in an Arithmeticalls but
Geometrical, proportion (which is his own saying, page 70. and somewhat more
rational and less Presbyteriall, then most of it is fellows are) then is there
no reason, that peremptoriness of vote, how Arithmetically so ever privileged,
but weight and worth of argument, should carry it against them. Which how it
may fall, when God shall cancel or reverse the Sciptures that now are, and
make a new revelation of himself unto the world, I know not; but whilst these
stand, confident I am, that they will never so fall.

But why the man should deny the Parliament a calling to judge of A. S. have
even the meanest of men to sing obedience and submission to the Assembly
without their understandings? Alas, they could make no melody in their hearts
unto God with such a singing. Nor would the song be either honorable or
comfortable to the Assembly it self, if themselves and others would but please
to bestow a few serious thoughts upon it. The glory of a Synod lies not so much
in the strength of their conclusions, as of their premises: nor is it any
thing worthy to be presumed, in comparison of what it is to be known, to be
wise and upright men. Me thinks an Assembly of conscientious and learned men,
should rather count it a profanation of their conclusions and resolves, then
otherwise, to have them swallowed without chewing; to have them subscribed and
consented unto only in such a way, and upon such terms, as fools are wont to
believe, subscribe, and consent unto all things: But,

5. To make the Apologists out of love with so much as looking toward
Parliament for any relief from them against the severe devotion of their
Brethren, in case they vote contrary to them (under which hope A. S. injoyes
himself with much contentment) he tells them, that by such a course or
expectation, they will join themselves with the Arminians, of whom he is
pleased to tell this Story. That hoping the civil Magistrate would have been
for them, they gave this Directive or Decisive power unto him; and afterward
repented themselves when they found him against them. Leaving the truth of the
Story upon the credit. of the Relator; I answer:

1. That Jesus Christ was never the more a sinner, for being numbered by the
Jews amongst transgressors, or for being crucified btween two thieves. Nor are
the Apologsts, or men of their judgment ever the more culpable or blameworthy
for being bound up in the same bundle of condemnation with Delinquents, by
their adversaries. Quis enim laudaverit hostem?

2. Neither did Paul count it any disparagement to him, to preach A. S. himself
think himself ever the more a Papist, because the Papists (as himself
confesses afterward, page 18.) believe all that he believes (though for my
part I think any man as good a Protestant as himself, that believes as much as
he) And page 64. in his 18th reasonless Reason against a toleration of men
better then himself, he insinuates this as a choice commendation of his
Presbyterial Government, that in it their Churches are not exposed unto the
calumnies of the Papists, who pretend to be nothing but one Church; meaning,
that a compliance with them in unity and uniformity, will be an exemption to
them from their calumnies.

3. It is an old piece of subtilty of the old Serpent, to oppose God in Jannes
and Jambres withstand Moses, but by doing the same things in appearance by the
help of the Devil, which Moses did by the finger of God? By this they hardened
Pharaoh and the Egyptians with this confidence and conceit, that God was no
more with Moses then with them. A. S. parallels the Apologists with the
Arminians, hoping to catch the foot of the simple in this snare, to make them
think that they are both baptized into one and the same spirit: you shall find
a further strain of this malignity in him, page 22.

Fourthly (and lastly) if the Arminians gave that power to the Civil
Magistrate which they are here charged to have done, upon hope they would have
been for them, they are no Antipodes to A. S. and his fraternity, who deny
this power to the Civil Magistrate, for fear they should not be for them, if
they were left free to judge of their own actions. All the lineaments in the
face of Presbytery demonstrate this to be in the heart of it; a willingness to
confer all, and all manner of power whatsoever upon the Civil Magistrate in
matters of Religion, which they may be secured will be used to serve their
turns, and not to the prejudice or disturbance of them in their way. And so A.
S. after he had labored in the very fire, and had engaged himself to the
uttermost to prove the negative, he falls off with this glozing close at the
last, (page 51.) that if the King and Parliament should find [any thing
contrary to what he had delivered] expedient, he had nothing to say against it.
Therefore of the two, Arminians are more charitably affected toward the Civil
Magistrate, in casting a power upon them, out of an hope they would use if for
their good, then the Presbyterians are in denying this power unto them, out of
fear they will use it to their damage.

6. (And lastly, for conclusion of this first Chapter) concerning such A. S.
(it seems) would here sequester for the honor and service of his Presbytery,
when Jesus Christ had declared himself willing to divest himself, and make a
delegation of it unto them, I shall as willingly acknowledge and adore their
patent, as any other. In the mean time, (God supporting me) I shall with the
utmost of my power, and in the presence of all discouragements, dangers,
deaths, vindicate the rights and prerogatives belonging to the crown of my
great Lord and Master: what shall become of me in so doing, ipse viderit. As
for such a Directive power, which with the honor and safety of the rights of
Heaven, is attributable unto men, whose character and cognizance is this, not
to be compulsorie unto men by any external violence, whether directly or
indirectly, to subscribe against their judgments and consciences to it, I can
freely allow as much of it to A. S. and his Presbyterial Assemblies, as will
stand with their peace with God, with their honor in the sight of unpartiall
and intelligent men, with the peace and edification of the Churches of God: if
they would have more (let them look to it) this desire of theirs will in time
find them out and slay them.

Cap. 2.
Concerning that executive, coercitive, and external power in matters of
Religion, which A. S. ascribes unto the Civil Magistrate. page 6.

A. S. in this sixth page, to persuade with the Parliament and Civil
Magistrate, that they shall do God good service to resign up their eyes
patiently into the hands of his Presbytery, feeds them with the commendations
of Constantine the Great, in refusing an unjust and exorbitant power, which the
Council gave to him. Where (by the way) it is somewhat observable, that it is
a thing incident to Councels and Synods, to give unjust and exorbitant power
unto Civil Magistrates. So that it stands the Parliament and civil Magistrate
in hand, before they part with their eyes upon such terms, to look about them,
and to consider twice over, what power they receive and accept of from the hand
of Council and Synods, especially in reference to matters of Religion, and the
Churches or servants of Christ. It is a terrible saying of Christ, enough to
make both the ears of Kings and Princes, and Parliaments, (yea, and of Synods
and Assemblies too) to tingle. Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones,
that believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about
his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea, Matthew. 18. 6. It is
dangerous meddling with Saints in any other way, then of tenderness and love, be
they never so few in number, never so weak in power, or otherwise (one of these
little ones, says Christ); All the 21. Reasons, with 41. more put to them,
whereby A. S. incites the Parliament against a toleration of the Apologists,
with men of their judgment, in the sequel of his discourse; will not deliver
either the King or Parliament out of the hand of that threatening, if they come
under the dint of it, by offering any violence (shall I say?) yea, any offense
to the least of these little ones. The Holy Ghost (1 Cor. 15. 24.) prophesies
of the putting down of all rule, and all authority and power by Christ: the
reason thereof, in the words immediately following, he shows to be, their
enmity unto him; for he must reign, (says the Apostle, Verse. 25.) till he
has put all his enemies under his feet. The truth is, that it is a very hard
matter, even for the best of men, in places of rule, authority and power, to
move regularly in their own orb, and not to mistake, or strain beyond the
tenor of their commission, to intermeddle in the affairs of Christ,
considering, first, that they are compassed about with their own infirmities,
as well as other men: secondly, in respect of their callings, they are
compassed about with more tentations this way, then other men: thirdly, (and
lastly) which is as much, or more then both the former, (if they be Christians)
what between the insinuations and flatteries of the baser, and the
inconsiderate affections and favor of the better sort of Teachers, they are
taught to dash their foot against this stone, as if it were another crown of
glory to them.

But let us first see, what that executive, or coercive (if it be lawful to A.
S. a syllable shorter) power is, which the man with both hands, and an
importune bounty, will needs bestow upon the Civil Magistrate. 2 By what
authority, and upon what grounds he does it.

For the first, he describes and states this power, after this manner, (page
6.) The Parliament pretends no Directive power in matters of Religion -- nor
any executive power that is intrinsecall to the Church -- but only an
executive, coercitive, and external power, which is not in, but about the
Church, and for the Church, whereby it compels refractory men to obey the
Church. And this authority belongs actually and in effect, in actu exercito,
(as they say) to true Christian Magistrates; but to others potentially, in actu
signato; and jure in rem only, till they become true Christians, etc.

In this description the man is to me a Barbarian (his own phrase to Church. I
have bestowed thoughts more then a few to be partners with him in his notion of
the word; but quanto plus cogito, eo minus capio. For shame A. S. out with the
beam of obscurity from your own eye, before you tiffle again to pull the moat
of obscurity out of your brothers eye. A man in reason would think, that the
same word, being used four or five times (and that without the least intimation
of any variety or difference of signification) almost within the compass of so
many lines, were still meant, and to be taken in one and the same sense. If so,
then ha with you. The Parliament, by that coercitive power, which you are
pleased here to bestow upon it, by way of compensation for that directive power
which you take from it, compels (say you) refractory men to obey the Church:
I presume that by the Church here, you do not mean all the particular Churches
and Congregations in the kingdom in the folio of their respective members, but
in the decimo sexto of their Synod, representative Assembly. If you take the
word in the former sense, you only say, that the Parliament has power to
compel the refractory to obey all the particular Churches, with their several
members in the Kingdom; which is a sense (I conceive) at as much defiance with
your ends, as with your and our understandings. If you take it in the latter
(which I doubt not but is your beloved sense) then your meaning is, that the
use and intent of that executive coercive power in matters of Religion, which
you put into the Parliaments hands, is to compel the kingdom, in case it be
refractory, or tot quot, to obey the Presbytery, and Presbyteriall assemblies
in all their Canons, Determinations, and Decrees whatsoever, without bail or
mainprise, without mercy or compassion, whether a man finds sap, sense,
savor, reason or Religion in them or no.

But yet secondly, I know not well how you should mean the coercive power in
the Parliament, to be not in, but about the Church, and for the Church. And I
doubt your meaning is not that the Parliament should, either only, or chiefly
work or act with this their coercive power, upon your Ecclesiastique
Assemblies, to restrain and keep them within compass; though I confess, if it
should move only or chiefly in this sphere, it would be more for the Church, i.
for the good and benefit of the Church in general, then to suffer such
assemblies to fit and impose oaths upon men to obey their acts, orders, and
decrees, (which you tell us, glorying in your shame, page 42. is done in your
Presbyteriall Government) and to punish or crush those that shall have more
conscience, then to inslave themselves unto them in such a way.

And 2. if by Church you should here mean the Church representative (as it is
more commonly, then properly called) in her general Assembly, you would be a
little more open, then (I conceive) will well stand with your principles in
such cases. For then your meaning is plainly this, That the Parliament has
that executive coercive power, which you ascribe to it, not for the Church, i.
the benefit of the Saints and servants of God throughout the kingdom, but for
the benefit and behoof of the Ecclesiastique Presbyteries and Assemblies only.
Now however, I can easily believe, that thus you would have it, yet I conceive
it somewhat eccentricall to your other motions to profess it.

And yet 3. when you immediately add; that in virtue of this authority, when
parties pretend to be effended by the Church, or if the Church judge any thing
amiss, he (the civil Magistrate) may command the Church to revise and examine
its judgment, etc. You must needs mean your transcendent Church of Presbyters;
otherwise you should prevaricate, and grant a judiciary power to particular
Congregations.

4. (And lastly) in the very next page (page 7.) to represent the voluntary And
if they all had fled away, what might have become of the poor Church of God in
this Kingdom? etc. Here, by the Church of God in this Kingdom, he cannot mean
the Ecclesiastique Church of representing Presbyters, because, if these had all
fled away, there had been no Church of God (in such a sense) in this Kingdom.
By the Church of God in this place, if he means any thing like a man, he must
needs mean the godly part in the Kingdom, and that considered, without their
Presbyters or Pastors. And oh that he, and his coopinatory party would but
grant that that executive coercive power which is in the civil Magistrate, is
for this Church; I mean, for the benefit and peace of this Church of God. But
in the mean time you see, that his Trumpet in the Description he gives of his
executive, coercive, external power in the Magistrate, gives no distinct
sound; perhaps he blew wild on purpose, lest an enemy should know how to
prepare to battle against him.

But is there never a blessing, of reason, or truth, in all this cluster? Come
and see.

In virtue of this authority (says he) when parties pretend to be offended
with the Church, or the Church judge any thing amiss, he (the Civil
Magistrate) may command the Church to examine its judgment, etc. In these few
words he has plainly plundered and undone a very considerable party of his
own beloved notions elsewhere. For,

1. What reason has he to be so invective against the Apologists (as he is
page 49. and 50.) for holding that Kings or civil Magistrates are above the
Church, when as himself here professes, that they may command the Church;
especially his own Maxim elsewhere, being this, that Par in parem non habet
imperium; and that Where there is no Superior or Inferior, there can be no
obedience or disobedience.

Non huc, non illuc exemplo nubis aquosae. 2. If the civil Magistrate has
power to command the Church to revise her judgment, when she judges any thing
amiss, surely he has power to examine and judge of her proceedings, whether
they be regular, equal, and just, or no; except you will say, that he comes to
the knowledge of your it regular and undue proceedings in your Presbyteries, by
immediate revelation. Suppose either the one or the other, what reason have you
to deny him part and fellowship with you in that Directive power in matters of
Religion, which you ingrosse and appropriate to your selves, as we have
formerly seen?

3. If so, then your Presbyteriall Assembly, or judging Church, may determine
and judge amiss. And if so, 1. how dare ye compel or make the people under
your government to swear obedience or subjection unto your orders, which yet
by your own confession (page 42) ordinarily you do? 2. Why are you not
satisfied with that subjection to your Presbyteriall Decisions, which pleads
no exemption, but only in the case of non-satisfaction, about the lawfulness
or truth of them? You give men a good foundation, a liberty to believe that you
may err; but you will not suffer them to build upon it, to refuse you, when
they think in their souls and consciences that that you do err. They that
will separate between such premises and such conclusions, will hardly make
good Christians themselves, or suffer others so to be. And if you be but
ingenuously willing to go along with this your own principle, That you may
err, as far as it would gladly lead you, me thinks I durst undertake that
the Apologists and you shall comprimize before to morrow next.

4. (And lastly) if parties may have cause to be offended, and not pretend to
be offended (as A. S. would mind it) with the Church (as out of all question
they may, if the Church may judge amiss) then have they power to judge of
their actions, as well as they of theirs. No man is justifiable in his
complaint or offense taking, but he that has a power to examine and judge of
that which gives the cause, or ministers the occasion of the offense. And if a
single party, which is no Presbyter or Prophet (in your sense) has a lawful
power to examine and judge of the acts and orders of a Presbyteriall or
Prophetical Assembly; and may possibly by means of such an examination, take
them tardie; do not so far magnify the spirits of your Prophets against the
spirits of our Saints, as to think these good for nothing but to swear homage
and vassalage unto them.

But A. S. (surely) pleases himself highly with a parcel of distinctions,

First, He distinguishes of that executive, coercive power, wherewith he
invests the civil Magistrate, as not being in, or intrinsecall unto the
Church* but external, and about the Church. Secondly, he distinguishes the
subject capable of this power, the civil Magistrate, into truly Christian, and
not truly Christian. Thirdly, upon this distinction, he builds a third
distinction, concerning the manner of the competencie of this power, to the one
kind of subject and the other; telling us, that this power or authority belongs
actually and in effect, in actu exercito, and jure in re to true Christian
Magistrates; but to others potentially, in actu signato, and jure in rem only,
till they become true Christians.

The man (you see) has much ado to find, or come at that power, in matters of
Religion: He adjures three unclean spirits of distinctions, to tell him what,
and where it is; and yet they do but peep and matter in their answer and make
no man the wiser by it. Here he seeks for the coercive power of the civil
Magistrate in matters of Religion, in the same black sea of darkness and
confusion, wherein he seeks (and would make the world believe he finds) the
Presbyterian government afterward. But if the one and the other be cloz'd up
in such an ammunition of rocks of distinctions, as A. S. represents them in
his story, certainly they are inaccessible to the judgments and consciences of
persons of mean capacity; and much more inaccessible to the judgments and
consciences of more understanding and considering men. The very darkness it
self of the distinctions which he is necessitated to use, to make his way to
come at the one and at the other, is a light sufficient to discover, that
neither the one nor the other is any where to be found within the territories
either of reason or of truth. But let us see the distinctions play a little
before us, for their Masters credit.

For the first: The Magistrates power (says he) viz. in matters of Religion
(for so he must necessarily be understood, by the Antithesis in the former
clause or member of this Distinction, where he denies a Directive power unto
him, in matters of Religion) is not in, or intrinsecall to the Church, but
extrinsecall and about the Church. Is it in, i. intrinsecall to matters of
Religion; and but extrinsecall in respect of the Church? So then (it seems) A.
S. his Presbyteriall Church, is somewhat more inward, intimate, and
intrinsecall, then the religion of this Church; otherwise, how should the power
of the Magistrate penetrate into the Religion thereof, and yet not reach into,
but only unto the Church it self? By this distinction he has utterly
disgraced his Presbyteriall Government, by making the Churches under it, more
internal and inward, then the religion that is to be found in them. If the
Apologists had but whispered one tittle of such a saying, though at never such
a distance, it had been enough to have produced seven reasons more (at least)
against their toleration, then are yet levied or brought forth into the world.

But 2ly, though you seem to deal very bountifully with the Magistrate
extrinsecall and about the Church, and to content your self and your
compresbyters with an intrinsecall power only; yet by somewhat that has been
lately printed, it appears, that you mean to eat at the same Table with him,
which you pretend to spread for him alone. For has not the Press very lately
been delivered of this piece of Presbytery, that the Classical Presbytery has
Reformation cleared, p. 23.
the authoritative power of Citation, just as the Bishops had? And is not such
a power external, and which is not in, but about the Churches? For if a
Classis shall cite or excommunicate a member of a Church, against the judgment
and consent of the Elders of that Church, let all the world judge whether that
be not an act of external power without the Church.

If it be replied, No; because that Church did implicitly consent in yielding
their Elders for members of that Presbytery; We reply, That if either your
public Law constrains that Church upon penalty, Invitum dicitur, quod quis vel
coactus, vel per ignorantiam admittit. Arist. Eth. l. 3. c. 1. Kecker. Praecog
Syst. Eth.
against their light, to suffer their Elders to sit in the Classical
Presbytery, then that Church does not freely consent; or if that Church without
constraint does consent for want of light (as it must be supposed, if a Classis
upon debate be found to be besides the word) this ignorant act of that Church,
is an unwilling or involuntary act, and so no free consent. And so the Classis,
according to A. S. his distinction, is like a Magistrate, which is a Bishop
without, and about that Church.

But good A. S. we know it is an easy matter to distinguish the Magistrate
executive, coercitive, external power as you speak of; but we would fain see
you demonstrate him into it: and then A. S. and M. S. should be no more two,
but one S. We know not how to transform distinctions into demonstrations.

His second Distinction, is of the Subject of this power, the Magistrate, whom
he makes twofold, truly Christian, and not truly Christian. But,

1. I would feign know by what Touchstone A. S. will try his gold in this case;
I mean judge of the truth of Christianity in a Magistrate. It appears (from
page 50. of his discourse) that he has no mind to grant his truth of
Christianity unto a Magistrate that is either Lutheran, Anabaptist, Socinian,
or Papist. Any of these misprisions in Christianity, are as sufficient in A. S.
his judgment, as in ours, to keep the sword of that power we speak of, out of
the Magistrates hand. And as for a Magistrate whose judgment shall be infected
(perfected, reason and truth would say) with Apologisme, (or the great hatred
of his soul) independencie) I make no question but he (in the Comique term)
should be exclusissimus from this capacity or right above all the rest.

But let us go on with the man in the terms of his own address to Magistrate
truly Christian, he understand an orthodox Magistrate; what if he had one or
two errors? would he yet permit him to be orthodox, and truly Christian, or
not? Till A. S. here specifies, Sermones generales non movent (his own rule)
for my self, until I shall be otherwise informed by himself, I shall make
use of my reason to believe, that by a Magistrate truly Christian, A. S. only
mean^ a Magistrate, who in his judgment is Presbyteriall: and that this
qualification of Presbyterialisme, and truth of Christianity in a Magistrate,
are against all contradictions, and counter-poysings whatsoever, termini
aequipollentes in his Logique. And if this be his meaning, the king (to be
sure) has none of his power as yet, in actu exercito, and jure in re; nor has
the Parliament (at least for ought A. S. or the kingdom knows) any whit more
of it then the King. And whatsoever it has done hitherto, by any executive,
coercive, external power about the Church or Church Affairs (in which kind it
has done very much) depends as touching the validity and justifiableness of it
upon this supposition, that it Presbyterializeth. Whence it follows, that he
that cannot, or does not believe that the Parliament is of a Classique
inclination, cannot (with the leave of A. S. his distinction) judge them to
have done lawfully or warrantably any thing that they have done hitherto,
about, or for the Church.

The truth is, that till A. S. will please to define, what manner of Magistrate
he must be, that shall pass the test of his distinction, for truly Christian,
we are constrained to suspend our bounty in conferring that executive,
coercive, external power about the Church upon any man. Nor do I make much
question, but that we shall have twenty Distinctions more, before we shall
obtain that Definition.

But of all the three distinctions here upon the stage, the best dancer This
Power or Authority (says he) belongs actually and in effect, in actu exercito,
and jure in re (it is very long, me thinks, ere we hear, to whom it belongs) to
true Christian Magistrates: but to others potentially, in actu signato, and
jure in rem only, until they become truly Christian.

1. Though I have many times heard of the distinction, in actu exercito, and in
actu signato, yet I never heard of any thing belonging to a person in actu
exercito, but that belonged to him, and that per prius, in actu signato. He to
whom the principle or power of acting does not belong, cannot stand engaged for
the exercise or acting of such a power.

2. My soul longs for the Summer fruit of a good reason from A. S. power about
the Church, and for the Church should not belong, actually, and in effect in
actu exercito, and jure in re, (and with as many other, proper, unproper,
necessary, unnecessary, sober, ridiculous expressions as he pleases) as well
to a Magistrate not yet truly Christian, as to him that is such. Has not an
Heathen or Heterodox Magistrate a lawfulness of power, to do presently, this
day, this hour, to morrow, and so forth, toties, quoties, as much good to and
for the Church or Churches of Christ within his jurisdiction or dominion, as he
could have, if he were truly Christian? Do acts of justice, bounty, grace
toward the Churches of Christ, any whit more defile a Magistrate how far from
truly Christian soever, then acts of the same nature performed unto his other
subjects? The Kings, and those that were in authority in Paul's days, were
generally (all the kings without exception) far from being truly Christian; and
yet was it not lawful for them to interpose with their Authority or Power,
that the Churches of Christ in their dominions, might lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty? If not, then was that exhortation
of his, 1 Timothy 2. 2. to be laid up in Lavender for some hundreds of years after
it was given; or else the benefit and blessing, the obtaining whereof by prayer
is made the ground of the exhortation, must have been made over in the
intentions of those that had so prayed, unto their posterities after many
generations. A. S. may choose which of the two he will believe: for my part, I
shall not be his corrivall in either.

Ye have heard A. S. his Distinctions for a coercive power about the Church in
a Civil Magistrate: Demonstrationes autem ubi? But where are his proofs?

Quas non invenio usquam, esse puto nusquam. What I find not any where, I
believe to be no where. I have searched, and that somewhat narrowly, throughout
the Juda (page 63) enforced after this manner; It is the Civil Magistrates
part to take away Heresies, Superstitions, and corruptions in manners after the
examples of the Kings of Juda. Wherefore then is it not his duty likewise to
take away all Schisms which are the high way to (and sometimes from) Heresy,
and consequently to deny Toleration, which is a way to both?

Reader, neither you nor I, must be offended, to have a molehill of proof
given us for a mountain of conclusion. You must know it is the manner of the
Presbyterian School, to hang great weights upon small wyars. For what need
Dictators argue? But,

1. If it be the Magistrates part to take away Superstitions, Heresies, etc.
page 48. that they must not serve God by a Proctor) and if so, you must
untruss, and deliver back again to him that Directive power in matters of
Religion, which you lately took from him.

2. When the Magistrate takes away Superstition, Heresy, etc. he mistake, and
smite the truth of God, in stead of Heresy, and the true worship of God in
stead of Superstition. Gamaliel Act 5. 24. 28. 38, 39.
might have had the full Vote of a Synod or Council, for persecuting the
Superstition, Schism and Heresy of the Apostles; but this was not security
enough to him; he was afraid of fighting against God, this notwithstanding. And
for my part, when the civil Magistrate shall be far enough out of this danger
of fighting against God, I have nothing to say against his fighting with
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, corruptions in manners, etc. Only my prayer for
him unto God is, that he would give him a wife and understanding heart, to
consider and discern, whether usurpation over the judgments and consciences of
the Saints of God, in matters of Religion, be not as grand a corruption in
manners as a Church or Kingdom is lighly incident unto.

3. Because the examples of the Kings of Judah for want of better executive
coercive power in the Civil Magistrate, with which A. S. would truk with him
for that Directive power (before spoken of) let us consider with a little more
freedom and ingenuity, what they contribute thereunto.

1. We do not read that any of the good Kings of Judah ever offered any
violence to the true Prophets, or people of the Lord, except it were in
passion, as a Chron. 16. 10. where Asa is said to have been wroth with the
Seer, that admonished him, and to have put him in prison. Which fact of his I
think A. S. himself will be ashamed to present either to Kings or Parliaments
for imitation. Therefore whatsoever besides may be proved from the example of
the Kings of Judah in matters of Religion, toward the rearing up of a
Presbytery in the perfection of its glory; certain it is, that nothing can be
proved, for the persecuting, annoying, crushing, disgracing, banishing, fining
the Apologists, whom himself (more then once or twice) acknowledges for very
pious, godly, and learned men.

2. Neither did any of these Kings ever compel any man to be of the Jewish
Religion; nor yet to profess the Jewish Religion against their judgments. It
was permitted to persons of other Nations to live amongst them, without being
circumcised, yea, or without smarting for want of it.

3. Nor do we read, that ever they attempted any thing against any A. S. would
call them) which yet abounded in great variety and numbers amongst them. We do
not find, that ever they find imprisoned, banished, put to death, either
Scribes, or Pharisees, or Herodians, or persons of any other Sect in the
profession of the Jewish Religion, that lived peaceably in their State.
Idolatry and Idolaters were (it seems) the adaequate object of their coercive
power in matters of Religion.

4. Nor did they, nor were they to inflict any outward punishment, Epbes. 5. 5.
Nor secondly, upon those that worshipped the true God of Israel, though with
some violation of the second Commandment, as when they sacrificed in the high
places, etc. But, first, upon such only, who apostatized from the God of
Israel, to serve strange gods, the gods of other Nations: And yet secondly, not
upon such neither, simply as such, but as attempting to entice and draw away
other of the people of God unto the same Idolatries with them, Deuteronomy. 13. 5, 8,
9.

5. There are two reasons very considerable, why the Kings of Judah Judah in
matters of Religion, for an investiture of Kings and Magistrates under the
Gospel, with the like, justifies the arguing of the Prelaticall School, which
pleads the order of the Aaronicall Priesthood, to demonstrate the necessity of
a Metropoliticall soveraigntie.

6. It no where appears that any of the godly Kings of Judah ever or Levites in
some things disputable between them, and others in the Land. Until A. S. shall
dig such a treasure as this out of the Scriptures, he will never have
sufficient wherewith to finish that tower of a Magistraticall coercive power in
matters of Religion, which he has begun to build.

7. If A. S. (or any other) will needs make the Kings of Judah tributaries
coercive power we speak of in the Civil Magistrate, he must first prove, that
these Kings were invested with that power which they exercised in matters of
Religion, by a moral Law, and which is of perpetual obligation and engagement
upon other Nations. For such a weak man as I, will rather incline to think,
that it was conferred upon them by a Law Politic and Judicial; and which no
more concerns or obliges Kings and Magistrates of other Nations, then that
Law mentioned in the same place with it, (and which indeed is part of it)
(Deuteronomy. 13.) which injoyneth the slaying of the Inhabitants of the Idolatrous
City with the edge of the sword, and the destroying of it utterly with all that
is therein, and the cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword; and the
gathering of all the spoil thereof into the midst of the street thereof, and
the burning of the City with fire, and all the spoil thereof every whit; and
the making it an heap for ever, and the not building it again. I think A. S.
himself does not conceive Christian Kings or Magistrates engaged in conscience
to observe all the particulars in this Law.

8. (And lastly) if you consult with those passages in the Law Judah exercised
about Idolatry and Idolaters, (for they went no further; they meddled not with
the crushing of Sects or Schisms, as we heard) you will find, that it was the
generality or entire body of the Church or Nation of the Jews, and not their
Kings, that was invested with it by God: See Deuteronomy. 13. from the beginning to
the end: and again, Deuteronomy. 7. 5. and Chap. 12. 2, 3. with many of like
consideration. So that what they did in this kind, they did it, or were to
have done it, in the Name, and with the consent of the Body of their people.

But the grand Pillar and supporter of this coercive power in Magistrates, is
this angry and discontented argument. What? Would you have all Religions, Sects
and Schisms tolerated in Christian churches? Should Jews, Turks, (and Papists
especially,) be suffered in their Religions? What a confusion must this needs
breed, both in Church and State? Give me leave to demulce and pacify this
argument; and then we advance to a new subject. I answer by distinguishing.

1. If by a toleration, the argument means either an approbation, or

Secondly, if by a toleration the argument means a non-suppression

First, because God has anointed and sanctified his word, and the casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and for the bringing into captivity every thought unto the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. The Apostle in this place, v. 4. affirms, that the
weapons of his warfare (meaning the knowledge which he had of God, and of Jesus
Christ in the Gospel, and his abilities of utterance and preaching) were
mighty through God, for those ends and purposes. When God has appointed a
means, and that of so much efficacy and power, either to prevent an
inconvenience, or to accomplish any end or effect whatsoever, for men to wave
this means, and to interesse another of their own, is both to put an affront
upon God, and to consult frustration and disappointment to themselves. And for
my part, I am all thoughts made, that the true and adequate reason why those
Sects and Schisms, and wild opinions which are lately started amongst us,
gather so much strength and head, and grow so fast upon us as they do daily,
is this; that we reject the wisdom and counsel of God for the opposing and
suppressing of them, and have recourse to our own arm, hoping by disgracing,
displacing, way-laying, impoverishing, suspending, imprisoning* and other
weapons and ways of the flesh, to ease our selves of the burthensomnesse and
trouble of them. Besides the Scripture mentioned, there is a passage of full
importance this way, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, etc. And he gave some Apostles, some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, until we all come into the unity of faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, etc. We see here that Gods design and desire,
as well as ours, is unity, and perfect agreement amongst the Saints, in all
matters of faith and knowledge. But how, or by what means, or by whom has he
projected and purposed the obtaining of this his desire? Mark, he does not say,
that he gave some Kings, and some Princes, and some Judges, and Justices of the
Peace, some Pursevants, and some Jaylors, etc. to bring us into the unity of
the faith; No, but he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, to bring this desirable end of his
to pass. And if we would make more use of these agents and instruments of God,
of the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, of Pastors and Teachers, and less of
those other (which are our own) for the quenching of those flames of divisions
and dissentions that are amongst us in matters of Religion, we might in all
likelihood see our desires in this behalf, many years sooner then by any other
course we are like to do. The word of God, especially in the hand of an able
Minister (among other ends) is given by God on purpose for the conviction and
stopping of the mouths of gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9, 11. And therefore this will
do it, when a thousand other means, not having this anointing oil upon them,
though never so plausible, and promising in the eye of humane wisdom, will
rather open them yet wider, then otherwise.

2. It is the express order and command of God to Ministers of the and
convince gainsayers, and men contrary-minded to the The servant of the Lord
must not strive but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, in meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth. 2 Timothy 2, 24. 25.
truth, to perform these offices unto them with meekness; and therefore not
to threaten them with delivering them over to the Secular powers, or to incite
the civil Magistrate against them. And if it be not lawful for the Minister
to encourage or put on the civil Magistrate to use any external violence or
compulsion against such, certainly it is not lawful, much less any point of
duty for him to proceed in any such way against them. And if such meekness be
to be used toward those that are professed enemies to Christian Religion in
the main (of which the Scripture in the margin evidently speaks) much more
is it to be showed toward those, who it may be are as cordially affected to
this Religion, as our selves, only dissenting from us in some apices or iota's
of this Religion.

3. Repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth, being (as we see) a
special gift of God, and no man capable of it by his own industry or seeking,
it is very unreasonable that the want of it, being in it self a judgment upon
a man from God, and withal no ways prejudicial or hurtful unto others, (at
least not necessarily or unavoidably hurtful

External compulsion in matters of Religion, is of a proper and

If it be objected, That the intent of the Magistrates compulsion in this case,
is not to extort a profession from me against my judgment and conscience, but
to engage me to rectify and reform my judgment according to the truth, and so
to make profession accordingly.

I answer, First, that I stand already engaged by a far greater band
hereunto, viz. my peace with God, and the safety of my soul, then suffering
temporally from the Civil power. Nor can it reasonably be here replied to me,
that many will do more for fear of a present temporal punishment, then of
the future loss of their souls; because they that will do this, will be
ready enough to comply with the Magistrate in his Religion, what ever it be,
without compulsion. Secondly, if the intent of the temporal compulsion bent
against me, be my engagement to rectify my judgment according to the truth,
and then to profess accordingly, why is it discharged upon me before it be
known whether I have not discharged such my engagements to the uttermost of my
power, and yet am not able to call that truth, which the Magistrate would have
me so to call? Many (says Pro. 29. 26.
Solomon) seek the face of the Ruler: and who would not gladly second the
Magistrate in his Religion, if he had his judgment and conscience in his own
hand or power?

5. If the civil Magistrate has an actual coercive power to suppress truly
Christian, which he had not before, then truth of Christianity alters the
property and tenor of Magistracy, and that for the worse, in respect of those
that are in subjection to it; yea, and (possibly) in respect of the best of
those that are in such subjection. Before he was truly Christian, he had (says
A. S. and Presbyterians generally) no power to punish, fine, imprison, banish,
crush any of his Subjects for the exercise of their conscience toward God: but
by virtue of that great mercy vouchsafed unto him by God, in giving him part
and fellowshship with the Saints in Jesus Christ, he is invested with a new
power to persecute the Saints, and to make them pay dearly for having
consciences better (it may be) then his own, at least better then to comply
outwardly with what they cannot inwardly digest and approve. If this be the
case between a Christian, and the Civil Magistrate under whom he lives, he
has small encouragement to pray for the conversion of such a Magistrate to the
truth, in case he were for the present, Heterodox, or Pagan; it being far
better for him to live under such a Magistracy, which has no power to mis-use
him for his conscience sake, then under that which has; yea, and is made to
believe, that it ought to use it accordingly.

6. That power is very dangerous for a Magistrate to own, in the exercise
whereof, he may very easily (and commonly does) run an hazard (at least) of
fighting against God, or of plucking up that which God has planted, or of
pulling down that which God has built up. But is that power of suppressing
Schisms, Heresies, etc. which A. S. Cum multis aliis, are very earnest to
fasten upon him. Ergo, The Proposition (I conceive) is too much every man's
sense and consent, to be A. S. his dissent. The Assumption I demonstrate by
this reason: Because those practices and opinions in Religion, which the
Magistrate is born in hand by those, with whose eyes he sees in such cases, are
schismatic, erroneous, and contrary unto God; may very possibly be the ways
of God, and truths of God (such men's judgments of them notwithstanding.) For
first, the judgments of these men are not Apostolical, or infallible. A. S.
himself, who makes his demands for Presbyterian sovereignty, as high as
another, yet dares not lay claim to this crown. Therefore it is possible for
them to be in a misprision about some Question, or controversall point in
Religion. Secondly, frequent experience shows, that a minor part (yea, a party
for number inconsiderable) of godly persons in a Church or State, may have the
mind of God and of Christ among them in some particulars, before the
generality or major part of this Church, comes to be enlightened or interessed
in it. For a proof whereof ad hominem, we need go no further, then to that
party of godly persons in the Land, who stood up in Queen Elizabeth's and King
James his days, for Presbyteriall Government, when as the far greater part,
both of Magistrates and Ministers in the Kingdom, were in their judgments
opposite hereunto, and wholly Episcopal. So that had that Queen or King, or
any Parliament under them, gone about to suppress that party, which yet was
then looked upon as schismatic, sactious, and erroneous, they had (according
to A. S. his judgment, touching the judgment of those men) fought against
God, and sought to pluck up that which he has planted. Yea, thirdly, (and
lastly) it seldom or never falls out, that any truth which has for a long
time been under hatches, and unknown to the generality of Ministers and other
learned men in a Church or State, has been at the first, and on the sudden,
discovered by God, either unto the generality, or major part of them, but unto
some few only, yea, and sometimes but unto one (for a season) by, and from
whom, he is pleased to propagate the light and knowledge of it unto more
afterward. If then the Magistrate should rise up to suppress this truth, or
those that hold it forth unto the world, because it has few friends and many
enemies amongst the Masters in his Israel, and is generally looked upon as a
schismatic and erroneous opinion, should he not (in Gamaliel's sense) fight
against God? The householder in the Parable forbad the plucking up of the Tares
out of his field, for fear of plucking up the Wheat with them, Matthew. 13. 29.

7. That power which was never attributed to the civil Magistrate, coercive
power in matters of Religion, for the suppressing of errors, schisms,
heresies, etc. was never attributed to the civil Magistrate by any Christian,
but only by those that See for the further proof of the minor Proposition, Mr
Io. Robinsons Essays, p. 49. 50, etc.
were very confident, that it would be used for their turns, and to effect
their desires. Ergo, A. S. himself is wary and tender above measure in
conferring it upon him; distinguishing once and again, and the third time also
upon it (as we heard) before he dares let him have it; yea, and in the close,
does as much (in effect) as tell him, that except he be Presbyterian right
down, and will accommodate him and his party with it, he ought not to claim it.

8. That power which in the exercise of it, directly tends to prevent, A. S.
deny this Proposition, at the peril of his modesty and reputation be it. So
then I assume; But such a power in the civil Magistrate as we speak of,
directly tends to all the mischief and inconvenience mentioned. Ergo, The
evidence of the assumption is this: when men are obnoxious to the stroke of the
civil power, and in danger of suffering deeply from the Magistrate, for any
thing that they shall hold or practice in Religion contrary unto him, it must
needs be a great tentation and discouragement upon them, from searching and
^nquiring into the Scriptures, after a more exact knowledge of the good and
holy, and perfect will of God in things; because in case he should discover
any thing contrary to what the Magistrate professes, he must run the hazard,
either of withholding the truth he so discovers, in unrighteousness, and so
of having both God and his own conscience his enemy, or else of having his
bones broken by the iron rod of the civil Magistrate, for making profession of
any thing contrary to that which he professes.

9. That power which in the use of it plainly and palpably tends to power in
matters of Religion, to crush schisms, heresies, etc. which is by A. S. and
many others, pinned upon the Magistrates sleeve, is a power of this tendencie
and importance in the use of it. Ergo. This latter Proposition shines clear
enough with this light. First, a very great part (if not far the greatest) of
those that are like to suffer by it, are men of good conscience, and truly
fearing God. This is manifest in the Apologists and men of their judgment,
whom A. S. himself, over and over (though condemning himself, toties quoties)
acknowledges for very pious and godly men. Nor is it like that (ordinarily)
men of loose or no conscience, should delight to swim against the streams,
either of greatness or plurality, in matters of Religion. Now then it cannot
but be conceived to be matter of solemn gratification to Satan, who is a
murderer, and blood^ enemy to the Saints, to see them disgraced, crushed,
trodden and trampled upon, especially by those, whom God has appointed to be
their protectours, and most of all, that this grievous measure should be
measured out unto them for the goodness of their consciences toward God.

Secondly, It is the impatient and importune desire of all ignorant, loose,
lukewarm and carnal professors, to have all Religions, (as they call them)
all ways, sects, opinions, and practices in Religion, wholly silenced,
suppressed, and abolished where they live, excepting only that one way and
practice, which shall be authorized and practiced by the State. Because by this
means, they hope they shall not be distracted about their Religion, nor be put
upon that sore trouble of seeking it they know not where, or amongst whom; but
shall have it put into their mouths by the hand of Authority; which they hope
likewise will stand between them and harm, in case it should not prove a
Religion of that purity and goodness, which God requires.

10. (And lastly) That power which in the use of it, directly tends peace and
comfort of them, or by both, is a power from beneath, not from above. (This
Proposition also, a conscience any whit ingenuous, cannot lightly deny) But
such is the coercive power in matters of Religion, wherewith A. S. would fain
befriend himself, in the civil Magistrate. Ergo. The truth of the Assumption
appears in this consideration: When the conscience of a man has once broke the
bands and tie of its own light, and prostituted it self to the desires and
pleasures of men, against the grain of its own judgment and inclination
(whereunto it is sorely tempted and urged, when the man is threatened deep, in
case he shall not comply with the State in their Religion, his judgment and
conscience being wholly averse to it) one of these two great evils or miseries
commonly befalls him. Either 1. God takes no more pleasure in such a conscience
afterward, but withdrawing himself from it, leaves it unto it self, whereupon
secretly (as it were) resenting the departure of God from it, it falls upon a
course of hardening it self, and by degrees contracts a boldness, impudence,
and desperateness in sinning; as a woman by suffering a breach to be made upon
her modesty or chastity once, often becomes facile and prone to that kind of
sinning afterward; or else, 2. by reflecting upon what it has done in such a
case, and feeding night and day upon the sad thoughts of its own act, and
casting it up between God and it self, how grievous a sin it is, to trample
upon its own light, for any man's sake, or upon any consideration whatsoever, it
brings it self into grievous agonies of perplexity, and horror, out of which
it never recovers afterward.

Thus I have given A. S. an account of my present thoughts, touching that
coercitive power in matters of Religion, which he is so importune to put into
the civil Magistrates hand, with both his own; making it as strange and
uncouth a matter, as a new Independencie amounts unto (page 60.) that any man
should not give the right hand of fellowship to his conceit herein. Which yet
notwithstanding I shall be most willing and ready to do, if the man will but do
me the courtesy solidly and theologue-like, by reason, and not by vote, that
is, unanswerably to answer the ten arguments propunded. For I profess
ingenuously, there is nothing separates between me and his judgment in the
point in hand, but only those ten reasons, with their fellows; and if I were
able to answer them my self, I would abate the condition required to the
bargain, and purchase my agreement with him by mine own labor.

Chap. 3.
Concerning Presbytery, or Classique Government of Churches, whether it be
founded upon the Scriptures, or what foundation it has otherwise.

IT is easy to observe (and yet well worth the observing) how A. S. his hand
trembles and shakes in drawing the line of the descent and pedigree of his
Presbyteriall Government; he knows not well where to find the sourse, first
spring, or original of it. He is between the Scriptures on the one hand, and
the law of nature on the other; as the Poet describes a fierce Tygre between
two droves or herds of cattle.

Nescit utro potius ruat, and ruere ardet utroque. He knows not which he had
best fall upon, but has a great mind to fasten upon both. When he has
occasion to skirmish with the Apologists upon this point, me thinks I see him
traversing his ground, as if he trod upon hot Irons; he treads daintily and
tenderly, and shifts his steppings to and again, off and on, as if he felt no
ground under him, but that whereof he was jealous. And it seems, that for the
whole family it self of persons engaged in A. S. his judgment about
Church Government, though they be but one, resolutely enough agreed for the
government it self; yet there are great divisions of heart amongst them
concerning the parentage and descent of it. Some out of a desire to have it the
more adored and reverenced in the world, will needs have it to be of the house
and lineage of John's Baptism, viz. from heaven, from the Scriptures; Others of
them, fearing that genealogy to be so perplexed and intricate, that it is
fitter to make strife and questions of, then demonstration and satisfaction,
think it better to wave that title, and claim, and to content themselves with a
Meropean, in stead of a Phoebean parentage for it; to rise no higher then the
liberty or power of the Church it self, to seek its original. Which cleft in
the house considered, it was a very prudent spoke put into the wheel of the
Apologists, by him that gave counsel (if all tales be true) at no hand to have
it put to vote, whether Presbyteriall Government could be proved from the
Scriptures, or no. Such a vote as this might very possibly have proved of as
interruptory a consequence to the builders of this Government, as the confusion
of tongues sometimes did to builders of another fabric.

But A. S. is A perse A, for ought that ever yet I could hear (save only
subordination, between superior and inferior Ecclesiastical Judicatories, i.
(in plain English) Presbyteriall Government, to be partim juris divini, partim
naturalis aut mixti; partly of divine right, partly of natural or mixed: which
yet is his Decision, page 27. When he affirms page 36. that his Presbyteriall
power needs not any pattern formally, and expressly from Christ, it suffices
that it has one from nature; would not a man think that he waves the
Scriptures in the question, as being completely furnished otherwise to make
good his standing? And yet within a few lines after, he glories too in the
superfluous and over-abounding contributions of the Scriptures to him: And yet
(says he) we can show a patent for it, not only from the Law of Nature, which
should suffice, but also from the Law of Grace, in the old and new Testament.
In other places, he seems wholly to decline the Law of Nature, as if men by
their prudentials or power in any kind, had nothing to do to institute or set
up any power in the Church, but by express order and warrant from God in the
Scriptures. It is only in God (says he page 48.) who is a King in this
spiritual Kingdom, a Master in this House, a Father in this Family, who can
give power therein unto any man; we dare not be so bold, etc. and page 61.
Verity consists not in the middle of this or that, which ye imagine, but in
a conformity of our conceptions with their object, and due measure, which in
this matter is only Gods word revealed in the Scriptures: and according to
this rule I take Presbyterian government rather, etc. And yet one more, page
34. Combined Presbyteries (qua tota, sed non qua totaliter considerata, i. no
man can tell how or which way) judge of points of doctrine, and discipline
already revealed in the holy Scriptures, and give us new Ecclesiastical Laws
of things indifferent, and so teach and rule the Churches, etc. Come A. S. let
you and I confer lovingly of these affairs before we part.

1. I wonder much, that having two Nations (at least, if not more) page 69. and
elsewhere.

Si variasse vocas crimen, variavimus ambo. 2. The differences that are amongst
the Apologists and men of their from another; you differ between your selves as
much as heaven and earth. They all as one man unanimously affirm, that their
way of government is Canonical, and of Divine assertion; you are divided about
the authority of your way, some making it Canonical, others Apocryphal, some
fetching it from the stars, others from the dust.

Hinc caput atque illinc, humero ex utroque pependit. By the way, the ingenuous
dissent of that party amongst you, who cannot say that they see any lineament
of Heaven in the face of your Government, being yet wel-willers, and friends of
affections large enough unto it, is unto me as little less then a
demonstration as may be, that your way is but from men, and not from God. For
as the saying is, Quid non sentit amor? If there were any thing in the
Scriptures that did but look merrily, or cast a plausible glance upon your way,
would not they that are so entirely devoted both in their judgments and
affections to it, find it out? yea and double and treble the sympathy and
strength of it with their imaginations? As it is the property of Love, to
cover a multitude of sins or trespasses, that are, (Prove. 10. 12.) so is it a
property likewise of the same affection to discover a multitude of pleasing
accommodations which are not.

Besides, it is somewhat more then a mote in the eye of your unity, that in
some Churches (of your Presbyteriall calculation) particular or Parochial
Senats or Consistories, have power to suspend from their communion, those that
be members thereof; yea also to excommunicate them, etc. This is your own
bounteous acknowledgment, p. 26. I thought that such a misdemeanour as this in
the State Presbyterial, had been of Classick vindication, at the least.

3. If Presbyterian government needs no formal or express pattern from
Christ, then either it has none such from him, or this pattern Tim. 3. 16.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable* etc. Therefore
by A. S. his own confession, his government has no formal or express pattern
from Christ. In one sense it may be granted, that Presbyterian government
needs no formal, nor yet material pattern from Christ, viz in such a sense,
as it may truly be said, that Castles in the air need no reparation. But,

4. If your government needs no formal or express pattern from Christ, we
would gladly know whether it needs any material or implicit pattern from him,
or what it needs from him, whether something or nothing. But if you understood,
or would please but to consider the necessities of it, I verily believe you
would confess that it did stand in need of that formal and express pattern
from him, which you speak of. You see that for want of such a pattern it drives
but heavily, and is long in Ptov. 8. 12.
getting up into its throne; it has lost many a merry day already, and yet
daily meets with such contestations, oppositions, contradictions, from sober,
wise, learned and religious men, that it is like to reign but in the fire of
contention, and with the sorrow and sadness of many such hearts as Christ would
not have made sad. And all this calamity befalls it for want of a formal and
express pattern from Christ: And yet has it no need hereof? Surely it is very
magnanimous, and high-spirited, to be able to bear all this heavy pressure of
misery upon it, and yet profess that it stands in no need of that which would
ease it.

5. If it needs no formal express pattern from Christ, we would willingly you
can show from the Law of Grace for it in the Old and New Testament. We suppose
that it stands in need of all that you can show for it, either from the Law of
Nature, or of Grace, either from the Old Testament, or from the New, and much
more. You tell us, you can show pattern upon pattern, but show none. Surely you
would be thought to do very nobly; Posse and nolle, nobile. You do not show
us, but only tell us, (p. 41.) that if we will, we may see it in the ordinary
practice of the Church of the Jews in the Old Testament. It seems that sight
you have of your Presbyteriall Government, either in this practice of the
Jewish Church, or in any other passage, or part of Scripture, depends upon your
wills: you are willing to see it, and therefore you see it. Otherwise, why
should you tell us that we may see it, if we will? you are happy men, who have
your eyes dependant upon your wills, and so can see what you please, or have a
mind to see: Nobis non licet esse tam disertis; our wills depend upon our eyes;
we dare not will any thing, but what we first see, to be the will and mind of
God. It is no marvel, that you cast it as a sore aspersion upon the Apologists
(p. 4.) that you saw them no ways minded to submit themselves (in these
matters of conscience) to the desires of the Parliament. I verily believe, that
did their judgments depend upon their wills, as it seems yours do, they would
have been as freely willing to have submitted in all things, unto the desires
of the Parliament, as you are. But,

6. If our wills be weak, and thereby are hindered from seeing that practice of
the Jewish Church, which you see, what do you contribute or afford us toward
the healing and strengthening of them? Nay, do you not rather occasion that
which is weak in this kind, to be quite turned out of the way? For when you
tell us (as you do page 13.) 1. that the adaequate end of your Presbyteriall
government, is the external peace of the Church. And 2. that the power thereof
consists, first, in the creation, suspension and deposition of Church Officers:
secondly, in determining matters of Doctrine: thirdly, in making
Ecclesiastical laws concerning things indifferent, etc. (all which you tell
us on a heap, page 42.) you both make us very loath and unwilling to find your
government there; and withal very confident that there it is not to be found.
For,

First, was the adaequate end of the government of that Church, the external
peace of the Church? Had it nothing in design, for the spiritual good, for
the edification of the members of it in knowledge, faith, and holiness? Was
the power of the high Priest given him only to keep the Church in external
peace? I thought that to provide for the external peace of the Church, had
rather appertained to the civil Magistrate and government, then to the
Ecclesiastic; and it is the Apostle himself that thus thoughteth me, 1 Timothy
2. 2. where he enjoyneth; that supplications, prayers, etc. be made for Kings
and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in
all godliness and honesty.

Secondly, neither do I find in the practice of that Church, any power given
to the combined rulers and governors thereof, for the creation, suspension,
deposition of Church Officers. I read of the deposition of a Church Officer
(and no mean one neither) by the Civil Magistrate, 1. King. 2. 27. So Solomon
cast out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord, etc. but of any such
deposition by the combined rulers of that Church, I remember not that I have
read. But,

3. As for any power of determining matters of Doctrine, this is further
practice of that Church, then any thing else. I know not well what A. S. means
by his phrase of Determining matters of Doctrine; but in my notion, and in the
Grammatical and proper sense of the word, Determine, the claim of such a power
rises up as a high partition wall between me and his Government. If by a power
of determining matters of doctrine, he means nothing else but a liberty or
ability of discussing and arguing such matters, and of recommending the issues
and results of such discussions, unto the Churches, as consonant (in their
judgments) to the truth, with a proposal of their desires unto the Churches,
to consider well of them, and to embrace them, if they can so judge and
conceive of them, I have nothing to oppose against this power. But if by his
power to determine matters of Religion, he means a power of concluding or
defining, what men shall be bound in conscience to receive and believe for
truth, and shall be looked upon as sinning, in case they do it not, whether
they see sufficient ground for what is so concluded, and obtruded upon them, or
not, (which I partly believe to be A. S. his sense, I am sure is the proper
sense of the word) such a power is, (and I think ever will be) the firstborn
of the abhorrings of my soul. I confess I cannot be overconfident that A. S.
intends the residence of such a power as this, in his Presbyterian Assemblies;
partly, because he speaks somewhat like a man in this behalf elsewhere,
supposing it to be safe even for a few men to dissent from all the world, in
case they have very strong reasons for their Paget Defense of Church
government. page 29.
dissent, page 22. and requires no subjection in particular Congregations unto
the judgment of Senats or Assemblies, but according to Gods word, page 28. (I
trust he means, so apprehended by the congregation; without this there is no
subjection according to Gods word.) And again, page 68. acknowledges it as an
undoubted maxim, that the church has no absolute power in her judgments, etc.
with many savoury expressions in this kind; partly also, because I find this
indulgence generally subscribed with Presbyterian pens, That the authority
which Classes and Synods exercise, is not absolute, nor their Decrees held to
be infallible, but to be examined by the word of God, and not to be received
further then they do agree herewith. And yet on the other hand I confess, that
I cannot conceive, or comprehend how A. S. his government can hold up her head
like her self, if this Iron-mace be taken out of her hand. For my part, if
this one Article of a liberty to wave Presbyteriall Injunctions and Decisions,
in case of a non liquet from the word of God, to him, to whom they are
tendered, will be but assented unto, and heartily kept and performed, it would
be the best Mediator I know to reconcile my thoughts and judgment to it.

4. Nor can I in the practice of the Jewish Church, find either vola or
vestigium of a power granted unto the Rulers thereof, to make Ecclesiastical
laws concerning things indifferent; I rather find a prohibition served upon
them for making any such laws; Ye shall put nothing unto the word which I
command you, nor shall you take ought therefrom, etc. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. So again,
Chap. 12. 32. If A. S. can but produce one example of any such Law or
Constitution made by them, he shall be a good benefactor to the penury of my
notions; and in consideration thereof, I will bestow upon him a dashing out of
this piece of his charge.

5. And lastly, in the practice of the Jewish Church, the Prelaticall A. S. by
your leave, the High Priest as well in his Authority as in his robes and holy
accoutrements, did far more plausibly sympathize with Metropoliticall state
and greatness, then with Presbyteriall. For my part, I am not able to discern
in all the practice of the Jewish Church, from the one end of it unto the
other, any piece, strain, or vein of such a pattern as A. S. speaks of.
Surely the vision is so conditioned, as not to be seen but upon Presbyterian
ground. The man did wisely in granting that he had no formal or express
pattern for his government either from the Old or New Testament: but he should
have done more ingenuously to have added, no nor yet any material or implicit
pattern neither. For if he has any material pattern, it is so purely
material, that it may contend with materia prima it self for the prize of
Invisibilitie. If he has any implicit, it is wrapped up under so many folds and
pleights of obscurity, that no seeing eye is able to pierce through to it.

But do we not give sentence too soon? It may be his pattern from the New
Testament will carry it, though that from the Old refused to meddle with it.
But where shall we seek this? He tells us, page 41. That we may see it in the
History of the New Testament, in the judgment given out at the Synod (either
truly or untruly so called) of Jerusalem, concerning the business of
Antiochia. What possibly we may see in length and time, is not easy to
determine for the present; but I have both more hope and fear of seeing a
thousand other things (which yet I cannot certainly say, that I shall see) then
I have of either, ever to see Classical proceedings demonstrated out of that
passage of Scripture. Nor does A. S. so much as put forth his little finger
toward such a Demonstration, but contents himself (for the present) to
threaten us with his own hope, of seeing the business clearly demonstrated to us
by a better hand ere long. Clear demonstrations of any thing from the
Scriptures, shall be very welcome to us at any time; but me thinks I see such
insuperable difficulties in the way, that I fear that Demonstration will never
come out clear. Yet because I would help forward the clearnes of it what I
can, I shall make bold to propound unto him that either is, or shall be the
undertaker thereof, a few particulars, which (I humbly conceive) must be
substantially proved to make the Demonstration clear, at least to me, and many
others.

1. It must be proved, that the Apostles in that meeting at Jerusalem, Acts 15.
6. sat there only in the capacity of ordinary Elders, or Presbyters, and not
as Apostles. i. that they waved or silenced the spirit of infallibility which
was given them, and fell to work with the weak and fallible spirits of other
men; which is, as if a man should pull out his eyes to see with the holes.

2. It must further be proved, that this Council at Jerusalem had their state
and set times of meeting, as weekly, monthly, yearly, or the like, and that
they did not assemble occasionally only. For this is one of the high
characters of Presbytery by A. S. his own calculation, page 39.

3. It must yet be proved, that they had Authoritatem citationis, an
authoritative power to cite and call before them whom they pleased within the
pale of Apostolical jurisdiction, that is, within the compass of the whole
world.

4. It must also be made clear, that the Apostles and Elders that were members
of this Synod, were sent hereunto, by those particular Churches, over whom they
had right to claim Jurisdiction, or intended to include in their
determinations.

5. The Demonstration will never be clear, till it be substantially proved,
that there was none authorized to sit in that Council, but only
Church Officers and Ecclesiastical men; the contrary hereof seeming (at least)
very apparent, from ver. 22. and 23.

6. That like wise must not be left unprov'd, that this Council had power, as
well to make new Laws of indifferent things, as to impose things necessary upon
the Churches. ver. 28.

7. The Demonstrator to make his work clear and clever, must prove that the
Churches of Syria and Cilicia, had their Commissioners or Delegates, fitting
authoritatively in this Synod, because they are included in the Determination,
ver. 23.

8. It must be proved likewise, that Paul and Barnabas sat as Commissioners
upon the same terms for the Church of Antioch in this Synod.

9. It must be made to appear, either that this Synod or Council would have
proceeded as now they did, whether they could have said, It seemed good to the
Holy Ghost, and to us, or no, or that ordinary Synods or Assemblies may
lawfully proceed as they did, though they have no such assurance of a
concurrence of the Holy Ghost with them, as they had.

10. And lastly, Proof must be made, that those words in the close of the
Epistle (sent from this Council to the respective Churches) ye shall do well,
ver. 29. are fulminative, and import some such threatening or intimation as
this, that if they did not submit, some further course must be taken with them.

If all these particulars shall be substantially cleared and proved, I shall
freely acknowledge that there is a plausible pattern for A. S. his Government,
in the new Testament, but Hic labor, hoc opus est. I shall not pre-judge any
man's abilities; but for the present, I do as much expect the fulfilling of
that Poetical Prophecy,

Vnda dabit flammas, and dabit ignis aquas, as I do ever to see that fifteenth
of the Acts, safely delivered of the man-child called Presbytery.

Therefore A. S. must pardon us if as yet we be not able to see any pattern
at all of his Government, neither formal, nor material, neither explicit, nor
implicit, either in the old or new Testament.

Well, but yet the man has one string to his bow more; though Grace will not
relieve him, it may be nature will. He has (as he says) a pattern in the
Law of Nature which will suffice. They must (I believe) have very good
appetites to Presbytery, that will be sufficed with this pattern. The Law of
nature is a very vast volume, and A. S. has not quoted either page, leaf, or
section of the book, so that I know not whither to turn, or where to look for
his pattern. But me thinks the man himself has given ample testimony to the
Law of Nature, that it is no ways guilty of, or accessarie to his Presbyterian
Government. For that which cannot be made out, to the judgments and
consciences of men, without the help of such an host of scholastique,
intricate, (if not inexplicable) distinctions, as A. S. is fain to leavie, and
muster together, p. 29. 30. 31. 32. etc. before he can make either head or foot
of his business, what other original or descent soever it may claim, I know
not, but (questionless) the Law of Nature will not own. The Law of nature
says with one of natures sons; Odi difficiles nugas: she meddles not with
subtilties, niceties, or curiosities of distinctions. A man that is unlearned,
and but of ordinary capacity, that shall read the pages last quoted, may very
possibly take his odd and uncouth distinctions for names of unclean spirits,
and think that the man conjur's for his Government.

But will you please to hear the names of his beagles, with which he follows
his game, and hunts classique Law out of those deep and dark caverns and
tullians of the earth where Nature had hid it, stygiisque admoverat umbris. The
first couple, Actus primus, senior, and Actus secundus, senior. The second
couple; Actus primus, junior, and Actus secundus junior. The third, Actus
primus, tertius; and Actus secundus, tertius. The fourth, Actus signatus,
senior; and Actus exercitus, senior. The fifth, Actus signatus, junior; and
Actus exercitus, junior. The sixth, collective and distributive. The seventh,
formerly, and materially. The eight, Totum simpliciter, and totum and
totaliter. The ninth, Omne simpliciter per omne, and pro omni and omnino vel
omnimodo. The tenth Totum, totaliter, and totum modificatum. The eleventh,
Divisim and conjunctim. The twelfth, per se, and per accidens: The thirteenth
and last, Totum confusum, and totum ordinatum. Can any reasonable man imagine,
that that conclusion or practice, which cannot be justified or cleared to the
understanding and conscience of learned, pregnant and apprehensive men (for
these are no lettuces for illiterate lips) but by the contributions and
engagements of all these distinctions (and some others not listed) should be
sufficiently contained in the Law of nature? The Law of nature is a book for
every man's reading and understanding; but this volume of distinctions is scarce
for any man's. If A. S. and his party would but spare the vulgar and common
sort of men (as there is neither reason, nor Religion but why they should) from
putting their necks under the yoke of Classique Government, until they can
plough with these heifers, I mean till he or they have made them capable of
all these distinctions, for my part I should not fear much danger or
inconvenience from it, except it were the intercepting or suspending of such a
Government, as might be a benefit and blessing to them, whilst they are in
preparing for the other.

In the mean time we clearly see that all A. S. his foundations for his
Presbyteriall building, fail him: neither the old Testament, nor the New, nor
yet the Law of Nature, will consent to bear or to support any such fabrique.
Nor is all that has been here said by way of contest with him about his
Government, any whit more then a first fruits of what is further opposeable to
it.

Chapt. 4
Concerning the form of Church Government maintained by the Apologists,
commonly called (nomine ad invidiam comparato) by the nickname of
Independency; by themselves Congregationall: and whether A. S. his exceptions
against it, be material, or of that moment, that it should give place to its
Competitor.

FOr the justification of this Government in a cataskeuastique or assertive
way, I shall plead nothing further (for the present) then what the Presbyterian
School it self grants, conceiving that to be a ground impregnable, especially
quoad homines, to found the lawfulness of it upon. I shall rather address to my
Antagonist A. S. and try whether he be any whit more dexterous at pulling down,
then we lately found him at building up; it may be he is better at hiding, then
at finding.

But first, toward the building up of the Congregationall Government, See
M^st^r (...) H^^le Independency etc. p. 2.
th^s cornerstone is given us by our Adversaries, that where there is no
neighborhood of Congregations, or single Churches, whereby they may with
convenience be aiding each to other, there a single Congregation must not be
denied ^ntireness of jurisdiction.

If we cannot upon this advantage of ground, make good this government against
all opposition, it is very ill bestowed on us, and we deserve to be punished
with that, which lifts up it self against it. But,

First, if entireness of Government or jurisdiction be not to be denied to a
single Congregation, when it is solitary, and without neighbors, then
certainly it has a lawful right, title, or claim to such a Jurisdiction. For
whatsoever does not in a way of equity or right belong unto any man, ought to
be denied unto him. If then a single Church in this case, has a right to an
intireness of rule and government within it self, I would gladly know, by what
right any other Church or churches, be they never so many, can take away this
right or privilege from it. Those whom God has put together (says our
Savior, in the case of marriage) let not man put asunder. Doubtless, if a
single Church, under the circumstance mentioned, has a right to an intireness
of jurisdiction within it self, it has this right conferred upon it by God, or
Christ himself, there being no other fountain or foundation thereof imaginable.
And if so, then who ever shall take away, or deny this right of Jurisdiction
unto it, must show a commission from heaven to do it, or otherwise be guilty of
putting those a sunder whom God has joined together.

Secondly, if a Church yet single, be invested with a power of Jurisdiction
within it self, and should be cashiered of this power, by the rising up of more
Churches near unto her, then that which is intended by God as a table, should
become a snare unto her; she should suffer l^ss, and have sorrow from those, by
whom she ought to be comforted.

Thirdly, If a single Church should suffer loss of so considerable a
privilege, as entireness of Jurisdiction is, by the multiplication of Churches
near unto her, then cannot this Church pray for the propagation of the Gospel
in places near to it, but she must pray against her own comfort and peace;
which is a sore temptation upon her, either to pray very faintly, or not to
pray at all, for such a thing.

If it be objected and said, that intireness of Jurisdiction is no benefit or
privilege to a single Church, but rather an inconvenience, or a diminutive
privilege at best, and that her condition shall be improved, not impaired, by
combining her self in point of government with other Churches: I answer,

First, that the Scripture it self makes intireness of government, or
subjection only unto those that are of the same society or body, a special
mercy, favor, and blessing from God. And their Nobles shall be of themselves
(says God, speaking of that great goodness he meant to show unto his people
after their return from Babylon) and their Governor shall proceed from the
midst of them* etc. Jer. 30. 21. So it is made a character or sign of the
prosperous estate of Tyres, that her wise men that were in her, (i. of her own
Nation) were her pilots, Ezekiel. 27. 8.

Secondly, subjection unto strangers, is still spoken of as matter of
punishment and sorrow: Give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen
should reign over it, Joel 2. 17. The Nations of the Jews were expressly
forbidden to set strangers to rule over them, Deuteronomy. 17. 15.

If it be objected; But Pastors or Elders of neighbor Churches ought not to
be looked upon as strangers, but as Brethren: I answer, (in a word) though they
be brethren in comparison of the unbelieving party of the world, and in respect
of their spiritual descent from the same Father with them; yet have they more
of the relation and consideration of strangers to them, then those that are (as
it were) of the same domestique society with them. And therefore subjection to
them, must needs have less of the blessing, and more of the curse in it, then
subjection to their own.

Thirdly, the grant of Government and Rule within themselves unto Towns and
Corporations, were ever esteemed matters of special grace and favor from
Princes: and have sometimes been purchased with great sums by the Inhabitants.

Fourthly and lastly, reason it self demonstrates intireness of Government, to
be a sweet privilege and benefit to a particular Church. First, in case a man
be questioned, he saves a proportion both of time, and labor of travel in
respect of whath must undergo, if he were to make his answer at a Consistory
further off. Secondly, proceedings against him in his own society shall be
regulated, managed and ordered by his own Pastor, who is a Father unto him in
the Lord, and who in all reason, and according to the course of (al most) all
constant experience, is more tender, affectionate, and compassionate toward
him, then the Pastors of other flocks, and those that are strangers to him. The
Pharaoh that knew Joseph, dealt well by him, his kindred, and seed: but (says
the Text) There arose another Pharaoh that knew not Joseph, and he evil
entreated our Fathers, etc. Thirdly, he shall be tried, and sentenced by those,
who know not how soon it may be their own case to be tried and sentenced by him
again; which in reason cannot but teach them moderation and equity, in
whatsoever they shall act or suggest against him; whereas, a Consistory of
standing Judges, whose fair necks have little or no cause to fear any yoke of
being judged themselves, are in far more danger, through a confident and
constant use of the Scepter, of having their hand hardened, and their little
finger soon made as heavy as their loins. It is a good rule which A. S.
himself prompteth us withal in this case, page 10. Nunquam satis fida
potentia, ubi nimia est; power seldom yields any good fruit, where it is too
rank and luxuriant. Fourthly, it is a great encouragement and confirmation of
face, to a man that is accused, and is called to answer for himself,
especially, if he be any thing tender foreheaded and bashful, as many of
inferior breed and education are, to answer before those, whose faces are
familiar to him, and with whose persons he is well acquainted; and the contrary
is a kind of oppression to such a man. Such an advantage or disadvantage as
this, may easily amount to as much, as either a man's standing, or falling in
this cause. A Consistory of strange faces, especially the persons being all of
superior rank and quality to him, may be to a plain man, of as bad a
consequence, a^ the seeing of Medusa's head was (among the Poets) it may turn
him into a stone, and make him able to say little for himself; whereas, if he
be to make answer at home, the knowledge and interest he has, of, and in
those persons before whom he is to speak, will be a sovereign antidote unto him
against such fears, as otherwise might betray him in his cause. Fifthly, in
this Government we speak of, by the Congregation, private Christians have the
opportunity of seeing and hearing from time to time, all the carriages,
debates, and judiciary proceedings in the Church, which will be not only matter
of much satisfaction, but also as a school of wisdom and experience unto them
daily; whereas, if these transactions be negotiated at a remote Consistory, the
private Christian loses his portion and interest in them. Sixthly (and lastly)
Conclusions many times are very offensive and hard to be digested, for want of
the knowledge of the premises, that should allay and sweeten them. Classique
determinations and awards, especially when they rise high, the reasons and
grounds of them being (for the most part) unknown to the generality of men, and
of hard construction with them: whereas the issues and awards that are brought
forth in a Congregation, the whole series and story of all proceedings, a
capite ad calcem, being known unto all, must needs be much more satisfactory,
and of a far better resentment with men. These reasons might have been enlarged
with much more strength and weight, and many others likewise added to them; but
for the present, desirous we are that brevity should have the casting voice.

Who then can lay any thing to the charge of this Government? That can I (quoth
A. S. in effect, p. 38, 39.) I have sixteen reasons or objections against it.
Yea, but A. S. your sixteen Reasons (or at least the greatest part of them, as
far as I can see) have all but one head; and if that be struck off, all those
reasons are but as so many dead corpses. You allege against the Apologists,
that the remedy in their way of Government, for the reducing of whole
Congregations or Churches, in case they miscarry or be irregular, is not
sufficient nor satisfactory. This you prove by laying pen upon paper, until
you had sixteen reasons (so called) in black and white. I shall not spend time
in transcribing these your Reasons, but shall desire the Reader (though it may
be some discourtesie unto you) to take your book into his hand, and to consider
of them with what is repon'd in Answer to them.

And first, for that defectiveness you charge upon the Congregationall
Government, for the reduction of whole Churches, under errors, miscarriages,
etc. I answer:

First, Suppose that course or means which the Apologists insist upon, a
withdrawing, and renouncing all Christian communion with such Churches, until
they repent, be not in the eye of reason or humane conjecture a means
sufficient for such a purpose, and that not only sixteen, but six and twenty
reasons, and those more plausible then A. S. his sixteen, could be levied
against it, yet if it be a means which God has authorized for the effecting it
(as I verily believe it is, neither does A. S. nor any of his, that yet I have
met with, prove the contrary) it will do the deed, and prosper, when as seven
other means that are greater of flesh, and more promising, will but beat the
air, and do little of what was intended and projected to have been done by
them. How many reasons may we probably conceive, that the disputers of this
world in Paul's time, were able to bandie against preaching, whereby to prove
it foolishness? yet this was, and still is, and ever will be, maugre all the
opposition of ten thousand disputations and reasons against it, the wisdom of
God, and the power of God, to save those that believe. The strength and power
of sacred Ordinances do not lie in their natures, but in their relations or
institutions. Now, that a withdrawing of Christian communion from persons
walking inordinately, is an Ordinance or means appointed by God, for the
reducing and reclaiming of them, is evident, 2 These. 3. 6. with the 14. We warn
you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your
selves from every brother that walks inordinately, etc. and verse. 14. If any
man obey not this our saying in this letter note him, and have no company with
him, that he may be ashamed. Clearly implying, that to withdraw communion, and
to deny Christian fellowship unto Christians walking inordinately, is both a
means of Divine institution, and otherwise proper and commodious in it self, to
reclaim and bring them to Repentance. There is the same reason of Churches in
this behalf, which there is of persons; Churches being nothing else but persons
embodied.

Secondly, suppose there were no such sufficient or satisfactory remedy for the
inconvenience mentioned in the way of the Apologists, as A. S. conceives to be
in his (which yet there is, as has in part already, and will afterward
further appear) yet Lawyers have a saying, that a mischief is better then an
inconvenience. A man had better run the hazard of a greater loss, then expose
himself to a daily wasting and consuming of his estate. A man had better be wet
through and through with a soaking shower once a year, then be exposed in his
house to continual droppings all the year long. The Delinquencie of whole
Churches, (such I mean, as is matter of public scandal or offense to their
neighbor Churches) is not an every days case, no more in the way of
Congregationall then of Presbyteriall Government: you acknowledge the rarity of
it in your Government, and we affirm it in ours. Now then much better it is, to
want a remedy against such an evil, which possibly may not fall out within an
age, though it be greater when it does fall, then it is to expose our selves to
continual droppings, I mean, to those daily inconveniences which we lately
showed to be incident to the Classique Government.

Thirdly, they that implead the Congregationall way, for being defective, as
touching the matter in hand, seem to suppose, that God has put a sufficiency
of power into the hands of men, to remedy all defects, errors, and
miscarriages of men whatsoever. Else why should it be made matter of so deep a
charge and challenge against the way of the Apologists, that it affords not a
sufficient and satisfactory remedy either to prevent or heal all possible
miscarriages in all churches? I would willingly know, in case your Church
transcendent, your supreme Session of Presbyters, should miscarry, and in your
Doctrinall determinations, give us hay, stubble, and wood, in stead of silver,
gold, and precious stones, (a misprision, you know, wel-neer as incident to
such Assemblies, yea, and to those that are more general and oecumeniall then
so, as obstinacy in error is to particular Congregations) what remedy the poor
Saints and Churches of God under you have, or can expect against such a
mischief; or what remedy you now have in the way of your government, for the
recovering of your selves out of such a snare, more then what the
Congregationall way affords, for the reclaiming of particular Churches. Nay,
the truth is, your Government in such a case is at a greater loss in respect of
any propable or hopeful remedy against such an evil (which yet is an evil of
a most dangerous consequence) then the other way of Government is for the
reduction of particular Churches. That has the remedy of God (as has been
showed) though not the remedy of men, and yet that remedy of God which it has,
is appliable by men, and those known who they are, viz. the Churches of Christ
near adjoining; but if your great Ecclesiastique body be tainted or infected,
though never so dangerously, Corpora morbis majora patent. Sen.
God must have mercy on you, and that in a way somewhat (at least) more then
ordinary, if ever you be healed. For that Directive power in matters of
Religion, which, had you left it in other men's hands, might in this case,
through the blessing of God, have healed you, being now only in your own, has
not only occasioned that evil disease that is upon you, but also leaves you
helpless and cureless by other men. A. S. makes the greatest part of his
arguments against that way of Government which he opposes, of what iffs, I
mean, of loose and impertinent suppositions, and cases, that are not like to
fall out, till ursa major, and ursa minor meet (unto which kind of arguments,
every whit as much as enough has been answered already) but he shall show
himself a sovereign Benefactour indeed to the Presbyterian cause, if he can
find out a remedy satisfactory and sufficient against that sore evil we speak
of incident to his Government in the case mentioned: which is a case both of a
far worse consequence then the obstinacy of a particular Church in some error;
and (I fear) of a far more frequent occurrence then the world is willing to
take notice of.

Fourthly, let us ponder a little, how sufficient and satisfactorie that
remedy against the evil now in consideration, is, which the Classique
polity, under the protection of A. S. his pen, so much glories in; let us
compare the two remedies, of the two corriving polities together, as A. S. has
done, after this manner.

But the Presbyteriall Government (says he, p. 39.) is subject to none of
these inconveniences: For the collective or combined eldership having an
Authoritative power, all men and Churches thereof are bound by Law and Covenant
to submit themselves thereunto: Every man knows their set times of meeting,
wherein sundry matters are dispatched, and all things carried by plurality of
voices, without any schism or separation. Not to be troublesome to the man
about his Grammaticals, (wherein his pen slips oftener then Priscian will
tolerate in such a piece) because in these he opposes nothing but a man's
conceit either of overmuch scholarship, or overmuch care, in him.

Here is a remedy indeed against some inconveniences; but whether the
inconveniences be not much better then the remedy, adhuc sub Judice lis est.
But what are the inconveniences?

The first is, that Churches being equal in authority, one cannot bind
another to give any account, in case of offense given. Well, what is the
remedy for this in Classique constitution? The combined Eldership having an
authoritative power, all men and Churches thereof are bound by Law and Covenant
to submit themselves, etc. What is another inconvenience? In case other
churches were offended in the proceedings of a particular church, they could
not judge in it; for then they should be both judge and party in one cause,
etc. Well, what is the remedy in Presbyterian polity? The combined Eldership
having an authoritative power, all men and Churches, etc. What is a third
inconvenience? That Congregationall Government gives no more power or
authority to a thousand Churches over one, then to a Tinker, yea to the
Hangman over a thousand, etc. What is the Presbyterian remedy for this? The
combined Eldership having an Authoritative power, etc. The combined Eldership
with their Authoritative power together with a Law or Covenant whereby all men
and Churches under them, are bound to submit unto them, are as bars of iron and
gates of brass to keep out al those inconveniences, irregularities,
defilements, pollutions, out of the Presbyterian Temple, whereunto (it seems)
the Congregationall temple, for want of such stoure and tight provisions, lies
open. But,

First, what if your combined Eldership has neither footing nor foundation in
the Word of God? It is not the serviceablenesse of it against a thousand such
inconveniences as were mentioned, that will justify it. Souls offering
sacrifice was a means to prevent the scattering of the people from him; yet
Samuel told him that he had done foolishly in it; and it cost him his Kingdom.
1 Samuel 13. 9. 13. 14. So the putting forth of Vzz^h's hand to stay the Ark, was
a means to keep it from being shaken; but yet the doing of it cost him his
life. Peter's valor and zeal in drawing his sword, and laying about him, was a
likely means of rescuing his Master; but the Lord Christ preferred the
imminent danger of his life before such a rescue, and checked the sword that
was drawn for him again into the sheath. That Law and constitution in the
Papacy, whereby all men and all Churches thereof, are bound to submit their
judgments in matters of Faith to the decision of the Papal Chair, is as
sovereign a remedy against all those inconveniences named, as that for which
Classique Authority is so much magnified by you; and yet it is never the less
abominable in the eyes both of God and men. The Question is not, which
Government will serve most turns; but which is most agreeable to the will and
Word of God. If that of Presbytery be defective this way, as there is extreme
cause to fear it is, this defect cannot be recompensed or redeemed by any
other commendation whatsoever.

Secondly, neither can we with any tolerable satisfaction inform our selves
out of all your discourse, either what you mean by that Authoritative power,
which you claim to your combined Eldership, nor yet how, or by what, or whose
Authority, they come to be invested with it. As for the power, sometimes you
deny it to be Magisteriall, or such, which may not lawfully be declined, when a
man cannot submit unto it without disobedience to God; otherwise, you make it
so irrefragably sacred, as if it were no lesser sin then perjurie it self, to
detract it. Again, for the investiture of your Eldership with this power,
whether they arrogate it unto themselves and are their own carvers, or whether
the Civil State and Parliamentarie Law, or whether the free and joint consent
of those over whom this power is exercised, do confer and derive it upon
them, you inform us not, but count an ignoramus, better then a verdict. But
till you do resolve us by what Authority or power this Authoritative power
comes into the hand of your combined Eldership, we shall think it safer to
stand to the hazard and damage of all the inconveniences spoken of, then to
subject to it.

Thirdly, if the Law of the State, be the first and most considerable band or
tie upon men to submit unto the power of your combined Eddership (as you seem
here to imply, in saying that all men and all Churches thereof are bound by
Law, etc.) then 1. you must acknowledge that the root and base of your
Government is potestas secularis, secular authority; and then how is it
Ecclesiastic or spiritual? A man may as well bring a clean thing out of an
unclean (in Jobs expression) as make a spiritual extraction out of a secular
root. Secondly, it will rest upon you to prove, that the Civil State has a
power to form and fashion the government of the Churches of Christ. Yea,
thirdly (and lastly) it will be demonstratively proved against you, that you
resolve the government of the Churches of Christ (in the last resolution of it)
into the humors, wills, and pleasures of the world, yea of the vilest and most
unworthy of men. But,

Fourthly (and lastly) the Authoritative power of your combined Eldership being
granted unto you, we do not see how the inconveniences you find in the
Congregationall way, will be much better solved in yours. For first, what if a
particular Congregation under the jurisdiction of your Eldership, reflecting
upon the Oath or Covenant it has taken for subjection thereunto, (as likewise
upon all other engagements that way) as unlawful, shall peremptorily refuse to
stand to the awards or determinations of it, what will you do in this case? How
will your combined Eldership remedy this inconvenience? What? will you
excommunicate this Church? The Apologists in their way do little less; (and
that by a power far less questionable then yours) nay in your interpretation
they do every whit as much: Or will you deliver them over Brachio seculari? to
be hampered and taught better then it seems you can teach them, by prisons,
fines, banishment, etc. O A. S. remember you tar'd the Apologists, for
comporting in a very small matter (in comparison) with the Arminians (in case
it had been true) and will you comply with the Papists in a matter of this high
nature? Churches had need take heed how they choose men for their Guardians,
that will so dispose of them if they please them not. Besides, you know what
was said in the second chapter, touching the power of the Magistrate in this
case. And what if in the Session of your combined Eldership there be no such
thing as plurality of votes concerning excommunication of such a Church, (as it
is very possible that in such a meeting the truth may find just as many friends
as error has, and no more) is not the remedy you spoke of, now in the d^st?

Again secondly, (to touch upon the second inconvenience mentioned) when your
combined Eldership proceeds against a particular Church amongst you, upon
offense taken, is not this Eldership as well Party as Judge? If you think you
have every whit the better of it, because your Eldership, though it be both
Party and Judge, yet has an authoritative power over those whom it judges: I
answer first, that as our Savior told Pilate, He could have no power against
him, except it were given him from above; no more can your Eldership have over
those whom it judges in this case. Now how uncertain and faint the
probabilities are, that they have any power over them given them from above,
has been formerly showed at large. And if that power which your Eldership
claims, and exercises over the Church arraigned, be not from above, then the
Apologists remedy is far better and safer then yours. Secondly, to hold and
maintain, that all those that have an Authoritative power over men, may
lawfully by virtue of such power, be both parties and Judges, is to exalt all
manner of tyranny, violence and oppression by a Law. Upon such a supposition,
men invested with authority and power, whether in Church or State, may be their
own carvers, and serve themselves of the estates, liberties and lives of those
that are under them, how, and when, and as often as they list. And why do you
not submit to the decisive judgment of the King in all controversies depending
between you and him, if that be your doctrine?

For the third inconvenience (so called) I shall be your debtour to tell me
plainly and distinctly, what power more your government gives to a thousand
Churches over one, then to a Tinker, or the Hangman, over a thousand. I do not
remember where either your self, or any of your party, have calculated the
proportion; but I well remember a saying in Charron, That every humane
proposition has equal authority, Tout proposition human a autant
d'authorite quel' autre, si la raison n'on fait la difference. Charron de
sag^sse. Plus credend^ est assertioni alicujus simplicis and non authorizati
excellenter in Scripturis eruditi, quam declarationi Papae.
if reason make not the difference: and another of Gerson (much commended by
Protestant Authors, though the Author of it Pontificiall) The saying of a
simple man, and no ways authorized, if he be well seen in the Scriptures, is
rather to be believed, then the Popes own determination. But A. S. what makes
you think (for I can easily guess what makes you say) that the government of
the Apologists gives no more power to a thousand Churches over one, then to a
Tinker or Hangman over a thousand? Vbi, ^uando, quibus testibus, did this
government, or any son it has, ever make any such comparison, or so far
honor either your Tinker or Hangman, as to make them equal in power to a
thousand Churches. And yet I suppose, if a man should say, that the dust in the
balance has as much life in it as the Sun, it would be no disparagement to
this excellent and glorious creature; because the excellency of it does not
stand in any degrees or superiority of life above any other creature, but in
the abundance of light which it has, and the height of its situation, and the
serviceablenesse of it to the world by means of both. In like manner if it be
supposed (which I think, upon what has been delivered, may very reasonably be
supposed) that the glory and excellency of Churches does not stand in any
power or authority that one has over another, or many over one, but in other
far more rich, and holy, and honorable endowments, relations, and
qualifications, it can be no prejudice or disparagement unto ten thousand of
them, to say they have no more authority over one, then A. S. his Tinker or
Hangman has over them. Therefore if A. S. his admired piece of Church-policie,
has no greater commendation, then to serve for preventing such Inconveniences
as this, the world needs make no great lamentation over it, though it were in
the condition of Rachels children, when she wept for them, and would not be
Matthew. 2. 18.
comforted.

Some other inconveniences there are, wherein A. S. finds the Government which
he opposes, tardie, and thinks he sets a crown of glory upon the head of his
Presbytery, in vindicating the innocence of it in respect of such guilt; But,
alas! he washes off this guilt with blood, or with water fouler then it (as
has been showed) and condemns his government in that wherein he mainly
allows it. The guilt is innocence, in respect of the purgation. There is one
inconvenience (formerly opened and insisted upon in this chapter) very incident
to Presbytery, the conscience whereof (me thinks) should make all the sons of
that way, rather to cover and compassionate, then to complain or cry out of any
inconvenience they either see, or rather think they see in another.

Chap. 5.
Whether the Apologists and men of their judgment, may lawfully and without
danger or prejudice to the State, be tolerated: and whether A. S. his reasons
to the contrary, be of sufficient weight to persuade either to the banishment,
erushing, or suppressing of them in any kind.

HE that has read the precedent part of this discourse, and does, though but
with the lowest degree of impartialitie, consider what has been argued between
the two ways, Presbytery and Apologisme, cannot lightly but mourn over the
title of this chapter; and think him to be a man of iron entrails that should
give occasion to such a Question as is there propounded.

Suppose the opinion maintained in the latter part of the second Chapter, were
waved, and such a coercive power in matters of Religion as A. S. contends for,
allowed in the Magistrates hand, yet that any man should plead for the drawing
of this sword against those men, who first, have such a considerable strength,
if not of evidence, yet of reason, for what they practice and profess:
secondly, have a like (if not a more) considerable strength against that way of
government which they cannot submit to. Thirdly, are by their fiercest
adversaries and opposites themselves, acknowledged ten times over for very
pious, godly, and learned men. Fourthly, have been (at least the generality of
them) and so continue, men of the most affectionate, and withal the most
effectual activitie and forwardness to promote the great cause of Religion,
Parliament, and Kingdom. Fifthly, are as deep in, or (if you will) as much out
of their estates rateably, for the support of this cause, as any other sort of
men whatsoever. Sixthly, have (many of them) such as were meet for such a
service, adventured their persons and lives, in the face of the rage and fury
of the common enemy, continuing still in the same engagements. Yea, seventhly
(and lastly) have (some of them) exposed themselves to more danger, and harder
terms from the adverse party, then ordinary (in case they should prevail) by
a public vindication of the cause of the Parliament in print from the
Scriptures, and that before any man of differing judgment from them in Church
affairs, appeared in the cause upon such terms; that any man (I say) on this
side of malignancie, should consult the sorrow, trouble, disgrace, suppression,
ruin of men, so holy, so harmless, of such eminent desert in the cause of
Religion, State, Kingdom, me thinks should exceed the line of humanity, and
be thought some inspiration or suggestion from the great enemy of mankind.

Nevertheless, if either God, Reason, the peace or safety of the Kingdom,
require the sorrows or sufferings of these men, I make no question but they
will be willing to dispense with all considerations whatsoever that stand up to
plead their immunitie, and will with Isaac patiently suffer themselves to be
bound, yea and to be offered up in sacrifice also, if need be. Only their
humble request and suit is, that they may not be sacrificed upon the service of
the ignorance, vain surmises, needless jealousies, bitter suggestions, whether
of a few, or of many. Better a thousand times is it, that such distempers as
these, though found in millions of men, should suffer, were it never so deep,
then that the least hair of the head of one of those men should fall to the
ground.

One A. S. (it seems) is come forth with a band of one and twenty Reasons, to
attach the liberty of these men, and to seize the fredome of their consciences,
and comforts for the use of the Presbytery, though his word be, For God and his
Country. But let us give him an unpartiall hearing of what he has to say: If
the Presbytery has right either to the liberties or comforts of these men,
God forbid that any man should deny them unto it.

We shall take the Allegations into consideration, in that order that himself
presents them, in p. 61. 62, 63* 64, 65. of his Discourse; desiring the Reader
once more, to read the tenor of them more at large from his own pen, because
I intend my Answer with as little transcribing as may be.

To the first we answer: first, that we are no ways able to comprehend, A. S.
his first Reason against Toleration, Answered.
why, or how the toleration of the Apologists and theirs, should open any door
to all sorts of erroneous opinions, any whit more then A. S. his entertaining
of a sober and discreet servant to wait upon him, should open a door to all the
Kings guard to become his household attendants: or then an allowance of
provender to his friends horse, should open a door to all Prince Ruperts troops
to rack and manger with him. Nay, secondly, we are verily persuaded (and that
upon good grounds) that the granting unto the Apologists a free exercise of
their Ministry, will (under God) be an effectual means both of chasing away
of many erroneous opinions, which are (for the present) fighting against the
truth of God amongst us; as also of preventing the coming on of further
supplies from Hell unto them. A. S. himself gives them this testimony, page 70.
that whoever knows them, knows well they want no abilities to dispute their
opinion in any Assembly in Europe. Men of their abilities, being sound and
orthodox in their judgments withal, are Carpenters prepared (as it were) on
purpose by God, for the cutting down of the horns of false doctrines and
opinions, if they be suffered to work.

Thirdly, (and lastly) if the worst should come to the worst (as the saying is)
better a door opened to all sorts of erroneous opinions, yea, and to many other
inconveniences greater then this; then that the guilt of any persecution, or of
any evil intreatings of the Saints and servants of God should cleave unto a
people or State.

To your second Alledgement, why no Toleration for the Apologists, Answer to
his second Reason.
we answer; first, that the very constitution of it is but superstitiousness of
fear: The shadow of the mountains seem men unto you. It may breed factions and
divisions between persons of whatsoever relation, etc. Judge. 9.
May (the country Proverb says) comes but once a year; but that May this
Proverb speaks of, must come so often; but A. S. his May, may possibly not come
in an age, no nor in many generations. And would he have so many thousand of
the dear children and servants of God, as do Apologize in the Land, actually
and out of hand, be compelled to eat their bread in darkness, to be filled with
heaviness, and many of them (it is like) to perish by hunger, nakedness, etc.
for the honor and exaltation of his May be?

Non Dea te genuit, set duris cautibus horrens
Caucasus, Hyrcanaeque admorunt ubera tygres.
The man speaks as if he had been bred of rocks, and sucked the milk of Tygres.

Does he not deserve to be beaten with his own rod? and because his writing
books may cause many troubles and distractions amongst us, not to be tolerated
to have pen, ink, or paper any more?

Secondly, I would know of him, whether he deemeth himself to be of another
Religion then the Apologists, because he dissents in judgment from them about
Church Government. If so, he must deem himself eithe Arminian, Papist,
Socinian, or worse; if not, then Candorem tuum A. S. in that malignant
expression, whereby you would make simple people believe, that the father and
the son, and so the husband and wife, are of different Religions, when they do
not walk in the same way of Church Discipline.

Thirdly, why should such a difference as this, at least a liberty thus to
differ, without smarting on either side, breed factions or divisions between
persons in relation? Does the wild Ass bray (says Job) when he has grass? or
loweth the Ox over his fodder? Surely persons are never Job 6. 5.
upon better terms of advantage to agree, then when contentment is enjoyed on
every side. Or in case of such a difference as we speak of, if it be matter of
discontent to one party, that the other is not of the same practice with him,
you may confidenly believe that the miscarriage in this kind rests on the
Presbyterian side; the spirit thereof inordinately lusting after unity in
practice, viz. whether either there be any unity in judgment or no, yea, or
whether there be any ground for it or no, on the dissenting side. You may
prophecy of troubles and distractions likely to arise in families and other
relations, with somewhat the less danger of miscarrying in your predictions, if
you animate or encourage those that are, or shall be of your party, to make the
fray. As I have read a story of a Wizard in France, who foretold the death of
the Duke of Burgondie upon a certain day; and to make himself a true Prophet,
when the day came, murdered him himself.

4. Suppose A. S. should have the Apples given him which his soul lusts
after, and no toleration granted, would there not be as much, if not more,
reason to fear factions and divisions between Magistrate and Subject, Husband
and Wife, etc. as otherwise? If God should not incline the judgment, or not
satisfy the conscience of the one of these parties in relation, concerning the
lawfulness of that Government Presbyteriall, which we suppose (for argument
sake) to be established without a toleration of any other, would not the party
agrieved and burdened in this kind, be (in all likelihood) worse company for
the other, more troubled, more discontented, and every whit as much divided,
both in judgment and practice from him; yea, and more divided in affection,
coffeehouse being one of the greatest enemies that are, to love, union, and
peace? Were it not a thousand times better, and more conducing unto unity in
affection and peace, rather to suffer the discontented party to marry then to
burn, I mean, to enjoy the freedom of their conscience, rather then to be
perpetually kept in an iron chain of spiritual discontent? We cannot but know
that relations were encumbered with such factions and divisions, as A. S. speaks
of, even whilst the mountain of Samaria stood, I mean, when Episcopacy reigned,
when yet there was no toleration of Pluralities of Church Government (though of
Church Livings there was.)

5. Nothing is more frequent in and about the City, then for members of the
same family, to address themselves to several Ministeries from time to time,
the husband to hear in one place, the wife in another, the child in a third,
for their better spiritual accommodations respectively, yea, and sometimes to
communicate with several Ministers, without the least breach or touch of
coffeehouse on any side.

6. And lastly, It can hardly be expected, especially in this Kingdom, where
the godly and understanding party have so long suffered, and that in extremity,
from a peremptory imposed State-government, without any relaxation or
mitigation, and have lately tasted the unexpressible sweetness of ease, peace,
and liberty of conscience, that they should without extreme discontent be
brought back into another house of bondage, where the furnace of peremptory
subjection is like to be heat every whit as hot, as in the other. Excellency of
teaching, and that abundant light of the knowledge of God, which has shined
from the Ministry amongst us, into the hearts of many thousands, have made the
conscience very soft and tender in many. And where conscience is tender, a
little violence is a great torment to it.

To A. S. his third reason, to prove the intolerableness of a Toleration, His
third Reason Answered.
we answer, that the inward parts of it are but vanity and falsehood. For, 1.
It supposes that malignant supposition we spoke of, viz. that Presbytery and
Apologisme, make two differing Religions. 2. That there is no State in
Christendom, where there is one only Religion established, that will admit the
public exercise of any other; which is manifestly untrue, as is notoriously
known in France, the Low Countries, etc. 3. And lastly, it supposes, that
Apologisme, in case it be tolerated, must needs become a Schism in that
Religion which is established in the Land. We conceive, that every difference
in judgment does not make a Schism in that Religion which is professed on
both sides; we shall then find abundance of the weed growing in the
Presbyterian field it self. I my self know differences not a few amongst that
party; and some not of the lightest consequence. Or, if his meaning be, that
the practice of it, in case of a Toleration, should become a Schism from the
Presbyterian Church or Government, we answer, 1. That as yet we have no
Presbyterian Church or Government amongst us; and so, if the toleration be
granted before such a Government be established, it is apparently (...), out of
the reach of such an imputation for ever. 2. If it be not a Schism before, and
without a toleration, I do not apprehend what influence or aspect a Toleration
should have upon it, to make it one. 3. And lastly, I conceive him to be an
incompetent Judge, incapable of knowing or determining what a Schism is, who
acknowledges his ignorance or non-knowledge of what a Church is, which is a A.
S. his Profession or confession (which you will) page 21. And in this also we
confess our ignorance, that we know not wherein consists its essence or
being (speaking of a Church) I cannot believe that he should perfectly know the
nature of darkness, that is ignoranant of what belongs to light; nor that he
should know what death is, who is ignorant wherein life consists; nor that he
should know what a schism or rent means, that knows not what belongs to the
unity and intireness of the body. The rule among the sons of Reason, in all
such cases as these, is this; Rectum est index sui and obliqui; And again, that
en^ia privativa cognoscuntur ex suis positivis. etc.

Your 4th Reason, is rather somewhat else then a Reason; a confession His
fourth Reason Answered.
of the dimness or weakness of your sight. I cannot see (say you) how (a
Toleration) can well be denied to other Sects, if it be granted to our
Brethren: But,

1. Do you remember, how you quip your Brethren (as here you call them) for a
like expression used by them, page 41. If ye see no Scripture for it, yet
others (you tell them) may see. So here we tell you, that though you cannot
see how a Toleration can well be denied to other Sects, if it should be granted
unto your Brethren, yet others may see how very well it may. Bernardus non
videt omnia.

2. It is much that you should not be able to see such a thing as this, who
have such command over your eyes (as was noted formerly) as to see what you
will. Is it a matter of such profound and difficult speculation, to conceive,
how he that has the keeping of a door with lock and key, and bolts to it,
should let in one man that knocks, without letting in all comers?

3. Whereas you determine it to be a Question inextricable, to expound clearly,
what sects and what opinions are to be tolerated, and what not, do you not
prevaricate with your own cause and confidence, and put the Magistrate to a
stand, whether he should tolerate your opinion for Presbyterian government, or
not? Nay, do you not put him out of all hope of ever coming to a clear
resolution of what is his duty to do in this kind? For what patent can you show
from heaven, why this opinion of yours should not abide the test and trial of
that law, which here you impose upon others? I believe there are very few,
either Sects or Opinions amongst us (in both which notwithstanding we abound more
then is for our comfort) that either are liable to more considerable and
material exceptions, or that have been dealt with by an higher hand of
opposition and conviction, then this of yours. And why any one opinion which is
in the same or greater condemnation of unsatisfactoriness and ambiguity, then
others, should magnify it self to rule all others with a rod of iron, and to
break them in pieces like a Potters vessel, equity or reason, (for my part) I
know none: and I fear A. S. himself is as poor in this commodity, as I.

4. If it be so inextricable a Question, to expound clearly, what sects and
opinions are to be tolerated, and what not, how will you do to sway your
Presbyterian Scepter with judgment and equity? How will you know what opinions
donare Ecclesia, to make free denizens of your Church, and what to
disfranchise? By your own rule it is an inextricable Question, clearly to
determine what opinions are to be tolerated, and what not. And if the Question
be so difficult above measure, to determine what opinions are to be tolerated,
and what not, it must needs be yet of a far more difficult and weighty
consideration, to resolve what are fit to be countenanced, to be established,
yea, and yet more, to be imposed, to be enforced upon the judgments and
consciences of men, and what not; toleration being an act of a far lighter
importance, then either an establishment, or an enforcement.

5. And lastly, whereas he adds (in the close of this reason) that the less
the difference be, the greater is the schism, and adds no more; I marvel who
he thinks will entertain such a saying, the old Writ of Ipse dixit being out of
date long ago: yet the saying somewhat confirms me in what I said before, viz
that the man knows not what belongs to a schism. For does he here by a schism
understand any thing that is sinful? Then he makes the lesser difference from
the truth, to be a greater sin, then a greater would be. If his meaning be,
that the less material the ground or reason of any man's dissenting from a
major part be, the greater is his fault, or sin, in dissenting; We answer, that
his Argument proceeds, not only a non concessis, but also a non concedendis:
for to dissent from a major part, though the grounds of a man's dissent be no
matters of deep consequence, yet if they be such wherein his judgment and
conscience are not satisfied, his dissent is no sin at all, and consequently
cannot be the greater sin. Gnats must not be swallowed for any man's sake more
then Camels.

To his fifth Reason we answer. First, that suppose God in the Old His 5 reason
answered.
Testament granted no toleration of diverse Religions, or disciplines, does it
follow from hence, that you should grant none neither? Dare you say in matters
of knowledge, authority and power, Ero similis Altissimo, you will be like the
Highest? Remember the fall of the son of the morning. Will you set your
threshold by Gods, and compare with him for excellency of knowledge, or
infallibility of discerning? If you could assure us, after the rate of a
divine assurance, that that Religion and Discipline which you would impose on
us, are in all points sound, and justifiable in the sight of God, we could much
better bear the height of your indignation against a toleration of any
discipline or opinions but your own.

Secondly, though God granted no such toleration (as you speak of) in terminis,
yet he straightly prohibited all manner of violence, oppression, and hard
measure among his people one toward another; and in special manner charged it
upon the consciences of the rich, not to take any advantage of the poverty of
their brethren, to exact upon them, enslave them, and the like. Though such
Laws as these, in the letter of them, respected only civil transactions and
dealings between men, yet the equity and spirit of them extends to spirituals
also, men being every whit as liable to violence, oppression, and hard measure
from men for their conscience sake, as in any other respects, or upon any other
grounds whatsoever. Therefore in case there had been a minor party in that
Nation, that had been of a peculiar judgment by themselves, about the sense
and meaning of such or such a Law, relating unto practice (as Laws generally
do in one kind or other) and so had dissented in this practice from the major
part of their brethren in their Nation; in case this major part had taken the
advantage of their brethrens weakness, and because they were fewer in number,
should have forced them, against the light of their judgments, to alter their
practice, or if they refused, should have trodden and trampled upon them, or any
ways evil entreated them, it had been as apparent a breach of the Laws we
spoke of, as any oppression or violence in civil proceedings. And the truth
is, that for men that are truly conscientious, civil liberty (as it is called)
i. freedom from illegal taxes, impositions, exactions, imprisonments, without
liberty of conscience, is an accommodation of little value; yea, without this,
such men are not capable of much ease or benefit by the other. They are still
in danger of being in trouble and molestation from the State, for their
conscience sake.

3. Though God gave no such toleration (as you speak of) by a law, yet he did
actually tolerate for a long time together with much patience, not only a
minor, but a major part of the Jewish Nation, in a manner the whole Nation, and
that not only in some opinions or practices, which were disputably false or
sinful, but even in such which were notoriously and unquestionably such. (...)
(says Paul, Act. 13. 18.) He suffered (or tolerated) their manners in the
wilderness forty years; and afterward in the land of Canaan, many and many
a year longer, even till there was no remedy (as the Scripture somewhere
speaks. So then, if you be willing to follow the practice and example of God
(an honor whereunto you seem to pretend in this Reason) you must tolerate your
brethren, not only in some opinions and practices which are dialectically and
topically evil, but even in those which are demonstratively such.

4. And lastly, whereas you add, that the New Testament requires no less
union among Christians, then the old did amongst the Jews, we acknowledge the
truth of what you say, but the pertinencie of it to your purpose, we yet
desire. Though the New Testament requires union amongst Christians, and that
very ardently and pressingly, yet it does not require him that is stronger to
cudgel him that is weaker into the same opinion with him. If you be of a
better growth and stature in knowledge then we, and comprehend such truths as
we do not yet understand, we are most willing, as far and as fast, as meat
and nourishment will do it, to grow up unto you; only we would not be racked
or stretched to the same stature or proportion with you. We showed in our
second Chapter, what means the New Testament has appointed and sanctified,
for the effecting of the unity amongst the Saints, which it requires of them.

For your sixth Reason (so called) we can scarce see the face of a His 1.
Reason answered.
Reason in it. You say that if your brethren do assent to your Doctrine, and
are resolved likewise to assent to your Discipline, which shall be established
by common consent, they need no other toleration then the rest. If your meaning
be, that in case they assent to your Doctrine, and are resolved to assent to
your Discipline, viz. immediately and out of hand, as soon as it comes from
under the hammer, and has but the stamp of Presbyteriall Authority set upon
it, we are clearly of your mind, and do not conceive, how or why they should
need any other alteration, then what others have. Only we somewhat marvel
that you should so far forget your self, as to imply (by this your
expression) that even your Presbyterian party it self stands in need of a
toleration, as well as ours. Jam sumus ergo pares. Truth (I see) is sometimes
too quick and cunning for her adversaries. But if your meaning be, that a
resolution in your Brethren (the Apologists) to assent to your Discipline, viz.
when, and as soon as they can possibly satisfy themselves touching the
lawfulness of it, will exempt them from a necessity of a Toleration, both
they (we suppose) and our selves shall be very glad to hear such tidings from
your pen. We make no question but they are as thoroughly resolved to assent to
your Discipline upon such terms, as you can desire them.

That you add, is very incongruous. It would first be discussed (say you)
wherein they are resolved to dissent. First, we marvel who you mean should
discuss that wherein they should be resolved to dissent: especially
considering, Secondly, that they do not use to take up their resolutions
beforehand, not so much as to dissent at all, much less wherein or about what
they shall dissent. Thirdly, how should they resolve beforehand, wherein, or
whereabout to dissent, except they could prophecy of your future thoughts and
resolutions?

You would further have it considered (but you tell us not here neither by
whom) whether it be of so great importance, that in consideration thereof, they
dare not, in good conscience entertain communion with you. We scarce understand
your English, or meaning, here; and therefore if we answer besides your mind,
your words are in fault. We grant that other men of good abilities, consciencee
and learning, may draw up a very satisfactory resolution concerning such or
such a case, or practice, about which I am scrupled; but it will not follow
from hence, that therefore this resolution will be satisfactory unto me, or that
I with a good conscience may walk by it. Though the particular reason or
reasons, one or more, upon which the Apologists shall refuse to entertain such
a communion with you, as you mean (or at least should mean, if you speak any
thing to purpose) should be by never so many, and upon never so much
consideration, adjudged as insufficient, or inconsiderable to cause any such
refusal in them; yet this will not impose a necessity upon them to join in
communion with you, except you can make them capable of a sufficiency of
reason in such a resolution why they may with a good conscience submit unto it.

To your seventh Reason we answer, First, that though the Apologists His 7.
Reason answered.
should not be pressed to be actors in any thing against their consciences, yet
there is a necessity lying upon them to be suitors for a toleration, (I mean,
in case it will not be granted them without suing for, which would be a greater
honor to your Presbytery, then the contrary peremptorinesse is like to be)
viz. that so they may be actors of good, according to their consciences.
Suppose A. S. had bread and water, wherewith to subsist, but withal had a good
sum of money due to him, and that from one that was very well able to make
payment, or otherwise had an opportunity to prefer himself to some place of
profit, credit, or the like, if he would but become a suitor for it, would he
think that he had no need either to require his money of him in whose hand it
lies, or to sue for such preferment? The Apologists conceive there is a
necessity upon them, to save the souls of others, yea of as many as they can
lawfully purchase an opportunity to save, as well as their own. But,

Secondly, we know not by what authority or interest you undertake to secure
them, that they shall not be pressed to be actors in any thing against their
consciences. It may be you are but of the ordinary Presbyterian stature and
pitch; and so your mercies, though somewhat severe, yet possibly may not be
very cruel: But (says the Scripture) in those days there were Giants in the
earth, as well as men of the common Genesis 6. 4.
standard; so we fear a party amongst you of Hyper-presbyterian spirits,
whose Spring-tides may swell beyond your Low Water marks. But,

Thirdly (and lastly) we conceive this promise of yours to them, that they
shall not be pressed to be actors, etc. to be broken by your self seven times
over in your discourse, and by others of your party from time to time. To
consent unto your government, is (doubtless) to act against their conscience;
otherwise they had no reason to dissent from it. And whether to threaten them
with a non-toleration, together with all the evils and miseries attending
thereon, yea with paying for it in their purse and persons, in case they will
not consent unto it, (as some others of your party have done) be not a pressing
of them unto it, we leave unto men, whose judgments are not wholly swallowed up
in the gulf of Presbyterian zeal, to determine.

To your eighth reason, we answer, that we find very little heart His 8.
Reason answered.
or face of reason in it. The strength of it (whatever it is) lies in this
hypotheticall proposition: If it be against the nature of the communion of
Saints to live in Sects apart, without communicating at the Lords table, then
ought not the Apologists to be tolerated. But, etc. But good A. S. do you
conceive the men would under a toleration, live without communicating at the
Lords table? I know not what communion you have with their intentions of
spirits, more then I: but for the present, I am no man of your belief herein.
Toleration or no Toleration, I believe they will communicate at the Lords
Table, and that oftener then twice a year.

Secondly, if living in Sects apart be so offensive to your zeal over the
communion of Saints, why do you not rather mediate a Toleration for them, then
oppose it? If you shall suffer them to work with you, they will be so much the
more free to eat and drink with you, and to exercise all manner of Christian
friendship and familiarity with you. But if you shall thrust them into holes
and corners, and judge them unworthy of all part and fellowship with you in the
public Ministry of the Gospel, you impose little less then a necessity upon
them to live apart, and to enjoy themselves amongst themselves; and besides
represent your selves unto them as no ways desirous of communion with them.
Therefore in this reason your premises and conclusion are at utter defiance
the one against the other

As for your ninth reason, it is every whit as wild, and wide from His 9.
Reason answered.
the purpose as the former. For what if the Scripture exhorts us evermore unto
unity, and this unity cannot be easily procured by a Toleration of Sects; does
it therefore follow, that godly, learned, and orthodox men, such as being
encouraged, though at an under-rate, are (as was formerly showed) both able and
likely to do as good service against Sects, as any men, are to be
barr-hoysted, quashed, crushed, only because they cannot say, A vision, where
other men say it? The Scripture exhorts unto many things, which are not to be
procured by every thing that is lawful, no nor yet by every thing that is
otherwise necessary and fitting to be done. Were not this a ridiculous
reasoning, The Scripture exhorts to live godlily in this present world; but
this cannot be procured by eating and drinking: Therefore eating and drinking
are not to be tolerated. Apagecruentas nugas!

Whereas you add, that a Toleration of Sects cannot but daily beget new
Schisms and divisions. We answer, first, that this allegation we have answered
already once and again: yet secondly, we add, that many inconveniences,
sicknesses, diseases, come by eating and drinking, yet are these to be
tolerated in the world. Thirdly, we plead for no toleration of any Sect, (nor
of any thing so called) but which may stand with the utmost that either A. S.
with his pen, or his whole party with theirs, can do against them to
suppress them. Fourthly, we have (...) proved, that Apologisme is neither Sect
nor Schism, no more then A. Ssisme is. Fifthly and lastly, whereas you say,
That a Toleration of Sects cannot but daily beget new Schisms, etc. We answer,
first, that Gods toleration, or long-suffering toward sinners, does not only
lead all sinners to repentance, but also bring many thereunto. And why should
not man's toleration expect an effect answerable hereunto? Secondly, the
disciples in the ship were as much afraid, that their dear Lord and Master had
been a foul spirit, and would have sunk them in the Sea, as A. S. is afraid of
a Toleration, that it must needs beget new Schisms and divisions daily. But as
the feared Destroyer proved the experienced preserver of that ship and m^n, so
may A. S. his feared propagator of Schisms and Divisions, be found an
experienced destroyer and dissolver of them. That means of all other, which
has God in it, is likest to do the deed: And God (we know) was neither in the
tempest nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but in the still voice.

His tenth reason, being helped, rises up in this form, If there was a His 10
Reason answered.
greater difference amongst the members of the Church of Corinth, in the time
of S. Paul, and yet they communicated together, and that by the Apostles
exhortation, then ought not the Apologists to be tolerated. But true is the
former, therefore the latter also. We answer, first, that the fabric of your
Argument is built upon a false foundation, or supposition, viz. that the
reason, why the Apologists refuse communion with you (you mean, I suppose, in
your sacramental actions) is, because of the latitude, weight or degree of the
differences in judgment between you and them: whereas the reason of their
refusal in this kind, is the nature or particularity of the difference,
together with your practice depending upon your opinion in opposition unto
theirs, not the height, weight, or importance of either. A difference in
judgment about the lawfulness of stinted forms of prayer, is nothing so
material or weighty, as a difference about the nature of Faith, Justification,
etc. yet the lighter difference in this case, makes persons so differing,
incapable of joining together in Communion, in the use of such prayers; whereas
the greater difference would not.

Secondly, if there were so many and great differences amongst the members of
the Church of Corinth, as you speak of; and yet Paul no ways persuaded or
encouraged the predominant or major party amongst them, either to cast out, cut
off, or suppress the underling parties, but exhorted them unto mutual
communion, etc. Why do not you content your self with the line of the same
process, and in stead of disgracing, quashing, crushing, trampling on, only
exhort the Sects and Schisms amongst you unto mutual communion; and to the
forbearance of Sects and Divisions? a practice which you do well to take notice
of in the Apostle, but do ill to think that your own of club-law is better.

Thirdly (and lastly) nor do we know any ground or good bottom you have for
your assumption, wherein you affirm, that there was greater difference amongst
the members of the Church of Corinth, then is between the Apologists and you.
Old Ipse dixit is made to carry this burden alone.

Your eleventh Reason is very corpulent, but less active; the chief His 11.
Reason answered.
ingredients of it being Abbots and Priors, Convents and Monasteries amongst
the Papists, St Francis, St Dominick, and the Donatists, with whose opinion and
practice, you say, the opinion of your Brethren too much symbolizeth. We
answer, first, that Theologia symbolica non est argume tativa. Angels and
Devils agree in something: yet this agreement is no impeachment, either to the
holiness or happiness of the Qui ut uni haresi suae ad^tum ^^^fac^r^t,
cunctarum haeres ^^ bl^sph^m^as ^^^ctabatur, Vincent. Lyr. cap. 16.
Angels. A. S. himself symbolizeth with Nestorius the Heretic in one
property; of whom Vincentius Lyrinensis reports, that to make way for his own
heresy [or opinion] he fell heavy upon all heresies beside. Secondly,
whereas he affirms, that the opinion of his Brethren is not unlike to the
Convents and Monasteries amongst the Papists; certainly the unlikeness between
them is far greater, then that between an Apple and an Oister. We cannot but
wonder, how, or in what respect, the man should conceive, that an inward,
spiritual and notionall thing, as an opinion is, should be like a great
building made of lime and stone, or a pack of die fellows in a fat Fraternity.
Thirdly, whereas he insinuates a hateful similitude between his Brethren and
the Donatists, who (he tells us) separated themselves from other Churches,
under pretext that they were not so holy as their own; We answer, first, that
this insinuation will not so much as in show touch all the Apologists however,
because some of them (we believe) have no Churches of their own; and therefore
they cannot pretend more holiness in them, then in others. Secondly, that
neither in substance or truth does it touch any of them, or their opinion. For,
first they do not separate from other Churches, but only in such opinions and
practices wherein they cannot get leave of their consciences to join with them;
the one half (at least) of which separation, is made even amongst their
Churches themselves, one from another; one dissenting from another, not only in
many opinions, but in some material practices (as before was touched, and that
from A. S. his own pen, no ways partial you may think in such a case.)
Secondly, we would know whether A. S. himself and his party, does not as much
symbolize with the Donatists in that critical property or practice we speak
of, as the Apologists. For under what pretext do they separate from the Church
of Rome, and from Episcopal Churches, but only this, that they think not their
Churches, to be as holy as their own? If they separate from them upon any other
grounds, it were not much material, though they held communion with them
still. Yea, thirdly, if they do not think their Presbyteriall Churches more
holy then the Congregationall, they are far more guilty of Schism and
Separation, then their Brethren here spoken of. For then they are at liberty in
point of conscience, to come over and join with them; when as the other are in
bands and fetters of conscience, and cannot pass unto them. Their Brethren
would gladly come over unto them, but cannot: they can come over unto these but
will not. It is the will, not the act, that makes Schism and Separation.
Fourthly, we do not see, as deep as you have laid the charge, wherein the
Apologists do any whit more symbolize with Convents, Monasteries, or Orders,
amongst the Papists, then you and your friends. You tell them, that all their
Churches believe one Doctrine together with you, and that every one of these
Churches has one Minister, as the Popish Convents a particular Abbot or Prior.
We pray you, do not all your Churches believe one Doctrine together? and has
not every one of your Churches one Minister? Wherein then lies the difference
between you and them? or wherein do they symbolize more with Convents or
Monasteries, then your self? Nay, (fifthly and lastly) as if you had quite
forgotten your rhomb, you tacitly couple your self with those Popish Convents,
Monasteries, and Orders, in one ignoble consideration, from which you acquit
your Brethren. They only differ (say you to them) in this, that ye have no
General, or any thing answerable thereunto, to keep you in unity and
conformity; plainly implying, that your Presbyterians have, viz. their
sovereign Judicatory. So that if this your reason should but take place, and be
held valid, it is your Presbyterian party, not the party Apologizing, that
ought to suffer the non-toleration you speak of; it being they, not these, that
are the great symbolizers with St Francis, and St Dominick.

To your twelfth Reason, we have given answer upon answer formerly; His 12.
Reason answered.
as first, where we considered of the examples of the Kings of Judah, and
showed how little they contribute to the claim of coercive power in the
Magistrate, to take away Heresies, Schisms, Superstitions, etc. Secondly,
where we argued against such a power by several demonstrations. Thirdly, where
we gave an account also, how Toleration is no way either to Schism, Heresy,
etc. So that that there is not one apex or ieta of this Reason remaining
unanswered.

The Logico-Divinity of your thirteenth Reason, consists in this His 13.
Reason Answered.
Enthymeme. If we have but one God, one Christ, and one Lord, one Spirit, one
Faith, one Baptism, (whereby we enter into the Church) and are one Body, we
ought to have one Communion, whereby to be spiritually fed, and one Discipline
to be ruled by: and if so, then ought not the Apologists to be tolerated. We
answer, that neither does your inference or conclusion here at all follow from
your premises. We have all you speak of, one, one, and one; and in regard of
that multiplied unity, we ought (as you say) to have one Communion, and one
Discipline; But first, not necessarily that Communion, or that Discipline,
which are of Classique inspiration, no more then those which are either of
Papal, or Episcopal recommendation; because, though we judge these two
latter spirits more sphalmaticall, erroneous and dangerous then the first, yet
we cannot think, that either the Pope or Bishops, or both together, have so
engrossed the spirit of erreour and fallibility, but that they have left of
that anointing more then enough to initiate all other Orders, Societies, and
Professions of men in the world. Secondly, though we ought to have one
Communion and Discipline, yet ought we to be led into this unity, by the hand
of an Angel of light, not to be frighted into it by an evil angel of fear and
terror. Thirdly, that duty which lies upon all Christians, to have but one
Communion and Discipline amongst them, is no dispensation unto any party or
number of them, to smite their Brethren with the fist of uncharitableness, or
to dismount them from their ministerial standings in the Church, because they
will not, or rather cannot knit and join in the same Communion and Discipline
with them. Nay, fourthly, that very tie of duty which lies upon all Christians
to have but one and the same Communion and Discipline amongst them, carries
this engagement upon them all along with it, to show all love, to use all
manner of gentleness and long suffering toward those that are contrary minded
to them either in the one or in the other, since love is not only a sodering
and uniting affection, but further commends the person in whom it is found, as
one to whom God has appeared, and who has been taught by him. Therefore
fifthly (and lastly) to make the engagement that lies upon all Christians to
have but one Communion and Discipline, a ground and reason why such as differ
from others about these, should be evil entreated, suppressed, kept under
hatches, or the like, is as if a man should plead that natural affection which
a parent ows unto his children, for a ground and motive why he should sharply
scourge them when they are sick and weak.

His fourteenth Reason is of an unknown strength (at least to me) His 14.
Reason answered.
If I were a Magistrate, I should never the more know how to prepare to battle
against the Apologists or any other godly person, for the sound of this
trumpet. Surely, of all the rest, this Reason will never be accessory to the
undoing of these men. However, let a poor man be heard in his cause. The Reason
then with all the help it is capable of, rises up but thus. If Churches have
Disciplines or Governments different in their species, then the Churches must
be different in their species also. But the consequent is false, since there is
but one Church: Ergo, Apologisme is intolerable. They that can gather this
conclusion out of the premises, may very well hope to gather Grapes of Thorns,
and Figs of Thistles. The consequent in this argument, which the Disputer
says, is false, is this, Churches must be different in their species. If the
meaning of this consequent be, that there is an absolute necessity, that
Churches should differ specie one from another, the Disputant is in the truth,
in saying the consequent is false. Or if the meaning be, that Churches ought to
differ specie one from another, the same verdict may still pass upon it. But
upon that supposition which is made in the Antecedent of this argument, viz.
that these Churches have Disciplines or Governments different in their species,
the consequent is not only true, but necessarily true: and that upon the
Disputants own ground, which is, that all collective bodies that are governed,
are differenced (specie) by their different governments. But be the Consequent,
or be the Antecedent, or be the Consequence, be any thing, be nothing, or be
every thing in the premises, either true or false, why sho^^d not the
Apologists be tolerated, notwithstanding? Be the Sun in Aries, or be it in
Taurus, or be it in Capricorn, why should not A. S. be tolerated to write more
books for the cause Presbyterian notwithstanding? I hear that upon the
applause and approbation of this by his party, he has since put forth his
hand to another; as Herod seeing that his butchery upon James pleased the
people, put forth his hand to Acts 12. 2, 3.
take Peter also.

But is there nothing more in the Reason then this? Truly, if A. S. hides the
treasure of his mind so deep another time, dig for it who will for me. For
this once I have taken pains to find it; and have found somewhat which I
conceive is like to it, if not Identically it. The man (I take it) would be
here conceived to reason after this manner: If the Church of Christ ought to be
ruled or governed, only with one species or kind of government, then ought not
they to be suffered, who go about to pluralize this government, or to set up a
kind of government in the Church, specifically differing from the government
more generally practiced and established. Sed verum prius: Ergo and posterius:
and consequently the Apologists being men that would do such a thing as this,
are not to be tolerated. If this be the argument, this is the Answer. First,
the consequence is lame, and halts right down; because, though the Church of
Christ ought to be governed with one and the same kind of government
throughout the world, yet it no ways follows from hence, that therefore that
government which is more generally established and practiced in the world,
should be that specificall government whereby it ought to be governed. If this
consequence were good, it would highly be friend the government Pontifician,
but dissolve and destroy the government Presbyterian; because the Pontifician
government, is, (or at least not long since was) far more oecumenicall, and
comprehensive, then the Presbyterian either is, or is like to be. Therefore in
framing this consequence, the man has given sentence against himself and his
own beloved opinion touching Church Discipline; and has put a sword into the
Popes hand to smite as well the Consistorian, as the Congregationall
government. And,

Secondly, suppose the government more generally practiced in the world, be
that very kind of government, whereby the Churches of Christ ought to be
governed; yet, except this government, both as touching the lawfulness and
necessity of it, be sufficiently cleared to the judgment and consciences of
those, from whom submission to it is required (an honor whereunto A. S. his
government has not yet been preferred by all his great friends) they ought not
to be scourged with ^^s Scorpions, if they demurre a while about their
submission thereunto; and in the mean season, desire to live under such a
government, wherein they have double and treble satisfaction, both in point of
lawfulness and necessity, above the other. Thirdly, and lastly, though unity
and uniformity in government be very fitting and necessary throughout the
Churches of Christ, yet that the servants of Christ should fall foul one upon
another, and the greater eat up the less for this uniformity sake, is no ways
necessary; especially considering that God (as has been formerly showed) has
provided other means far more gracious, honorable and proper, for the bringing
of the blessedness of this uniformity upon his Churches in due time. So that if
there be any thing in this Reason, it is altogether with, and not at all
against the Apologists.

To your fifteenth, we answer, first, be it supposed, (which yet His 15.
Reason answered.
we shall presently oppose) that neither Christ, nor his Apostles ever granted
any toleration to diverse Sects and Governments in the Church; yet did he or
they ever grant a power to a major part of Professors in a Kingdom or Nation,
to grind the faces of their Brethren, partakers of like precious faith and
holiness with them, either because they could not in all points jump with them
in their judgments, or because they endeavored to keep a good conscience
toward God, for following the ducture and guidance of their present light? If
you will take without asking that, which neither Christ nor his Apostles ever
granted you, you may very well bear it at the hands of your Brethren, if they
humbly sue and entreat for what they never granted; especially considering that
that which you take is imperious and high, tending to the annoyance and trouble
of many; whereas that which they sue for, is moderate and low, only a peaceable
standing amongst you, that they may be able to do good unto many. Secondly, if
neither Christ nor his Apostles (as you say) ever granted any toleration to
diverse Sects and Governments in his Church, how come you and your Government to
be tolerated, your Government being specifically diversified from that of the
Papacy (as is before observed) which is more general and extensive then yours?
If you have not a toleration for your government, either from Christ or his
Apostles, we are doubtful from whom, or whence you have it. Thirdly, do you
not by this reason build up the walls of Babylon, and strengthen the Papists in
their bloody error, against the reformed Churches, upon which they look as
schismatic from their Mother, and in that respect think them no ways fit to
be tolerated, but to be suppressed both in their doctrine and government, yea
and in case they will not be reduced to the principles of Rome, to be wholly
extirpated and rooted out of the world? What can be spoken more to the heart of
such apprehensions, and counsels, and resolutions as these, then that neither
Christ nor his Apostles ever granted any toleration to diverse Sects and
Governments in the Church? Fourthly, whereas you say, that they granted no
toleration to diverse Sects, do you not imply, that they did grant a toleration
to some one Sect at least, if not to more. And how know you whether the Sect of
Apologisme (in your improperating style) be not that Sect, or one of those
Sects, to which Christ and his Apostles (it seems) granted a toleration? Is it
not (I appeal to your judgment and conscience) as like to be this as any
other? Fifthly, we willingly grant your conclusion in this Reason, sensu sano;
that there is no reason why the Apologists should sue for a toleration, no nor
yet properly, why they should be tolerated (toleration in propriety of
signification, as was formerly noted, being rei malae, appliable only to that
which is evil) but rather why they should be countenanced and encouraged.
Therefore if you think that they shall sin in suing for a toleration, you shall
do well to prevent that sin in them (and perhaps shall withal prevent a
greater of your own) by declaring them persons worthy not of a toleration, but
of encouragement; or at least by procuring them a toleration, that they may not
be put upon the tentation of suing for it. But sixthly and lastly, to the main
frame of your Reason: what do you think of Sinite utrunque crescere, Let both
grow together until the Harvest, Matthew. 13. 30. Is not here the toleration
granted which you deny to be granted? Non laclacti, nec ovum ovo similius; If
it be not this toleration, certainly it is somewhat as like to it as like may
be. You know who the Householder is, that gave this order, laid this restraint
upon his servants; otherwise the 37. verse will inform you. And who do you
think should be meant by the tares? You will not say, the good sons of the
Church, at least so acknowledged by their Mother. You cannot say (with reason)
the loose, vicious, etc. morally disordered sons of the Church, because these
were sown in the field before the Householder sew that good seed therein (spoken
of v. 24. and 38.) whereas the tares, which must be let grow to harvest, are
expressly said to have been sown after, v. 25. And besides such wicked and
vicious persons as these, at least as the danger and degree of their
wickedness may be, ought to be gathered out of the State (and then they cannot
grow in the field till harvest) by the hand of the civil Magistrate. Therefore
thirdly (and lastly) you must by the tares, of necessity understand, such in
the Church as you call Sectaries, Schismatics, Heretics, such as corrupt the
purity of the doctrine of the Gospel, by erroneous and false opinions, or at
least are looked upon by the greater part of the respective Churches of Christ,
as such. Which yet appears further, by the reason which the Householder renders
unto his servants, why he would not have them plucked up, but grow until the
harvest, lest (says he) whilst ye go about to gather the tares, ye pluck
up the wheat also. There is no danger of hurting or plucking up the wheat, i.
the children of the Kingdom, v. 38. by punishing civil or moral
misdemeanors of men; but if Magistrates or others shall be busy about
plucking up Sectaries, Heretics, etc. they will be in continual danger of
plucking up the wheat. First, because many truly pious and conscientious men,
children of the Kingdom, may soon be drawn into some unwarrantable Sect and
opinion: And secondly, such opinions as are sentenced by the generality or
major part of a Church, as erroneous or heretical, and so expose those that
hold them to the reproachful names of Sectaries, Schismatiques, Heretics,
very often fall out to be the sacred truths of God, and the persons holding
them forth unto the world, the best and faithful est of his servants.

For your sixteenth reason, it concerns others more then the Apologists, His
16. Reason answered.
to answer; the frame of it being an indignabund relation (whether true or no,
caveat lector) of what hard measure the New-Englanders offered to some that
desired to sit down amongst them, because they differed a little from them in
point of discipline. The men here charged, are of age to speak for themselves;
and besides, want no abilities otherwise. I make no question, but if they had
but the correcting of A. S. his Relation, they would be able to make more
reason and equity of it, then without some correction or other, I am able to
do. But (to leave our brethren in New England to their own Apology) I would
fain know of A. S. what he means to do with his story; or how he intends to
bring it under contribution to his cause. For first, he does not only not
approve of those proceedings, which he relates, but is very passionate and
intemperate in the very relation.

Delicti fles idem reprehensor, and Author? Is the man so full of the spirit of
reprehension against such practices, and yet so full of the spirit of imitation
also? Or what? Is his desire so great, to appropriate or ingrosse the power and
practice of persecuting for difference in religion to himself and his own
party, that he is not able patiently to bear the sight of either in others? If
your brethren in New England stumbled at the stone you speak of, persecuted (as
you say) those that were approved by themselves both for their life and
doctrine, merely because they differed a little from them in point of
discipline, you have a fair warning; take heed that you do not stumble at the
same stone also. They (it is like) justified themselves in themselves, in those
proceedings, though they did not so in the fight of God; but if you, having
condemned them in what they did, shall nevertheless run the same course, you
will be both (...) and (...), both self-condemned, and God-condemned also, and
so have no cloak nor shelter for your sin.

But you think it no ways reasonable, that the Apologists, being of the same
profession, (as you speak) should be suitors for a toleration in Old-England.
We answer, first, if you speak with reference to those proceedings immediately
before reported by you, you are more of the same profession with them, then
your brethren the Apologists. These do not profess persecution merely for a
little difference in point of Discipline; the world knows who they are that do
little less. Secondly, what though men of the same profession with them,
miscarried for want of such light, as should have directed them in a better
way; must this be a band of conscience upon them, to bow down their backs
without any more ado, and to suffer Presbyterian greatness to go over them,
as the stones in the street? Nay thirdly, they have the more reason and
necessity, in regard of such a miscarriage of their brethren, to sue for a
toleration here; because by that miscarriage of theirs, they are awakened to
expect and fear yet far harder measure from you and your party, if they do
not bestirre themselves by some means or other to prevent it. He that feels
the smart of rods to be grievous, has the more reason, not the less, to take
heed of being beaten with Scorpions. Fourthly (and lastly) why should you any
ways be against your brethren suing for a toleration, when as there lies a
necessity upon you to grant it or consent to it, unless you mean to steer
that New England course, which you have with so high a hand of indignation
contested with, in this very reason? Except (happily) you have this ingenuous
reach in it, for your reputations, that you would honest is precibus occurrere,
prevent all honest and reasonable requests with the early forwardness of your
bounty. If I could reasonably think this to be your design, I would
seriously persuade with the Apologists to wave their suit for a toleration, and
so to gratify you with an honorable opportunity of doing good, before you
were provoked by any man's suit or motion to it.

But men that are subject to fears, are seldom sons of bounty. The bottom
(it seems) of all that A. S. has pleaded throughout his Discourse, against the
Toleration of Apologisme, is a solemn fear that possesses him, of being sent
he and all his party into some Isle of Dogs, if the congregationall men had
but the upper hand over them. Omne timidum natura querulum. But I can hardly
believe that the man is really afraid of what he here pretends; (in which
case he were rather to be pitied, then roundly dealt with) first, because
himself confesses, that some of his brethren hold, that all Sects and
opinions are to be tolerated, p. 6. So that in case these men should have the
upper hand, he is assured of a party at least among them, to secure him and
his in that kind. Secondly, he confesses again and again, that his brethren
are very pious and holy men; and therefore certainly will not be so dogged as
to send him and his into any Isle of Dogs. Thirdly, a poor toleration is as
far from a superiority of power, as rags are from the robe, or the dunghill
from the throne. Fourthly, I do not think that he knows any such Isle as he
speaks of, whereinto he fears to be sent, by the men of his indignation.
Fifthly and lastly, if he should be sent into some Isle of Dogs, the soil and
climate might probably agree well with him; he has learned (it seems) to bark
and bite too, against his sending thither.

To conclude, for this Reason, Whereas fear indeed ordinarily makes men
cruel, it is much to be feared, A. S. only pretends fear, that so he may
have a color to be cruel.

To his seventeenth Reason we answer. First, that the Scripture does His 17.
Reason answered.
not forbid all, nor any such Toleration as the Apologists desire. This was
sufficiently showed before in our answer to the fifteenth Reason. His proof
from Revel. 2. 20. holds no intelligence at all with his purpose; yea, it makes
sore against himself and his Synedrion. For first, by the toleration or
suffering of Jezabel, which is there charged as a sinful neglect upon the
Church of Thyatira, is not meant a Civil or State-toleration, but an
Ecclesiastic or Church-toleration. This Church suffered false Doctrines to be
taught in her very bosom, and her members to be corrupted and endangered
thereby, from day to day, without laying it to heart being a matter of that sad
consequence) and without calling those to an account that were the sowers of
such tares, broachers and spreaders of such opinions; yea without using any
means, to have the truth soundly taught in opposition to such Doctrines. Both
Pastor and people (it seems) slept together, whilst the envious man, by his
Agent and Factress Jezabel, sowed these tares in their field. Such a toleration
as this we formerly showed to be sinful; and the Apologists are as much
against it as you; so far are they from desiring it, or suing for it. They
desire a Toleration for themselves and their Churches in the Civil state; not
that the errors which spring up in their Churches, should be suffered to fret
like gangrens, without being opposed by them, or be protected by the State.
Secondly, whereas that particular Church alone is charged by Christ, with this
toleration or sufferance of Jezabel, and not any more Churches, whether
neighbors or not neighbors to her, nor any combined Eldership, or state
Ecclesiastical, made of the consociation of the seven Churches, much less any
state civil, evident it is, that the care and power of redressing emerging
enormities or evils in a Church in every kind, is committed by Christ to every
particular Church respectively, within it self. And so they that trouble the
Church must (as you say) be cut off. But by whom? not by the civil Magistrate
(if the trouble be spiritual) nor by the combined Eldership, but by the
particular Church it self, which is troubled by them, in case there be no
remedy otherwise. Secondly, when you say, that there must be no such speeches
among us, as I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, etc. nor that some are Calvinians,
some Independenters, some Brownists, etc. And again, that we must all be
Christ's, we must all think and speak the same thing, otherwise men are
carnal, etc. (with some other good words to like purpose) we join heart and
hand with you in all these things, and are ready to contribute the best of our
endeavors unto yours, if ye will suffer us, to make the Tabernacle of God
amongst us, according to this pattern which you show unto us. Such expressions,
I am of Paul, I of Apollos, etc. together with the names of Calvinians,
Independents, Brownists, etc. are as un^un^able in our ears, as in yours, etc.
But,

First, every man that says, I am of Paul, or, I am of Apollos, is not to be
taught by Thorns and Briars, (as G^deon taught the men of Succoth) to speak
better, by fining, imprisoning, unchurching, or the like; but by soundness of
conviction, and wholesomness of instruction from the Word of God. The German^
have a saying, That etiam in introne puniendo potest peccari. A man may sin in
punishing him that most of all deserves it. It is not enough for us to
correspond with God in his ends, but we must keep as close to him in his means
also. Secondly, whereas you say, we must all be Christ's; surely there is none
of those Sects you speak of, but are willing to join with you in being his, and
in being called by his Name, rather then by any other. We fear, these unhappie
sounds, of Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists, etc. are more frequently made
of your breath, then of the breath of any other sort, or sect of men amongst
us. Thirdly, whereas you add, Neither has the Church of God a custom to be
contentious; the Apostle indeed says, 1 Cor. 11. 16. that the Churches of God
have no such custom; but he does not say, that these Churches of God had any
custom, to erect a Presbyterian throne, or a combined eldership amongst them,
to keep them from contentions. Fourthly, whereas you tell us, that neither
permits the Apostle Schisms; we tell you, that we have already told you
(and that once and again) both in what sense he permits them, and in what
not, and have showed you our concurrence with him in both. Fifthly (and lastly)
in that you tell us, that we must not quit our mutual meetings, as others do,
and as must (you say) be done in a public Toleration, we neither well
understand the sense of your words, much less any purport in them to your
pupose. We do not know what quitting of meetings there is like to be more,
under a public toleration, then is for the present.

Your eighteenth Reason is so Atheologicall, and unworthy your His 18. Reason
Answered.
cause, that the very naming of it might be Answer sufficient. A toleration
(say you) cannot but expose your Churches unto the calumnies of Papists, who
evermore object unto Protestants the innumerable number of these Sects, whereas
they pretend to be nothing but one Church. Will you redeem your self out of
the hand of Popish calumnies, by symbolizing with them? will you turn Turk,
that you may not suffer Turkish insolences and thraldom? Surely you forget
your argument insisted upon in your eleventh Reason: There you make symbolizing
with Papists, a reason against your Brethren and their Opinions, why they
should not be tolerated; and here you make a defect or want in them of
symbolizing with them, a reason likewise why they should not be tolerated. It
seems contradictions, inconsistences, impertinences, unintelligibilities,
sense, nonsense, any thing, nothing, will serve to make reasons against the
poor Independenters (as you call them) why they must not be tolerated. Was not
the consideration of your own, page 14. that the Devil evermore assaults more
the true Church, the true Doctrine, and true Discipline, then the corrupted
Church, her corrupted Doctrine or Discipline, a far better sanctuary for your
Churches against those Popish calumnies you speak of, then a correspondence
with them, to keep you in unity and conformity? But this Reason we have
answered formerly.

Your nineteenth Reason, is very concise. In this you only say, that His 19.
reason answered.
of such a Toleration follows all you formerly deduced out of Independencie.
And so it may without putting the world to much damage, or sorrow. When we cast
up your deductions of inconveniences out of Independency, we found them
counterballanced to the height with the exits from Presbytery. If you poyse
your wallet well, you will the end that hangs at your back the heavier. But for
answer to this Reason, I refer the Reader to the former Chapter.

His twentieth Reason, is somewhat of a differing strain from the His 20.
reason answered.
rest. The ground and bottom of it seems to be, a desire of a plausible
insinuation with the Assembly, under a pretense of jealousy over them, lest
they should suffer in point of honor, in case his Brethren should obtain a
Toleration. But first, good A. S. why must it needs be thought, in case it
should be granted unto them, that it was extorted by force of Reason, or that
all the Assembly were not able to answer your Brethren? This suggestion smells
of worse blood about the heart, then all the Reasons hitherto; Fearing (it
seems) that all engagements upon the Assembly in point of conscience to deny
the Apologists a Toleration, might fail, and prove ineffectuall that way; he
seeks here to engage them in point of honor, by way of reserve; telling them
(in effect) that howsoever their consciences might favor the Independenters in
point of Toleration, yet their credits and reputations would suffer by it. Yet
let the suggestion be but a little looked into, and it will be found to reflect
no great matter of grace or commendation upon the Assembly it self. For if no
favor or courtesy can be thought to come from them, but that which is
extorted by reason, and the denial whereof they cannot answer, it is a sign
that they are not, (...), i. easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, which yet the Holy Ghost makes the standing characters of that wisdom
which is from above. James 3. 17.


Whereas he adds, that their opinion and demands are against all reason, and
that sundry of them could not deny as much, and had nothing to say, but that it
was Gods Ordinance. We answer, first, that what A. S. his standart is, whereby
he measures Reason, we are not so well acquainted with him, as to know, but
according to ours, this assertion of his opens seven times wider against all
reason, then either the opinion or demands of his Antagonists. First, for their
opinion, we believe that somewhat more then nonsense or irrationalities, has
been argued by themselves in the Assembly for it: Is it like, that very learned
men, and of abilities to dispute their opinion in any Assembly in Europe (which
are A. S. own letters of recommendation on their behalf) should rise up to
defend an opinion that is contrary to all reason? And somewhat like unto reason
(at least so called, amongst our vulgar apprehensions) has been said for it in
the preceding part of this Discourse. And secondly, for their Demands; though
A. S. does not inform us what they are, or wherein that fiery contestation
against all reason, which he finds in them, consists, yet we suppose, he means
their suing for a Toleration, that high misdemeanor, for which he has judged
them now these ten times. Was it, or is it, or would it be against all reason,
for the poor Protestant Churches in France, to sue for a Toleration in the
state, if it were not granted unto them without suing? Or is it not much more
agreeable to reason, that Protestant Churches should be tolerated in a
Protestant State, then in a State Pontificiall; especially in such a Protestant
State, of which they have so eminently deserved, as the Apologists and their
Churches, and men of their judgment have done of this, as was briefly touched
in the beginning of this Chapter? Or is it against all reason, that those
persons in the Low Countries, between whose judgments there is that known
variety of differences in matters of Religion, and which concern the worship of
God, being not able so well to accommodate themselves for livelihood and
subsistence in any other State, with the freedom of their consciences should
desire a Toleration in that? Suppose those men of your judgment, of whom you
speak, page 10. who were (as you there say) condemned to death for their
Discipline, ready to be executed, and were afterward exiled into foreign
countries; Suppose (I say) these men had desired a Toleration in their own
country, of those who thus unreasonably dealt with them, had they violated all
Rules and Principles of Reason by such a desire? But the truth is, that the
assertion is so notoriously against all reason, that it is scarce consistent
with reason to bestow so much pen in answer to it. There is but one only
supposition to make either reason or truth of it; if it be granted, it may
pass for both. If the desires of some Presbyterians be All Reason, and nothing
reason but they, then both the Opinion and Demands of the Apologists, must be
acknowledged to be against all Reason. But otherwise I know no principle or
rule of reason at all so much as discourtesied by either.

Secondly, whereas you say, that sundry of themselves could not deny it, and
had nothing to say, etc. First, certain I am, that some of them have absolutely
denied any such confession. Secondly, the acknowledgement it self looks no
more like any of the rest, then a mere fiction does the Relator. I believe that
upon inquiry it will be found a misprision of truth. For does it not sound
aloud incredibilitie, that men of sufficient abilities to dispute their opinion
in any Assembly in Europe, should confess their Opinion and Demands to be
against all reason? But such stones as these are fit for A. S. his building.

Thirdly, whereas you say, that they could never show (their opinion) out of
Gods word; we answer, that they have often showed it; but God and men (it
seems) are not yet agreed to have it so generally seen, as is to be desired:
but our hope is, that the agreement will be concluded between them in due time.

Fourthly and lastly, you conclude this reason, with this undertaking, that if
it (your brethrens opinion we suppose you mean, though it is hard both here and
in twenty places more, to know your meaning clearly) be refused, it will help
to confirm the Churches, and the people in truth. We desire to know in truth of
what? It will indeed confirm both marvellously, in the truth of Presbyterian
fastness to their own cause; but in what other truth it should confirm either
the one or the other, we wait for our intelligence from you to know.

Your 21. and last reason (save only those which you say you omit) His last
Reason answered.
is but a slip of your ninteenth, being somewhat that follows out of
Independencie. But here you tell us, that the Government so called, cannot but
overthrow all sort of Ecclesiastical Government. Is Saul also among the
Prophets? Haec verba loquentis ab ore, Gaudens arripio, and st^^^^ factus
Numine, adoro. I joy over these words, and reverence them so that I conceive to
be of God in them. We know who prophesied when he was not aware of it. Indeed,
by the beauty and perfect consonancie of this government with the word of God,
it may very reasonably (yea and upon higher terms then of reason) be thought
that in time it cannot but overthrow all sort of Ecclesiastical government,
and stand up it self in their stead. F^xit Deus, and festinet.

But that which you add in the close of this Reason, plainly shows, that you
had no mind to prophecy, though God had, or might have b^ you: for here you
say, that this order, by necessary consequence, will breed all sort of
disorder. No, first, it will not breed the disorder of oppressing conscientious
men for conscience sake: nor secondly, of discouraging men from searching the
Scriptures more narrowly; not thirdly, of having recourse unto the word for the
setting up of the government of Christ's Kingdom; nor fourthly, of making men
walk sundry miles for what they might have upon as good or better terms at
home, besides a thousand other disorders, which the order of your Independencie
will never breed by any consequence at all, necessary or unnecessary, being of
a very sovereign importance to prevent them. And for your premises (in the
body of your Reason) by which you would fain make the match, between the order
of Independencie, and all sort of disorder, they are but false brokers. The
Independent Churches (as you call them) have no such custom, as for one to
give entertainment or admission to any person, that has been censured by
another, without the censure first relaxed by that Church which inflicted it,
or without the consent of this Church. This is their reproach, not their
practice.

And thus we see that amongst A. S. his 21. Reasons, there is not one that will
stand by their Master, when they are but a little put to it; there is none of
them but with a little persuasion and debate, will willingly enough consent to
a Toleration for the Apologists. If the Disputant himself, with his party,
were but as tractable as his reasons, there need no more words be made about
the business.

As for his afterbirth of Reasons, (p. 65.) since he professes himself that
he omits them, we shall comport with him herein, and omit them also; I hope he
will think himself a debtor to us for this compliance. It seems that himself
places no great confidence in them, in that he mentions them as if he
mentioned them not, and thought them not worthy to be numbered amongst his
firstborn. His Horsemen (you see) have been overcome, and yielded themselves:
his Infantery knows the manner of the field, and will, no question, surrender
without encounter. Nor is there any thing for weight or substance in this Tail
of Reasons, but what has been broken already in the Head.

FINIS.

