A LAMENTATION against the Professing Priest and People of OXFORD; And to all
in the Cages of unclean birds, called Colleges.
WOE be to the Deceived and Deceivers, that will not Enter, nor suffer others,
through your lies and traditions. Woe be to you that speak evil of that you
know not, and of the Servants of the most high God, which he has sent to visit
you, whom you say are bewitched and deluded of the Devil: Is separation from
sin, pride, and deceit, (in which you live) a delusion? Nay, we feel it to be
freedom, that have believed and obeyed him that is made manifest for that very
end, to destroy the works of the Devil; we set to our seal that God is true,
but they that believe not make God a Liar. You plead for sin while you live,
when I have been wounded for sin: some of your Priests have told me, I could
not be freed from sin in this life, but that I should be cleansed after death
by the blood of Christ; I then answered you, My conscience condemned me, and
God is greater and would also condemn me, and that I find in the Scripture,
that as the tree falls so it lies, and as Death leaves man judgment finds him,
yet you told me I should be washed and made spotless in Christ, but since the
Lord has opened my eye to behold your abominable deceit, and false doctrines
of Devils, by which his Kingdom is upheld; and in this you as much as in you
is, frustrate the End of Christ's being manifest in flesh, which was to destroy
the works of the Devil, and all that are born again will witness against
your Doctrine, for he that is born of God sins not, neither can he because the
Seed remains in him.

Oh abominable Doctrine! that denies Christ to be a complete redeemer, to you
that are pleading for sin, and live in pride, coveteousnesse, and deceit,
indeed you are not redeemed, you will not come to him that you might have life.
And so the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world you know not, nor
the Grace that has appeared to all, and brings salvation to them which obey,
you know not, but in my measure I witness him, and deny you and your Doctrine.

Woe be to you that are pleading for sin, it is for sin that the Lord will have
a controversy with you, professing Priest and People of Oxford, plead no
longer for sin, but turn into that of God in you, which shows sin and evil,
and wait in it for strength to be delivered from sin. Oh that you saw what an
enemy. sin is to your souls! then you could not sit at ease in your wealth and
vain glory: Oh that you were sensible of the dreadful day that is coming on
you for sin, wherein that which now checks you will roar like a Lion, therefore
tremble you beasts of the field.

Oh abominable Priests! the worst of all men, deceivers that will not enter
your selves nor suffer such as would; will your Preaching and long prayers
plead for you, in that day which the Lord will plead with all flesh? Give over
deceiving, boast not in other men's words, saying, Thus says the Lord, when he
has not spoken to you, for that the true Prophet of the Lord has cried woe
against, and against all that steal words from their neighbors; and till you
know the word of the Lord, and are commanded by it, for ever let your mouths be
stopped, for what is the chaf to the wheat, turn into the light of Christ with
which he has lighted you and all men, and that if you heed it will teach you
to stand in Gods counsel, the want of which has been the cause of so little
profit amongst your hearers, which have been long learning, and are not able to
come to the knowledge of the truth, but are deceived by your empty words, which
are but as husks to feed swine, but the Fathers house is not known by you nor
them, where there is bread enough. Therefore, I say, give over your deceiving,
and holding the truth in unrighteousness, for against such is the wrath of God
revealing, because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God
has shown it unto them, Romans 1.19. The word of God is near, even in the mouth
and in the heart, and that was the word of Faith which Paul preached, Romans
10.8. And blessed are all they that know it, hear it, believe it, and obey it,
they come to hear the true Shepherd, and a stranger they will not hear: Now
you are warned to give over deceiving, by a friend to your souls, but a hater
of all your pride and deceit, known to the world by the Name,

Margret Greenway.


