The KING Against Tucker;

The CASE of William Hall Esquire;

The KING Against Reginald Tucker.
The Case of William Hall Esquire;
Upon a Writ of Error to Reverse the Judgment of the Court of King's Bench for
the Reversing the Attainder of the Defendant Tucker.
JOHN TVCKER Deceased had two Sons, Andrew a Lunatic, and the now Defendant
Reginald, after the Father's Decease Reginald got a Commission for the Custody
of his Elder Brother and his Estate, and for diverse years concealed him in a
Mad-House, and acted as Owner and Proprietor of the whole Estate in his own
Right, part whereof was Lease-Hold for Lives, and part Inheritance.

1681. The Defendant surrendered the Lease-Hold Estate, and took a New Lease
thereof in his own Name, and then Mortgaged the same to Alice Hinton of Hackney
Widow for One Thousand Pounds, she not knowing of Andrew Tucker's Title.

1683. The Defendant, though Younger Brother, and his Elder Brother alive, made
a Mortgage of the Estate of Inheritance by the Name of Son and Heir of his
Father, to Mr. Kett, and others, for Five Hundred Pounds.

1685. Mrs. Hinton, being by Age and Sickness unable to manage the Estate lying
in Somersetshire, importuned Mr. Hall being her Relation, to take an
Assignment of her Mortgage, and she on payment of her Money assigned to him and
Mr. Hall entered on the Lease-Hold-Estate, and Sowed the Land, having never
heard of Andrew Tucker; after which, one Grove a Kinsman of the Defendant
getting a new Commission of Lunacy and the Custody of Andrew Tucker, entered
upon Mr. Hall, and reaped and carried away the Crop of Corn which he had sown
to the value of Eighty Five Pounds, but soon after the Lunatic dyed.

March 21. 1686. The Defendant Reginald Brother and Heir of Andrew was
Attainted of High Treason.

April 23. 1687. Sir Theophilus Oglethorpe got a Grant from the Crown of the
Defendant's Estate, having procured his Reprieve, and paid Ten Pounds to carry
it to Wells.

1688. Mr. Hall having been at great loss by Andrew Tucker's Title, and being
brought into danger of losing most of his Money, and put to great trouble and
expense by the King's Title, and by several Suits both in Law and Equity, his
Debt and Interest being near the value of the Lease-Hold, and finding that Mr.
Kett had spent above two Hundred Pounds in defense of his Mortgage against the
Title of the King and the Lunatic, for his better security, and to save
further expense, and prevent an account for the mean profits, was necessitated
to buy Sir Theophilus-Oglethorp's Title to both the Estates, and paid him for
the same six hundred Guineas, and paid Mr. Kett Eight Hundred Pounds, and paid
sixty four pounds for changing the Life of the Defendant's Wife in the
Lease-Hold-Estate, she having before the Purchase committed Felony by Marrying
a second Husband, and thereby her Life in the Estate in danger to be lost, all
which several sums were the full value of both Estates.

1689. Reginald the Defendant Petitioned the House of Commons for leave to
bring in a Bill to reverse his Attainder, but the Committee, to whom the
Petition was referred, hearing Mr. Hall's Case, who opposed it only on account
of his said Purchase, and Examining the Defendant if he was guilty of the
Treason, did not Report the same to the House, the Defendant's design being to
avoid Payment of Mr. Hall's Money, which he has often offered to accept with
his Interest, and to account for the mean Profits, and to Release the Estate,
and is now willing so to do after nine years trouble and vexation, and often
Soliciting to save the Defendant's life, before he heard of Andrew Tucker.

1692. The Defendant brought a Writ of Error in the King's- Bench to Reverse
the said Attainder, and in Easter Term last the same was Reversed, only because
these words Contra ligeantie sue debitum, are not in the Conclusion of the
Indictment.

To which it is answered, Reginald, and one Thomas Place, timorem Dei in
cordibus suis non habentes, nec debitum Ligeantiae suae ponderantes,
dilectionem ac veram and debitam obedientiam quas very and fideles subditi Dom.
Regis hujus Regni Angliae erga ipsum Regem gererent and de jure gerere tenentur
penitus subtrahentes, ac machinantes and totis suis viribus intendentes pacem
and tranquilitatem hujus Regni Angliae perturbare, etc. proditorie
compassaverunt imaginati fuerunt and intendebant dictum Regem supremum and
naturalem dominum suum non solum de Regali statu titulo and Regimine Regni sui
Angliae, etc. deprivare and exheriditare verum etiam eundem Dominum Regemad
mortem and finalem destructionem adducere and Guerram Rebellionem and
Insurrectionem contra Dominum Regem infra hoc Regnum, etc. Levare and
Suscitare, and ad easdem proditiones conspirationes and imaginationes suas
perimplendum and ad effectum redigendum, etc. ijdem Reginald and Thomas, etc.
contra dictum Dominum Regem Supremum verum naturalem and indubitatum Dominum
suum cum magna multitudine gentium armatarum, etc. Guerram publicam contra
dictum Dominum Regem proditorie, etc. levaverunt, etc. And concludes, contra
pacem Domini Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suas, etc. ac contra formam Statuti,
etc.

I. And forasmuch as it appears in the body of the Indictment, That the King
was the Defendant's Natural Lord, and by Consequence the Defendant his Subject,
and the Fact alleged in the Indictment appearing to be High Treason, it is
humbly submitted whether it be necessary in the end of the Indictment to repeat
the Fact to have been done against the duty of his Allegiance, it being so
fully and plainly expressed before in the body of the Indictment to be so.

II. This Indictment is according to a multitude of Presidents of Indictments
for High Treason, which are without such Conclusion, the Records whereof are
ready to be produced.

III. Many Persons have been Executed on the like Indictments.

IV. The Consequence of such Reversal may be very fatal, for that there are
many Estates granted and enjoyed under those Attainders, and if for this Error
the Judgment in this Case shall stand Reversed, then may also the Judgments
upon those Attainders be for the same Error Reversed, and diverse Grantees and
Purchasers under the Title of those Attainders be defeated of their Estates, to
their utter Ruin.

Wherefore it is humbly submitted to your Lordship's Consideration, and hoped
that, for the Reasons aforesaid, the said Judgment of Reversal given in the
Court of King's Bench shall be Reversed by your Lordships.

Monday 21. Jan: 94: This Judgmt of reversall given in ye K's Bench was
affirmed in Parliam^

