REASONS FOR THE Abatement of Interest TO FOUR in the HUNDRED.

AND The OBJECTIONS against it fairly STATED, and briefly and fully ANSWERED.

By E. H.

LONDON: Printed for Daniel Brown, and Matt. Gillyflower; at the Bible without
Temple Bar, and at the Spread-Eagle in Westminster Hall. 1692.

The CONTENTS of the following Discourse, are these, viz.
CHAP. 1. The chief Advantages propounded by bringing down Interest from Six to
Four per Cent. per Annum, are, 1. That it will increase Trade. p. 1. Chap. 2.
The Abatement of Interest will raise the Value of Land. p. 25 Chap. 3. That it
will improve Rents, or at least enable the Farmer to pay his Rent better. p. 30
Chap. 4. The Objections against the Abatement of Interest, fairly stated, and
clearly answered. p. 38.
REASONS FOR THE Abatement of Interest, etc.
CHAP. I.
The chief Advantages propounded by bringing down Interest from Six to Four per
Cent. per Annum, are, 1. That it will increase Trade.

BEFORE I endeavor to prove, That an Abatement of Interest to Four in the
Hundred, will be very beneficial to the Nation, or go about to Answer the
Objections which are commonly made against it; I think it not amiss to premise,
that I will not undertake to evince, that only the lowering of Interest will at
any time force a Trade, tho it lie under never so many Obstructions or
Restraints; no, that surely will not be expected, nor can it be reasonably
imagined, that the bare lessening of Use, can make us drive a greater Trade in
time of War, than we had in time of Peace, tho Interest was at 6 per Cent. I
hope it will be sufficient to induce Gentlemen to promote a Bill to lower
Interest, if it can be proved, That when Trade is open, it shall be greater
when Interest is low, than it can be when Interest is high; if it can be
proved, That even a restrained Trade shall be greater with a low Interest, then
it can be with an higher. If I can make it appear, That Land in time of War as
well as Peace, will sell for more, if Interest be at Four, than it will if it
be at Six per. Cent. This I doubt not will be sufficient to convince the
Reader, that the lowering of Interest to Four in the Hundred, will be very
advantageous to the Nation. I will not take up the Reader's time with a longer
Introduction; but will begin with the first Benefit propounded to be discussed,
viz. That the lessening of Interest to Four in the Hundred, will encourage and
promote Trade. Only give me leave here to prefix the preamble of an Act of
Parliament made in the twenty first year of Jac. 1. cap. 17. and another made
in the 12 Car. 2. cap. 13.

Whereas at this time, 21 Jac. 1. cap. 17.
there is a very great Abatement in the value of Land, and other the
Merchandises, Wares, and Commodities of this Kingdom, both at Home, and also in
Foreign Parts, whither they are transported. (2.) And whereas diverse the
Subjects of this Kingdom, as well the Gentry as Merchants, Farmers, and
Tradesmen, both for their urgent and necessary Occasions, for the following
their Trades, maintenance of their Stocks and Employments, have borrowed and do
borrow diverse Sums of Money, Wares, Merchandises, and other Commodities. (3.)
But by reason of the said general fall and abatement of the value of Land, and
the prices of the said Merchandise, Wares, and Commodities, and Interest in
Loan continuing at so high a rate, as Ten pounds in the Hundred pounds for a
year, does not only make Men unable to pay their Debts, and continue the
maintenance of Trade; but their Debts daily increasing, they are enforced to
sell their Lands and Stocks at very low Rates, to forsake the use of
Merchandise and Trade, and to give over their Leases and Farms, and so become
unprofitable Members of the Commonwealth, to the great hurt and hinderance of
the same: Be it therefore, etc.

Forasmuch as the Abatement 12 Car. 2. cap. 13.
of Interest from Ten in the hundred in former times, has been found by
notable Experience beneficial to the advancement of Trade, and improvement of
Lands by good Husbandry, with many other considerable advantages to this
Nation, especially, the reducing it to a nearer proportion with Foreign States,
with whom we Traffic. (2.) And whereas in fresh memory the like fall from
Eight to Six in the Hundred, by a late constant practice has found the like
success to the general Contentment of this Nation, as is visible by several
Improvements. (3.) And whereas it is the endeavor of some at present to reduce
it back again in practice, to the allowance of the Statute still in force to
Eight in the Hundred, to the great discouragement of Ingenuity and Industry, in
the Husbandry, Trade and Commerce of this Nation: Be it therefore etc.

That an Abatement of Interest to Four in the Hundred, will increase Trade, I
shall prove by these following Arguments.

All Merchants that N. B. M. D. in his Disc. of Trade.
Trade in the same sort of Goods to the same Ports, should Trade by the same
Interest, or else the Gain cannot be equal.

Interest is the Rule of Buying and Selling, and being higher in England than
in Holland; the English Merchant trades with a disadvantage, because the Dutch
Merchant can afford to give more, to buy dearer, and sell cheaper than the
English can, and yet shall gain more.

The Dutch can sell an hundred pound worth of Goods for 103 l. and the English
must sell the same sort and quantity for 106 l. to make the same account of the
Principal and Interest.

The Dutch may give 1 per Cent. more for the same quantity of the same sort of
Goods, (as the English deal in) and sell for 1 l. per Cent. less than they, and
yet shall gain 1 per Cent. As for instance, the Dutch may give 101 l. for the
same quantity of Goods (which I suppose the English to buy at 100 l.) may sell
these at 105 l. and will gain 1 per Cent. whereas the English, if they sell at
106 l. shall gain nothing.

When we had almost the Ibid.
sole Trade of Spain, and the sole selling of Cloth into Turkey, and several
other places; the difference of Interest was then not so considerable a
prejudice to Trade (tho Interest was then in England at 8 per Cent.) because
whosoever has the sole Trade to any place, may set what price he pleases upon
his Goods; but now Trade is dispersed; the same sort of Manufacture is made in
several Countries; the Dutch and English trade in the same sort of Goods, to
the same Foreign Parts, and therefore they ought to deal by the same Interest
(which is the measure of Trade) or else the Dutch may undersel us, and so must
beat us out of our Trade.

By this difference of Interest, Ibid
Holland is become the great Magazine, and Storehouse, for all sorts of Goods;
for they may be laid up cheaper there than here.

It is impossible for the Ibid.
Merchant, when he has bought his Goods, to know what he shall sell them for:
The value of them depends upon the differences betwixt the Occasion, and the
Quantity; tho that be the chiefest of the Merchants care to observe, yet it
depends upon so many Circumstances, that it is impossible to know it;
therefore, if the plenty of the Goods has brought down the Price, the Merchant
lays them up till the Quantity is consumed, and the Price rises; but the
English Merchant cannot lay up his, but with disadvantage; for, by that time
the Price is risen so, as to pay Charges and Interest, at 6 per Cent. the same
Goods are sent for from Holland, and bring down the Price; for they are laid up
there at 3 per Cent. and can therefore be sold Cheaper.

For want of considering Ibid.
this in England, many an English Merchant has been undone; for tho by
observing the Bill of Lading, he was able to make some guess of the Stock
imported here; and therefore has kept his Goods by him for a Rise: Yet not
knowing what Stock there was in Holland, has not been able to sell his Goods
to Profit; the same sort of Goods being brought from thence before the Price
rises high enough to pay Ware-houseroom and Interest.

So that now the greatest part of the English Trade is driven by a quick
return, every day Buying and Selling, according to a Bill of Rate every day
printed: By this means the English Trade is narrow'd and confined; the King
loses the Revenue of Importation, and Exportation, which he would have, if
England was the Magazine of Europe; and the Nation loses the profit which
would arise from the hands employed in Freight and Shipping.

High Interest decays Trade; sor, where the Advantage from Usury is greater
than the Profit from Trade; there the rich Merchants give over, and put out
their Stock to Usury; and the poorer Merchants, and others, who carry on a
Trade with borrowed Money, must break: Nay, further, whilst Interest is at Six
per Cent. few will run the hazard at Sea, (even in time of Peace) for their
gain of Eight or Nine per Cent. And how then can we expect any Foreign Trade in
time of War?

When Interest was at Ten in the Hundred, no wise man would follow any Trade
whereby he could not promise himself Fourteen, or Twelve per Cent. gain at
least. Now Interest goes at Six per Cent. the hopes of Nine, or at least Eight,
is necessary; the infallible consequence whereof is, That all Trades that will
not afford a clear profit of Nine, or at least Eight per Cent. we must neglect,
and give away to such who can Trade for less Gain, and must do so for ever,
unless we bring our Interest to a nearer proportion with our Neighbors.

Abatement of Interest will multiply Traders as well in England, as it has
done in Holland already, to such a degree, that almost all their People of both
Sexes are Traders; and the many Traders will oblige the Merchants to sell for
less Profit, by which means the bulk of Trade will be increased. (which will be
no disadvantage to the Nation, tho private men should gain less) And this is
the true reason why many considerable Merchants (who continue on their Trades)
are against the lessening of Interest.

If Intrest be abated to Four in the Hundred: Who will not, that can leave his
Children an Estate of a thousand, or two thousand Pound, bring them up to
Arithmetic, Merchants Accounts, and put them out to Trades, well knowing that
the bare Use of their Money, or the product of it in Land, will scarcely
maintain them.

Two per Cent. extraordinary in Interest, is an heavier burden upon the
Merchants, than Four per Cent. extraordinary in Customs; because Customs run
only upon Goods Imported, or Exported, and that but once; whereas Use falls as
well upon Ships, as Goods, and must be yearly paid on both; and the Ships in
many bulky Trades are of four times the value of the Goods.

An Anonymous Author in his discourse of Trade, page 10. says, That the Trade
of England was inconsiderable, and the Merchants very mean and few, when
Interest was at 10 per Cent. and that within Ten years after Interest was
brought down to Eight in the Hundred, viz. An. 1635. there were more Merchants
to be found, worth each 1000 l. and upwards, than could be found, before the
year 1600, worth 100 l. each.

And now since Interest has been at 6 per Cent. there are more to be found
upon the Exchange, worth 10000 l. than were then to be met with worth 1000 l.

The increase of our Trade has always followed, not preceded the Abatement of
Use by Law; if this be doubted, ask the Discourse of Trade.
Aged, and they will tell you, that 500 l. with a Daughter Sixty years ago, was
esteemed a larger Portion than 2000 l. now: Gentlewomen in those days would
think themselves well dressed in a Searge Gown, which a Chambermaid now will be
ashamed to be seen in. The Citizens now are richer in Clothes, Houshold-Goods,
Plate, Jewels, than the richest Nobility and Gentry were then.

Where Interest is high, the people are poor, and Money scarce; as for
instance, in Spain, Scotland, and Ireland, where Money lately was (and for what
I know still is) at 10 and 12 per Cent. the Inhabitants are poor, ill fed, and
meanly clad; tho Ireland and Spain are very fruitful Countries; and to the
last, all the Gold and Silver of the Indies are brought.

I come now to decide a Question often started in this Controversy, viz.

Whether the lowness of Interest be the cause, or the effect of Riches?

Many who write against the Abatement of Interest, do assert, That it is not
the cause, but the effect of Riches.

In answer to this (lest what has been said upon this Subject, should not
fully satisfy the Curiosity of the Reader) I will here add something more:

First, I presume this Postulatum will be granted, That Trade does employ the
Poor, does multiply Home-Artificers, does fill the Nation with People, does
carry out the Product of our Land, does bring in Money; all which are the cause
of Riches. This being granted, I will not be so disingenious, as to affirm,
that Riches will not bring Interest down; but what can be inferred from thence?
that a low Interest cannot be the cause of Riches? No certainly, that Inference
can never be made; for, if Trade be that which enricheth a Nation, and if the
lowering of Interest advances Trade, (which, I hope, is before sufficiently
proved) then it follows, That the Abatement of Interest is, doubtless, a
principal cause of Riches; for it is not absurd, nor improper to say, That the
same thing may be both a Cause and an Effect.

Peace may cause Plenty, and Plenty preserve Peace: Fear beget Hatred, and
Hatred may beget Fear: The Fertility of a Country may multiply People, and the
multiplication of People may cause a greater Fertility in that Country; so the
Abatement of Interest causes an increase of Wealth; and the increase of
Wealth, may cause a further Abatement of Interest.

Since our first Abatement Discourse of Trade.
of Interest, the Riches and Splendor of this Kingdom is very much increased;
as appears from the new Buildings, fine Furniture, and number of Coaches; from
our Shipping and Navigation, from the improvement of our Customs, which does
not proceed so much from the advancement of the Rates of Goods, as from the
increase of the bulk of Trade; for tho some Foreign Commodities and
Manufactures are advanced; yet others of our Native Commodities and
Manufactures are considerably abated in the Book of Rates.

England has been enriched constantly, and proportionably to, and after our
several Abatements of Interest by Law, from an Unlimited Rate, to Ten; from Ten
to Eight, and from Eight to Six, in the Hundred: And I think it may reasonably
be hoped, that a further Abatement will produce more Riches, as well here, as
it has done in Holland.

As it has been in England, so my Author says, it is in all Europe, and other
parts of the World; insomuch, that to know whether any Country be Rich or Poor,
or in what proportion it is so: The resolution of this Question, viz. What
Interest do they pay for Money? will tell you; for all Countries are at this
day Richer, or Poorer, in an exact proportion to what they pay, and have
usually paid for the Interest of Money.

That an Abatement of Interest would increase Trade, (which is the cause of
Riches) and would raise the value of Land, and keep up Rents, was the opinion
of the Parliament, in the 21 Jac. 1. and of another in the 12 Car. 2. as
appears in the Preamble to those Acts, which I desire the Reader once more to
look over again. That they were not mistaken in their Sentiments, is evident
from Seventy years Observation, beyond all Contradiction; insomuch, that it
must be granted by all Englishmen, for it can no longer be made a Question,
That to abate Interest, will advance Land, and increase Trade; and consequently
is the cause of Riches.

It is confessed on all hands, that in Holland Interest is lower than in England;
but some are pleased to say, That is not the effect of Laws, but proceeds only
from the Plenty of Money; for in Holland there is no Law restraining Usury: To
which I answer out of my Anonymous Author in his Discourse of Trade, That it
may be true, that in Holland, there has not lately been any Law to limit Usury
to the present Rate it is now at, viz. 3 or 4 per Cent.; yet most certain it
is, that many years since, there were Laws in Holland, that reduced Interest to
8, 6, and afterward to 5 per Cent. An. 1640. and in the year 1655. to 4. per
Cent. as he affirms, page 31. and no doubt but they would by Law lessen Usury
still, were it necessary at this time; It having always been the policy of that
State, to keep down the Interest of their Money 3 or 4 per Cent. under the Rate
of what is usually paid in their Neighboring Countries; we never yet abated
our Interest, but they soon after abated theirs.

Interest has been at 6 per Cent. in Holland; but after it was reduced to
Eight in England, it was reduced to Four in Holland; and now being at Six here,
it is there at Three; so that they have always kept the same advantage in Trade,
from our overbalance by Usury; well understanding the Profit they have from
thence.

It may not be impertinent to recite here so much of the French King's Edict,
as concerns this matter; for, perhaps all may not elsewhere come to the sight
of it.

He found that Ten or Eight in the Hundred, did ruin many good Families,
hindered the Traffic and Commerce of Merchandise, and made Tillage cheap, and
Handicrafts to be neglected; many desiring, through the easiness of a deceitful
Gain, to live idly, rather than give themselves to Arts, or to Till, or
Husband their Lands: For these Reasons he did forbid all Usury at an higher
Rate than 6 l. 5 sh. in the Hundred.

This Edict was ratified in the Court of Parliament. I have transcribed this
out of a discourse of Trade, page 51.

Should I pursue all the advantages to Trade, (which may reasonably be hoped
for, from an Abatement of Interest) or, should I enumerate all the benefits
which will redound to the Kingdom, by the encouragement and increase of Trade;
this Piece would swell into a large Volume. I need not tell you of what great
use the lowering of Interest would be to the Government; That the King might
with much less Charge build Ships, and set out his Fleet; that all Ammunition,
and other Necessaries for the Army would be much cheaper; That upon all
occasions he would be more readily supplied with Money: These Considerations
alone are of no small Concernment to the Nation; for the more easily the
Government can be maintained, the less Taxes will be wantting.

It would be unnecessary to add any more upon this Head, which relates to Trade.

I make no doubt, but the Reasons alleged, will convince the Merchant, and
Tradesman, That a further Abatement of Interest will be no prejudice to them,
but will highly advance their Calling. I proceed now to the next thing
propounded to the Consideration of the Reader, wherein I shall endeavor to
satisfy the Landed-man, That to lessen Usury, will be of very great advantage
to him, by raising the Value of Land in Purchase; and by enabling his Tenants
to give more for his Farm, or at least to pay his Rents fooner.

CHAP. II.
That Abatement of Interest will raise the Value of Land.

THE inseparable Affinity betwixt Trade and Land, is so obvious to every Man's
understanding, that I think it will not be denied, but when Trade flourishes,
Land always bears a good price, and the Landlord's Rents are well paid. When
Trade decays, Rents are never well paid, and the price of Land falls too; on
the other hand, when Rents fall, and Farmers break, then Shopkeepers fail, and
Merchants give over. The Interest of one is so interwoven with the others, that
it cannot be ill with Trade, but Land will fall; nor ill with Land, but Trade
will feel it. This Observation is by experience found so true, that no Trader
or Landed-man can make the least doubt of it.

That Land in England has risen in value, as Interest has Discourse of Trade.
been abated, is matter of fact, and every Owner of Land can best judge of
this; look but into your Ancestors Deeds of Purchase made Seventy years ago,
and you will find that Land was then fold for 10 or 12 years Purchase; but an
enquiry into the gross Sum of Money paid, will be more exact, and less
fallible, than to make an estimate by the years Purchase; for many Farms have
been of late years so rackt up in Rents, that it may be they will not yield
more years purchase now, according to the present Rents, than they would have
done many years past, and yet may double the Money they were then bought or
sold for, because the Rents might be much less then.

Where Use for Money is high, Land is cheap in other parts of the World, as
well as in England, and it must be so; that it is so, Spain, Scotland, and
Ireland, do abundantly attest; in those Kingdoms Interest is high, and Land
cheap. In Italy and Holland, Usury is lower and Land dearer.

That it must be so, according to the rate of Interest, is evident from Reason;
for who are so stupid as to give more than Ten or Twelve years purchase for
Land, if Interest was at 10 per Cent. when at single Interest they may double
their Money in ten years? If high Interest brings down the price of Land,
certainly low Interest must raise it.

Whilst Use is at 6 per Cent. (especially when Land is loaded with Taxes) few
will buy; the Interest of Money being at least 2 per Cent. more than the Rent
of Land.

If Interest be reduced to Four in the hundred, it would not so much overrun
the Rent of Land, and consequently more Men would be inclined to buy, and could
affored to give a better price than now they can; for Interest fets the price
in buying and selling Land.

If Usury was reduced to Four in the Hundred, we might reasonably enough
expect, that 10 l. per Ann. in Land (being now worth 200 l.) would within few
years be worth 300 l. the disproportion betwixt the Rent of Land, and Interest
of Money being so much less; and the value of Money being thereby so
considerably abated.

That 300 l. at 4 per Cent. in twenty years will bring in no more than 200 l.
at 6 per Cent. in twenty years does now.

And there is great Reason, that the exchange betwixt Land, Money, and Goods,
should be even; for why should the Country Gentlemen give 6 per Cent. for Money
or Goods, when his Land will bring in but four? I believe I might say, not
three at this time; why should the Gentleman pay 2 per Cent. more for all the
Goods he buys of the Merchant, viz. for Silks, Linen, etc. than the Merchant
gives for his Wool, Corn, or Cattle? This being the Case, I do not question
but the Nobility and Gentry, having so great a share in Parliament, will in due
time, before it be too late, reflect upon the great odds in the exchange, and
promote a Law to regulate the Balance; such a Law will certainly prevent many
noble Manors and goodly Farms, from being so quickly devoured by Taylor's and
Mercer's Bills; for Gentlemen may then expend more, pay better, and run into
Debt less.

CHAP. III.
That it will improve Rents, or at least enable the Farmer to pay his Rent
better.

THat an Abatement of Interest will improve Rents, or at least enable the
Farmer to pay his Rent better, than he can whilst Money is at 6 per Cent.

It will raise the Rent of some Estates, and keep up the Rent of others: For
the Farmer must make up his Accounts as the Merchants do. The Interest of the
Stock must be reckoned, as well as the Rent of Land; so that the taking 2 l.
per Cent. from the Stock, being added to the Rent of the Land, so much is the
Rent of the Land raised, or the Farm so much the cheaper to the Tenant. As for
instance, a Farm that is now worth 50 l. per Ann. and requires 300 l. to Stock
it, will be worth 56 l. per Annum, when Interest is reduced to four in the
Hundred; there being Six pounds a year taken from the Stock, and added to the
Rent; and the Farmer shall make the same account of profit from the Farm, as he
does now Interest is at 6 per Cent.

Interest being so high Discourse of Trade.
in England, is the cause of the fall of Rents; for Trade being thereby
confined to a quick return, and the Merchant not being able to lay up any
quantity of Goods, he exports less of our own growth; and the plenty of our
Native Stock brings down the Rent of Land; for the Rent of Land that produces
the Stock, must fall, as the price of the Stock does. Whereas, if Interest was
at 4 per Cent. it would make the Rent more certain, and raise the value of Land.

If Usury was at Four in the hundred, there would always be a Magazine of Corn
and Wool in England, which would be a great advantage to the Farmer; for there
are years of plenty and scarcity; and there are more Farmers Discouse of Trade.
undone in plentiful years, than recover themselves in years of scarcity; for
when the price is very low, the Crop will not pay the charge of Plowing,
Sowing, Reaping, Thrashing, and carrying to the Market; and when it is dear,
all Farmers, that lost by Plenty, are not so fortunate as to have a Crop: Now,
if Interest was at 4 per Cent. Corn and Wool in years of plenty would be
bought and laid up to be sold in years of scarcity. And by this means the
buying in years of plenty, would keep the price from falling too low; and the
selling in years of scarcity, would prevent it from rising too high, whereby
Corn and Wool would always be bought and sold at a moderate price, and the
Farmer's Stock and the Rent of Land would be more certain.

Estates let in Leases, whether for Lives or Years, will be very much advanced
by low Interest; for the Tenant being furnished more readily and easily with
Money, may afford to renew oftener, and give greater Fines, and will be enabled
to pay his yearly Rent more punctually than now he can.

The Clergy, as well as Gentry, Tradesmen and Farmers, will equally find the
benefit of 4 per Cent. the Tithe of all Improvements being their Inheritance,
will flow in plentifully to them without Fraud or Murmur, when the Farmer can
well afford it; such of them as enjoy Church-Leases may justly enough, and
without oppressing their Tenants, enlarge their Fines; whereas otherwise they
can hardly expect to keep up the present reserved Rents, and I fear they are
very sensible that Tenants come in slowly to renew.

I might upon this head properly enough, and without much difficulty show, That
to lower Interest will very much encourage and promote Building; for Houses
would be built Cheaper, and let Dearer; that it would be a great invitation to
improve Lands by good Husbandry; that it would multiply Artificers, and revive
our dying Manufactures, and put Artizans upon seeking out ways of making such
Commodities as we daily spend, and buy from Foreign parts, tho we are, or may
be accommodated with them at home. But so many ingenious Pieces are in print
(which the Reader may every where be furnished with) that it would be a needless
Repetition to pass through all these Branches, which have been so well handled
by others long since.

The great Encumbrances of Gentlemen's Estates, of what pernicious consequence
they have been, and must be to the whole Kingdom, is manifest enough. For if
Gentlemen become insolvent, or but bad Pay-masters; Tradesmen, who are forced
to depend upon them, must be so too: When the charge upon Land is light, and
Rents well paid, then the Nobility and Gentry (who have always been the
constant support of the Crown) will be abler to serve the King, both with Purse
and Person, and would recover that Power and Reputation in their Countries
which formerly they had; on the other hand, if the Nobility and Gentry should
be so weakened in their Estates and Credits that they could contribute little
to the Aid and Assistance of the Prince; what could we expect, but that our
Peace must soon be disturbed, the Government shaken, and the Kingdom ruined?
This Consideration is of no small Importance; for it is scarcely imaginable,
that the Interest of the Landed-men should at any time be severed from that of
the Crown; because Land being visible and immovable, is always most
responsible to the Law. I hope this Digression will not seem impertinent, tho
it neither relates to the value or Rent of Land.

I will in this place only offer one thing more to be considered by the
Landed-men. Suppose a Gentleman that has 600 l. per Annum, should have 300 l.
per Annum in his hands, and has no Money to stock it with; will not his
Circumstances be very hard to borrow at 6 per Cent. when it is too well known,
that he cannot with all his care and trouble make the Rent of his Land, in many
places half; will he not let his Land lie untilled, and without stock, rather
then run himself into Debt? That a great part of the Land in England is now
untenanted, I appeal to all those who have any share or Interest in it. Is it
not therefore high time to enable the Fere-holder to manage it at a more easy
Charge? And will not an Abatement of Interest do it?

CHAP. IV.
The Objections against the Abatement of Interest, fairly stated, and clearly
answered.

HAVING, by what has been alleged in the foregoing Chapters, endeavored to
maintain, (and I hope, to the satisfaction of the Readers) That the lessening
of Usury to 4 per Cent. will increase Trade, and raise the value of Land, and
keep up Rents; I intend in this, to state the Objections fairly, (which are
commonly made against it) and will study to answer them as plainly and fully as
I can in so short a discourse.

Object. 1. That Foreigners will call in their Loans.
Answ. In this Objection Four things seem to be insinuated, viz. 1. That an
high Interest (being so great an invitation to lend) does fill any Country
with Money. 2. That we are now supplied with abundance, by Merchants beyond the
Seas. 3. That it is for our advantage to borrow from them. And lastly, That, if
Interest be lessened, they will call it in. If any of these be false, the
Objection is then out of doors; for my part, I can scarcely believe any of the
Four Insinuations true.

If high Interest fills any Country with Money, what is the reason, that in
Ireland, Scotland, and Spain, and other parts of the World (where Interest has
been, and is High) they have so little? And how comes it to pass, That in
Italy, and Holland, Money is so plentiful where Interest is much lower?

How much Money is lent by Foreigners, is not easy to find out; the greatest
part (I guess) comes from the Dutch Merchants, and very probable it is, it may
be paid in by Bills of Exchange; which way of lending does not bring in Gold or
Silver; for if one English man lend to another Englishman, (be the Interest
high or low) between them Two, nothing is got or lost to the Nation: But if
Foreigners do transmit over Gold or Silver, it is no advantage to us to borrow;
for in all Loans the Gain is the Lenders, not the Borrowers; As for instance,
If the Dutch lend to the English an 100000 l. and let it continue here till it
comes to 200000 l. they at length carry home both Principal and Interest, which
Interest is a clear loss to the Nation, and a manifest Gain to the Dutch. After
all, Why should we imagine the Dutch will call in their Debts here, to put it
out for less there? Certainly they will not be so extravagant: The usual reply
to this is, That their Security is better: Truly, I cannot say so, unless they
were as safe from the French, as they are secure in their Titles from
Lawsuits, by the help of a Registry: I rather think they will be glad (whilst
the French do daily approach nearer and nearer to them) to transmit more hither.

But if, upon lowering of Interest, they should call it home; it would be
better for the Nation if they did; for then, perhaps they will draw back their
Effects in our Native Commodities.

Object. 2. That the value of the principal Money will be abated, by lessening
the Interest; so that every Man, whose whole Estate is in Money, will by such a
Law, lose a Third part of it.
Answ. This is a great mistake; for the lowering of the Interest a Third, will
not lessen the value of the Principal; for an 100 l. will buy as much Goods (of
some sort more) after such a Law is made, as it would before; it will buy as
much Corn, Wool, Cloth, and all things else, as now, except Land; for the
lowering of Interest will chiefly fall upon foreign Stock, or Wares; and the
Merchant may afford to sell his Goods 2 per Cent. Cheaper, and will gain as
much by them, as he did, when Money was at 6 per Cent. and almost of every
Gentleman's Fxpence is in Foreign Wares, as Wine, Spices, Silks, Linen, etc.
In such Goods there will be 2 per Cent. saved in the Price; so that they may
then maintain themselves almost as well with 40 l. a year, as they can now with
60 l.

But, what if the Principal should sink in value? Is all the Cash in the
Kingdom equivalent to the value of all the Land in England? No certainly; for I
have very good reason to believe, that all the Coin in the Nation does not
exceed Ten Millions, and the Annual Rents of England are at least Twelve; (as I
could easily make appear, if there was occasion for it) and consequently, the
Land of England at Twenty years Purchase, is worth above Twenty times more than
the Money; wherefore it is not difficult to know, which is most for the
advantage of England, to keep up the Interest of Money, or to raise the Value
of Land.

Object. 3. That such as are indebted, will not be able to take up Money to pay
off their Debts, and so will be put to great Streights and Difficulties, and
many will be undone, and ruined.
Answ. This Objection would have some weight in it, if the Law to abate
Interest, should respect Contracts already made; but to me, that seems, upon
many Accounts, so unreasonable, that I fancy no Gentleman does intend to aim at
it: And if the Bill respect only Contracts to be made after what time the
Parliament shall in their Wisdom think fit, then such a Law will be so far from
prejudicing the Debtor, that it will be an help to him; for, if he can pay off
his Debt, he may, by borrowing of another at 4 per Cent. and if he cannot, no
doubt, but the Creditor will be very willing to let his Money continue upon the
same Security, at 6 per Cent. rather than call in his Money, to put it out for
4.

Object. 4. That they who want Money, shall not be trusted upon Personal
Security, which will very much obstruct, and hinder Trade; for a great part of
the Trade of the Nation is carried on with Money, borrowed upon such Security:
And Usurers will rather keep their Money by them, than lend upon such Terms.
Answer. The Reason why any Man should lock up his Money, and expect a better
Advantage, when the Law has reduced it to Four in the Hundred, I cannot well
see. 4 per Cent. is no contemptible Interest, it is more than Land produces;
and what greater Advantage can any Man then expect, unless it be to lay it out
in Trade? if so, it will rather promote Trade, than obstruct, or hinder it; or
he must Purchase, or Build, which are the proper Channels into which we desire
to turn his Money.

Tradesmen will be supplied sooner than now they are; for there will be fewer
Borrowers.

The value of Land being raised, the Debts upon it will be sooner discharged;
and there being less occasion for Money to be lent upon Land, it will the more
easily be borrowed by Tradesmen and others.

If the Security was weakened by lessening the Usury, then we might justly fear
Tradesmen would not be furnished with Money at 4 per Cent. But the Abatement
of Interest is so far from making the Secutity weaker, that it will be safer to
Trust, when Interest is at 4 per Cent. than whilst it is at Six; for the
Tradesmen will drive a greater Trade, and must gain more, and so will sooner
be able to pay the Interest and Principal, than now he can.

The reason assigned against 4 per Cent. viz. Because Tradesmen are
necessitated to borrow, is a very strong Argument for it, and was thought so by
the Parliament in the 21 Jacob. and by that in the 12th. Carol. 2. as you may
see in the Preamble to those Acts for lessening Usury: If this be of any force
now against 4 per Cent. it was as strong against bringing Usury at that time
from Ten to Eight, and against reducing it from Eight to Six: We find this
Objection did not sway with the Parliament then; and we find by Seventy years
Experience, that the Abatement of Interest has been very beneficial, and that
the Moneyed Man has constantly submitted to the Use let by Law, and soon
ceased to be sullen, not scrupling to trust the Tradesman; and therefore, why
should we fear now he will not?

Object. 5. That it is now unseasonable, Money being scarce.
Answ. To this Objection I answer thus, That Money is not scarce; but if it be,
the taking off Two in the Hundred, will not make it scarcer.

That Money is not Discourse of Trade.
scarce, is evident from hence; We give more with Apprentices, than Thirty
years ago: We Ship off one Third more of Manufactures, than we did 30 years
past: Houses new built in London since the Fire, yield double the Rent they did
before: The speedy, and costly Building of the City is a convincing and an
amazing Argument of the Plenty, and late Increase of Money in England: We have
now more than double the number of Merchants Ships we had Thirty years past.

I cannot deny, but in the Country, Money is very scarce; for which, these
Reasons may be assigned;

1. The great resort of the Nobility and Gentry to London; their spending
little amongst their Tenants, and returning their Rents up.

The Second proceeds from the quick payments of the Taxes, and from the
constant practice of bringing up the Money in Wagons to London, which
misfortune cannot be avoided, unless the Counties could return in Cattle, Corn,
or other Goods, such Sums as they pay toward the Charge of the Government; for
the Balance must be made even with Money: As for instance, if the County of
Lincoln pay 100000 l. within the space of Twelve Months, for Taxes, and cannot
make out above 80000 l. in Goods, the remaining 20000 l. must be made up in
Money.

Money is not so much wanting in England, as such Security as Moneyed Men will
require, especially for great Sums.

The East India Company have taken up very great Sums at 4 per Cent. The
Goldsmiths in London could have had (and, I believe, may still) what Money they
would, upon their Servants Notes, only at 4 l. or 4 l. 10 s. in the Hundred.

No Gentleman finds any want of Money, if he will give Land-security: It Is very
well known, that many Thousands have, within these few years, been lent to
Gentlemen at 4 l. in the Hundred, and any Man may now have at 5 l. upon Real
Security; so that we seem ripe enough, and thoroughly prepared for a farther
abatement of Usury.

To take off 2 l. in the Hundred, will not make Money more scarce, for such a
Law would not lessen the Money, tho it would abate the Interest; but the
contrary is most true, the lowering of Interest will make it more plentiful;
for low interest increases trade, and trade increases money; for Bullion is a
foreign Commodity, and brought in by trade.

Another reason why money seems scarce, is the Banking it up, which obstructs
the circulation, advances Usury by rendering it so easy, that most men as soon
as they can make up 50 l. lend it to the Goldsmiths; which Trade of Bankering
does and will occasion that fatal pressing necessity for money throughout the
whole Kingdom.

Money will not lie so long dead, if Interest be abated, as it does now; for
the Gain being so much the less, the Usurer will strive to put it out as soon
as may be.

Object. 6. That the Exchequer will draw in all or the greatest part of the
Cash of the Kingdom.
Answ. This Objection is founded upon a presumption, that an higher Interest
than Four in the Hundred must be allowed to those who lend Money to the Crown
upon an Act of Parliament: I doubt not but the Parliament in their Wisdom will
think it highly reasonable that it should be so; and what mischief will follow
from thence? Will more Money be lent than what the Parliament shall give the
King Credit for? No certainly; but this benefit the King will receive by such a
Law, whatsoever Money the Parliament shall find necessary to be anticipated
upon a borrowing Clause, shall sooner be brought in; and that will be of great
use to the Nation; so that what is here urged against lessening Use, is when
well weighed a very strong reason for it; but what if Money should flow in,
will it not find a way out? Have we any ground to fear, it will be locked up
there? I am sure there is no such danger in time of Peace, and much less during
a chargeable War.

Object. 7. That Widows and Orphans will suffer much by an abatement of
Interest; Those who have Sixty Pound a year for a 1000 l. will then have but
Forty.
Answ. I answer thus: This will not be a general prejudice, because they are
few in number in respect of the whole Nation; for they are scarcely one to
twenty of the whole People, and of those not one in Forty will suffer by an
abatement of Interest, for these reasons; many of them have Land or Annuities,
and such persons may gain more by the rise of Land, than they will lose by the
fall of Use-money.

Many Executors allow Orphans no Interest, and yet justify themselves by Law;
to such Orphans it will be no damage to lessen the Legal Rate of Interest.

Their Portions will be of the same esteem, and of the same value to buy every
thing (except Lands) and they were never given them with that intent; for then
their Parents might as well have given them Lands: So that it is only the
income of their Portions that will be lessened, and that but for a short time,
till the young men set up their Trades, or till the Maidens or Widows marry.

But how severe soever the lowering of Interest from Six to Four in the Hundred
may be to Widows, Orphans, or younger Brothers; yet they will have as much Rent
for their Money, as the Gentry and their Elder Brothers have for their Land;
for the Land of England does not yield Four in the Hundred.

After Interest is reduced to Four in the hunnred, many will leave their
Children Annuities, or Estates, running in Trade (as they do in Holland and
Italy) whereby the abatement of Interest will become profitable not prejudicial
to them, and advantageous to the whole Nation by enlarging Trade.

Object. 8. That Gentlemen must give more with their Daughters for Portions, by
which means a great part of the Inheritance of such Gentlemen's Estates will be
lessened and more encumbered.
Answ. This Objection is founded upon a Supposition, that the value of the
Principal Money is sunk, and therefore they must give greater Portions; but
that is a mistake; for 1000 l. will be as much valued by a Tradesman, as it is
now; it will buy as much Goods (of some sort more) after Usury is abated, as it
will now; Foreign Stocks or Wares may be Sold 2 l. per Cent. cheaper than now
they can be afforded for; and the greatest part of the Ladies expense is in
Foreign Wares; so that they may then maintain themselves almost as well with
forty Pounds a year, as they can now with threescore.

But if larger Portions should be requisite, the Gentleman will be better able
to raise them; for his Rents will be better paid, and his Land will sell for a
third part more; so that his Estate will be less encumbered then before.

Object. 9. Others object, That an Abatement of Interest by a Law, is not
practicable, nor would it be conducive to the end aimed at; tho they confess a
low Interest does most encourage Trade, and advance Land.
Answ. Some Men fancy, That such a Law would be only advantageous to
Scriveners, who will have more for Procuration and Continuation. If this should
happen (tho I see no reason for it) the Borrower might afford to give more to
the Scrivener, when he pays less to the Usurer.

Interest has been abated twice in England by Act of Parliament, within the
space of fifty years, with very good success, and great advantage to the
Kingdom, and what should hinder its effect now more than formerly?

If a Law will not do it, why do the Usurers always oppose the passing of an
Act to that purpose? The true Reason seems to be, because they are wise enough
to know, that a Law will certainly do it, as it has done already, tho they
would persuade others to the contrary.

Octject. 10. Many assert, That low Interest is not the Cause, but the effect
of Riches; or otherwise, say they, Why are not all Countries rich, they having
it in their Power to make themselves so by a low-stated Interest by Law.
Answ. That low Interest is the cause of Riches, I appeal to the Judgment of
the Parliament in the 21 Jac. and of that in the 12 Car. 2. who ascribe the
decay of Trade, the fall of Rents, the discouragement of all Improvements, and
good Husbandry, to the height of Interest; and those wise Considerations did
induce them to pass two Acts, as may be seen by the preamble to the Acts
reducing Usury from Ten to Eight, and from Eight to Six in the Hundred.

The Authority of so many wise and worthy Patriots, and the visible usefulness
of those Acts confirmed by Seventy years Experience, is, I doubt not, of so
great weight, that no Man (without immodesty) can deny, that low Interest is
the cause of Riches. Vide p. 31. to p. 39.

Object. 11. Lastly, some allege, That all the Reasons urged for reducing
Interest to Four in the Hundred, will hold as strongly against all Usury.
Answ. To this, I answer, No; for many Improvements are made with borrowed
Money, and several considerable Trades are carried on with Loans, which would
fall or decay, unless Money could be had readily and freely.

It Is true, if Moneyed men would lend their Money freely, and gratis upon all
occasions, then doubtless, Trade would flourish most, and Land be advanced to
its highest Value; but since the Usurer is not so publick-spirited, it is
necessary that a moderate Interest should be allowed, to invite him to part
with his Money frankly: but why so great, as to discourage Trade, and wholly to
depress Land, nay, to exceed the Rent of it, I see no occasion. My Lord Bacon
in his time (in his Essay upon Usury) thought it expedient, that Use should be
brought to 5 l. in the Hundred, and highly reasonable that the Rent of Land
should always exceed the Interest of Money; and I am sure, at Four in the
Hundred it will not do that.

I have now gone through all the Objections of moment, that ever I could find
in Print, or meet with in Conversation; I have answered every one of them
distinctly, with as much brevity and perspicuity as possibly I could. If
through inadvertency I have omitted any, I ask the Reader's pardon: how many
more Objections soever may occur, this short Answer will serve for all. We have
often and continually felt the good Effects of an Abatement of Interest, and
therefore we may reasonably expect the like advantage; the Objections were the
same then as now, and can have no greater force, nor be of worser consequence.

I wish what is said, may give satisfaction; if it does not, I hope this
Subject (which is of so general concernment, and public use to the whole
Nation) will be better handled by a more acceptable and successful Pen.

The CONCLUSION.
THE raising the value of Land at this time seems most necessary, the Nation
being engaged in such a chargeable War: For the Land is the Fund that ever has
maintained, and must still support and preserve the Government. Have not all
our late Taxes been raised upon Land, Excise, Customs upon Home-Commodities
(which Duty arises from the product of Land) or Impositions upon foreign
Goods; the last of which does, tho not so immediately fall upon Land? For the
Gentry, and consumer of foreign Wares must pay at least so much dearer as the
Duty amounts to.

If the Charge of our Government, and Defense, should increase (as they have
lately) and I am afraid must still, the Power of France being so formidable;
and should Their Majesty's Customs decline (as they must, unless we have a free
and uninterrupted Trade at Sea) then I would gladly be informed from any
Projector, how this happy Settlement can be kept up, or the French kept out,
without a General Excise, or an Extraordinary great and lasting Land Tax? Money
must be granted in proportion to future Exigencies (how great soever they may
be.)

There is no true Englishman but will cheerfully give his Money, when Life,
Fortune, and Family are at Stake.

I need not remind any Gentleman how Rents fall, and Tenants break, tho very
honest and industrious.

But one thing I desire all Gentlemen (especially such who have no Places) to
consider seriously, in what manner, after what poor fashion they must live, if
but half of their Estates be thrown into their own hands; I doubt they will
find it very difficult to stock that half, and when Taxes and all other Charges
are paid, and the usual deductions made (not to reckon Casualties) I fear they
will see very little Money.

Nothing but an abatement of Interest can effectually reach the Usurer, who
must otherwise grow rich in time of War, whilst others labor under heavy
pressures.

In a word; no Law can be of greater advantage to the Nation, than an Act to
reduce Interest to 4 l. per Cent. it will produce the most general good with
the least private disadvantage; it will give great satisfaction to the whole
Kingdom; it will make an abundant recompensation for the Great Taxes, and heavy
Impositions, which the necessities of Public Affairs have required the
Parliament to lay upon the People; and it will enable the Landed-men to bear
exceeding Taxes, with great ease and cheerfulness.

No Consideration whatsoever has induced me to expose these lines to public
view and censure, but the deep sense I have of the Free-holder's and Farmer's
Poverty, the visible decay of Trade, the prospect of the pitiful condition of
the Ancient Nobility and Gentry (who have not been brought up to Husbandry) if
once their whole Estates should be Untenanted; nothing else has brought this
Treatise forth; therefore I hope, if I be mistaken in the Remedy propounded,
the Candid and Ingenuous Reader will easily forgive me, and acquaint the World
with a more speedy and effectual way to raise the value of Land, and increase
Trade.

FINIS.

