GOOD NEWS FOR ENGLAND: OR, Comfortable Tidings from Ireland, to all true
hearted Protestants.

BEING A REAL RELATION HOW SIR Simon Harcourt, Sergeant Major Berry, and
Captain Paramore, with the joint Assistance of diverse other Protestants,
obtained a famous Victory over the Rebels at Kildare.

As also how the Lord Dulon was grievously wounded, and a Kinsman of his taken
prisoner, with the number of those that were slain on each side.

Sent from the English Quarters at Lions, within four miles of Dublin by
Alderman Guy his Son of Bristoll, Cornet to Sir Richard Grenvile, Mar. 10.

London, Printed for ROBERT WOOD, 1641.

THE PROTESTANTS LAST LAST VICTORY OVER FHE REBELS IN IRELAND.
DEAR BROTHER:
I Received your Letter of the 10. of Febr. but had never opportunity or
leisure to recommend my true respects to you, until this fit occasion
proffered; for we have bin so busied upon strict duty ever since, that we have
had scarce time to eat our small victuals we get, for the Rogues are up in
every place about us, so that we are every day upon some march or service; but
this Bearer has faithfully promised to deliver this with his own hands unto
you: and therefore I will to satisfy your request, relate to you such
Occurrents, and passages, as have lately fallen out here; for my own part, I
have not bin well ever since our business at Ashinhanon, by means of a fall I
got homewards.

Yet on monday morning I made a shift to get to Horse, and marched with our
troop toward Kildare; upon a Report of a skirmish at Lunderston between the
Rebels and Lieutenant Col. Hurcliffi where the Rebels were put to slight, and
thereupon the L. Dulon removed from Caterlaff, and came toward Woodstocke,
that night we lay at Clanmor, and the Rebels at Bolton.

On Tuesday morning we had a Command from Sir Simon Harcourt by three a clock
to march toward Kildare, we were in all 180. Horse, and 1300 foot, at our
going forth, and by 8. of the clock in the morning we had intelligence by the
people of our Party, that the Rebels had marched all night, and were in number
at least 6000. horse and foot, which made us somewhat pause upon the matter, and
at a place of advantage (within a mile of Kildare) to make a stand.

But within half an hour, we had News that Serieant Mayor Berrie, and Captain
Parramore were within an hours march of us and made all the have they could
from their quarters toward us, with their Companies, and two pieces of
Ordnance, which we found to be true, which put a great deal of courage unto us,
and so we marched onwards toward Kildare, where we understood the Rebels were
at Water, a little Town four miles off, and that they were intrenching
themselves there.

Which to prevent, we made all the haste we could to them, and about four in
the Afternoon we perceived them.

Captain MARRO was the first Troop appointed to fall on, and Serieant Mayor
Berrie of the Foot, which was bravely seconded by all our Forces there, playing
against them courageously But the sport lasted not above half an hour before a
great storm of Reign fell on us, which hindered our play, and the Rebels
retreated into a wood, near Water Town, where they rested until 7. a clock at
night; at which time our sire-locks gave them such a salutation, that being
seconded by the rest of our Forces, they were enforced to leave the wood, and
fly toward Woodstock, which gave us such contentment, that we failed not to
pursue them, until they came to Bernee, where we fell upon their Carriages,
and provision, Sir Richard Grenvile took a Kinsman of the Lord Dulons with his
own hand, in the Chase we also took 35 of their horse, amongst whom was one
Lieutenant Fitz-James, whose horse and furniture came to my lot; we also took
three pieces of Iron Ordinance, four wagons of Ammunition, seven wagons of
Bread, Cheese, and Butter (which made us very merry) 700. Cattle. 3000. sheep,
and above 200. Swine, with above 400. men's Arms; with which we bravely marched
toward Kildare where we merrily cheered our bellies, and last night came home
into our quarters.

We lost in all this service about 97. men, amongst whom was Lieutenant
Cannock, and Captain Marroes Quartermaster, and of our own Company Will Parker,
and the Cutler, and no more, Fitz-James says, that the Lord Dulon received a
shot in one of his thighs, and was in great danger, and that they lost above
1000. men in the skirmish and flight, and some other News upon hearsay I could
write, but that I leave till the next convenience, and to the Relation of Sir
Richard his man, and desire you to hasten him away to my Mother: for I cannot
be quiet till I hear from her, pray if you come not over, let me hear from you
at every opportunity, and what News at home, for we hear a 100. lies.

You shall not fail to receive Letters from me by every Post that comes from
us, as long as I am able to write to you. Commend me to Edward Seamor, Mrs.
Kate, and her Mother, and with my true respects commended to your self. I
commit you to the protection of the highest, and will ever remain

Yours in what I may, WILL. GUY,
From Lions, Mar. 10. 1641.
FINIS.

