THE DECLARATION Of JAMES Duke of HAMMILTOUN and CHASTELLERHAULT, Marquess of
CLIDDISDALE, etc. Lord General and Commander in Chief of all the Scots Forces
by Sea and Land.
Whereas I have been very lately informed, that some Officers and Soldiers of
the Scots Army under my command, have injured and molested the persons, goods
and houses of some Inhabitants in these Counties: Therefore to testify and
make apparent how I abhor and detest such actions (which I shall very
unwillingly permit to be used to our Enemies, much less to those that have
received us with so much kindness and affection, as has eminently appeared
from the Gentry and Commons of these Counties (...)) I do hereby publish and
declare as follows.

I. That whatsoever Officer and Soldier under my command shall imprison or
wound the person of any Englishman, for payment of any money, shall for such
mprisonment or wounding, dye without mercy.

II. That wh^tsoever Officer or Soldier under my command, shall plunder any
house, or steal, drive, kill, or carry away the Horses, Cattle, Sheep, or other
goods of any of the I^ts of the ^ingdom (...) England, shall for the said
offenses be punished with death without mercy.

III. Lastly, That whatsoever Officer or Soldier under my command, shall where
any meadows or grass can possibly be gotten, eat up or destroy any growing
Corn, either in their march or quarters, shall for so doing, forfeit his or
their horses, and be imprisoned one whole week.

This my Declaration I strictly require and command all Colonels and other
Officers both of Horse and Foot of the Scots Army, that they cause to be
distinctly read at the head of every Regiment, Troop and Company, that the
punishment of the said offenses may not after the publication, be frustrated by
pretended ignorance. And I further desire, that this Declaration may be read in
all Churches and market Towns, that the whole people of England may see how
truly sensible we are of their sufferings; and that we are firmly resolved with
the blessing of Almighty GOD, and the welcome assistance of all pious, loyal,
and well-affected Subjects, to use all wholesome and just means to advance this
most Christian and glorious Work.

Given under my hand at Kirkbisthure, the 22. day of July 1648.
Edinburgh Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1648:


