THE IMPEACHMENT AND CHARGE OF Mr. Henry Hastings Son to the Earl of
Huntington, concerning his manifold Misdemeanors, the dangerous insurrections,
and Tumults, occasioned by the said Mr. Hastings in the County of Leicester, to
the disturbance and danger of the whole Kingdom.

Which Charge was drawn up by a select Committee and by them presented to the
Assembly of Lords; and an Order from the Lords, for the summoning of M.
Hastings to his Answer.

Also the substance of a Speech spoken by the Earl of Pembrook before the
Committee, concerning an Accommodation between the King and His Parliament, and
the Parliaments Command to all Judges etc.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

July 22. LONDON, Printed for John Warden.

THE IMPEACHMENT AND Charge of Mr. Henry Hastings, Son to the Earl of
Huntington.
THe proceedings of Mr. Henry Hastings in Liecestershire has bin very great,
putting the inhabitants in a great fear and perplexity, he having bin at the
Earl of Stamfords House at Bradgate where the Magazine for that County
remained, with some hundreds of men in Arms, and at his coming thither, he
made a Demand for the Magazine, and desired that it might be delivered into his
Custody and keeping, and that the Charge thereof according to the Authority
given him by his Majesty might be delivered into his hands.

But the Earl did withstand his Demands, and denied that power which he there
made use of, and still did reserve the Militia in his own Custody.

Upon which denial, M. Hastings being very much moved, in his wrath and Collar
gave forth very insolent and proud threats against the Earl, and all his
Assistants, and not only did strive to stain their spotless Reputation with
malicious and most opprobrious terms, but also proclaimed the Earl and all his
followers Traitors.

The Report and Consideration of these Outrages by the said Hastings so
committed, took up each House some time in debate, and occasioned two
Conference for the stopping and hindering of tumultuous meetings, both in that
County and elsewhere.

The Houses being much moved at these troubls, took into their consideration
the strength of the malignant Party with His Majesty, and the opposition caused
by them, to the great interruption of Parliamentall Proceedings.

Amongst others concerning the late actions of Mr. Hastings in and about
Leicester: And after some debate thereupon, they appointed a Committee to draw
up a Charge, against him and his Adherents. Upon the meeting of the House of
Commons, the Committee appointed, having prepared the Charge against Mr.
Hastings, according to the direction and appointment given them by the House,
it was publicly read, and the Lords House being completed and settled, the
said Charge was sent up unto them for their approbation also, with a Desire of
the said Committee that the said Mr. Hastings might be forthwith proceeded
aginst, which was assented to, and an Order issued forth for his summoning in
to answer the same.

On the 13. of JULY the Committees of both houses being met about the
accommodation between His Majesty and His Parliament, the Earl of Pembroke made
an excellent Speech; the substance whereof did discover and lay open the means
for that most happy and desired Union, and the happiness that would arise from
that Conglatination.

Whereupon the Committee taking into their serious consideration, the best means
for an Accommodation between the King and the Parliament, upon a Message sent
to the Lords, there was a Conference.

Where it was concluded, that a Select Committee of both Houses should meet
the next morning, to consider of those Remoraes, which hindered that happy
connection, and to remove them if it were by any means possible.

And upon their meeting the next morning, it was concluded, that the Earl of
Holland should present their Desires to His Majesty, who is now gone for the
same Business, whose Endeavors the Lord of his mercy bless, for the benefit
and peace of this Kingdom.

An Order of the Lords and Commons, Assembled in Parliament.
Whereas several Commissions of Array have lately issued out under the Great
Seal of England, into the several Counties of Leicester, Worcester, and other
Counties of this Realm, tending to the great danger of his Majesty, and the
disturbance of the peace of this Kingdom: For the preventing thereof, and of
the Execution, and issuing out of any such Commissions for the time to come, It
is ordered by the Lords and Commons, That the Judges and Justices of Assize, of
the several Counties of England and Wales, be required in their several
Circuits, at the Assizes and great Sessions to be next held for each County,
within this Realm, and the Dominion of Wales, in open Court, and in their
several Charges to be delivered to the Grand-Juries at the said Assizes,
openly to declare and publish, that the said Lords and Commons have upon mature
deliberation, Resolved upon the question, That the said Commissions of Array
are against Law, and against the Liberty and proper^y of the Subject: And that
all those that are Actors in putting the same in execution, shall be esteemed
Disturbers of the peace of this Kingdom, and Betrayers of the Liberty of the
Subject.

Ordered that this be printed and published,

John Brown Cler. Par. woodcut of a man's portrait


