THE ASSURANCE OF ABBEY AND OTHER Church Lands IN ENGLAND To the POSSESSORS,
Cleared from the DOUBTS and ARGUMENTS Raised about the Danger of RESUMPTION.

In Answer to a Letter of a Person of Quality.

By Nathaniel Johnston, Dr. of Physic, Fellow of the Royal College of
Physicians in London.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel; An^ are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Di^ch-side in Blackfriars. 1687.

THE PREFACE.
FEars and Jealousies are of all other Passions the most difficult to be
subdued, and where they are personated only, for accomplishing some Sinister
end, they are not to be removed by Arguments: Since they who are once Possessed
with them, never yield till they despair of attaining, or effecting the ends
they aim at.

All that I can hope to perform by this Treatise, is to give satisfaction to
those who are scrupulous in good earnest, and by the perusing of Partial
Authors dread the loss of their Church Lands, and the diminishing their Estates
thereby.

To such only I direct this Discourse; and can further tell them, that their
Fears are wholly Groundless; since His Majesty by His Special Command appointed
the Author to compose this for the Quieting the minds of His Interessed
Subjects, Publishing to them the Full Assurance of their Possessions by the
Canon, Civil and Municipal Laws, which to all considerate Persons, it is hoped,
will be sufficient satisfaction.

I must own the Subject is of that moment, that it deserved to have been
Treated of by an abler Pen, and one better skilled in the Laws: But I have
endeavored, with a sincerity becoming one that hates Imposing, to clear both
matter of Law and Fact.

THE TABLE.
Sect. 1. THe Arguments against the Alienation of Church Lands, page 4. Sect.
2. What kind of Alienations have been allowed by the Canons and Constitutions
of the Church. p. 14. Sect. 3. Several instances of Alienations of
Ecclesiastical Revenues from the Churches, or Religious Houses, they were at
their first Dedication conferred on in ancient times. p. 22. Sect. 4. Several
Instances of particular Alienations of Church Lands more modern in England p.
32. Sect. 5. Instances of Alienations of Church Lands in Foreign Coantreys in
the Roman Catholic Communion. p. 53. Sect. 6. Concerning the Alienations of
Church Lands in Germany, and, the Establishment of a Tolleration of Religion
there, by the Treaties of Munster and Osnaburgh. p. 64. Sect. 7. Whether
Cardinal Pool's confirmation of Church Lands to the Possessors, was delusory,
or not. p. 90. Sect. 8 Cardinal Pool's confirmation of Abby-Lands to the
present Possessors, and the Act thereupon. p. 131. Sect. 9. The Exceptions
against this Assurance of Abby-Lands to the Possessors, That it was not
confirmed by Pope Paul IV. fully answered. p. 170. Sect. 10. The Application of
what has been offered toward the Assurance of Abby-Lands to the present
Possessors. p. 193.
The Assurance of Abby-Lands IN ENGLAND, Cleared from the doubts and Arguments
raised about the danger of Resumption.
In Answer to a Letter of a Person of Quality.
SIR,
The occasion of the treating of the security of Abbey Lands.
YOU have obliged me very much, in the Present you made me of the late Treatise,
entitled, How the Members of the Church of England ought to behave themselves
under a Roman Catholic King; And have greatly pleased me in the remarks you
have made upon it; which in the General are favorable enough, in that you say,
it deserves consideration, as much as any Book writ on that Subject, since the
Kings Succeeding to the Crown; and that either directly, or by consequence you
think as much is said as the matter will bear; and you wish it were so
considered as it ought to be; for you verily believe, that the want of weighing
the Reas^ns there laid down, has occasioned most of those non-compliances with
the Kings desires, which have been so fatal to some, and may yet be to more,
that will not see, how much it is the Interest of all Subjects to endeavor with
great obedience, to comport themselves to their Sovereign in all the Duties of
Allegiance, and to one another as Fellow Subjects, that thereby the Civil
Harmony amongst themselves, may produce those effects, so wise a King, and so
sedulous for his Peoples happiness, studies to accomplish.

You tell me, that a further satisfaction in some particulars you think
requisite; and since the Author is unknown to you, and having some confidence I
will deal heartily with you, you desire my Judgment in some scruples: In
obedience to which I here send you my thoughts, and shall not insert your
Letter entire, but in parcels, for the advantage of fitting my Answer more
satisfactorily to your Objections, which as they are such as may shock some
deserve a serious reply to, especially since his Majesty is desirous his
Subjects should be satisfied in this particular.

SECT. I. The Arguments against the Alienation of Church Lands.
1. The necessity of clearing the doubts about the security of Abby-Lands.
IN the First Part of the Letter you tell me, that you conceive, that the Author
of the foresaid Discourse has too slightly passed over the security of
Abby-Lands, and other Religious Possessions, whereof the Roman Catholic
Regulars were violently disseized in King Henry the 8th. and King Edward the
6th. time. Whereas you Judge the consideration of the danger of their
Resumption, as weighty a Reason as any other, why persons of Interest and
Fortune oppose the Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws; lest by yielding a
Parliamentary consent to those, the Roman Catholic Religion should with greater
facility be propagated; which once effected, you conceive great endeavors
would be used, to procure a Restitution of those Lands to the Religious.

Upon this Head you re-mind me what Sir Henry Spelman has writ in his small,
but Learned Treatise, De non Temerandis Ecclesiis: the force of whose Arguments
were such, as they have prevailed with several persons to restore their
Impropriations to their respective Parochial Churches.

Yet you own that the Subjects (both Roman Catholics and Protestants) seemed to
entertain a firm Opinion of the Legal Security of them, till Part 2. fol. 297.
Dr. Burnet in his History of the Reformation, and the Author Pr^^ted for Rich.
Baldwin. 1685.
of a Letter to him, giving him an Account of Cardinal Pool's secret Powers,
endeavored to make it appear, that the Pope neither did, nor intended to
confirm the Alienation of Abby-Lands, and thereby have raised new doubts in
men's minds and in this present juncture of affairs their Arguments are made
great use of, to afright people from yielding any compliance to the King's
desire.

Some Canons against Alienation of Church-Revenues.
To enforce this, you not only press me with the Decretal of 12. q. 2. Non
lic^at Papae.
Pope Symmachus, inserted in the foresaid Letter, but urge the Decretal Epistle
of Binnii Council. Tom. 1. fol. 156. c. 2. D. Omnes tales praesumptores, and
Ecclesiae raptoresatque suarum facultatum Alienatores, a liminibus sanctae
matris Ecclesiae Anathematizatos Apostolica Authoritate pellimus and
denunciamus atque Sacrilegos esse judicamus, and non solum eos sed omnes
consentientes eis.
Pope Lucius, who lived about the year 253; where the Pope speaking of those
who vexed the Bishops of France and Spain, about the Possessions of their
Churches, and the Offerings of the Faithful, says, That according to the
Examples of the Prophets and Apostles and their Successors, and all the
Catholic Fathers, this was adjudged Sacrilege.

Therefore the Pope, following the said Examples, expels all Foretakers,
Robbers of the Church, and Alienators of their Profits, from the Threshold of
the Holy Mother Church by Apostolic authority, excommunicates them, Condemns
them, and judges them Sacrilegious; and not only those who deprived the
Bishops and their Churches of the offerings, but all such as consented to them.

So in the 2d Qua Divinis sunt Assignata usibus, ad humanos usus sine
Sacrilegio, non posse transferri, Idem f. 83.
Epistle of Pope Pius I. An. 155. it is expressed, That those things which are
assigned to Pious Uses, cannot be transferred to Human Uses, without Sacrilege.
-- And so he orders such to be esteemed and judged.

In the Council of Concilium Agathense. Id. to. 3. fol. 712. Col. 1. c. ^.
Agatha, in the time of P. Symmachus about Anno 506, cap. 1. n. 7. it is thus
decreed, Casellas vel mancipiola Ecclesiae (sicut prisca Canonum praecipit
Authoritas) vel vasa ministerii, quasi commendata fideli praeposito, in Integro
Ecclesiae Jure possideant: Ideoque ut neque vendere, neque per quoscunque
contractus, res unde pauperes vivunt, alienare praesument. Which is to be
rendered thus: That the Churches in full right possess the Houses and Farms, and
the Vessels of Use in the Holy Offices, as commended to a faithful Steward, (as
the ancient Authority of the Canons command) so as none presume to sell, or by
any contracts alienate those things on which the poor live.

So in the Indigne enim ad Altar Dei properare permittitur quires
Ecclesiasticas audet invadere, etc.
sixth Synod under the same Pope, in the time of Theodoric the King, it is thus
expressed: He is unworthily permitted to approach the Altar of God, that dare
invade Ecclesiastic Goods, or unjustly, that is, without the Bishop's License,
possess them, or wickedly or unjustly persist in the defense of such
possession. And further it is declared, That such are to be judged Murderers of
the Poor, and if they amend not the fault, are to be Excommunicated.

In the third Council of Haec Synodus nulli Episcoporum licentiam tribuit, res
alienare Ecclesiae, quoniam and Antiquioribus Canonibus prohibetur. Idem Tom.
4. fol. 503.
Toledo it is decreed, That no Bishop have Power or License to alienate the
Goods of the Church, because by ancient Canons it is forbid.

So in the Decretals, 12. q. 2. Pope Stephen I. or, as the lesser Gloss, Pope
Anaclet I. decrees, That he shall be reputed a Manslayer that takes away,
defrauds, or robs the Moneys, i.e. any Profits of Christ and the Church; for
which Ivo may be consulted, p. 3. c. 18.

You further urge the seventh Synod Si quis Episcopus, vel Monasterii
Praefectus inventus fuerit, ex Episcopatus, vel Monasterii Agris, in Principis
alicujus manus alienare, vel alteri personae tradere, nullius sit momenti
Traditio. Idem Tom. 6. fol. 124.
of Nice, under Constantine and Irene, wherein it is thus decreed; That if any
Bishop or Superior of a Monastery be found to alienate into the hands of any
Prince, or deliver to another person, the Lands of the Bishopric or Monastery,
such Alienation shall be of no force.

You refer me also to the Council of Milden Idem Tom. 6. fol. 410 C. D.
under ^ope Sergius II. wherein the Decree is in these words: Quapropter
secundum Statuta Canonum, ab omni Ecclesiastica Communione, ut Sacrilegus,
debet Arceri; si quis quod Venerabilibus locis relinquitur, vel pravae
voluntatis studiis, suis tentaverit compendiis retinere. Which I translate
thus; Wh^refore, according to the Statute of the Canons, if any, by the study
of a depra^ed will, attempt to restrain that to his own use, which is bestowed
on Venerable places, viz. Churches, Monasteries, etc. he ought to be driven
from Ecclesiastical Communion, as a Sacrilegious person.

The last thing you urge, is, That I will peruse the Collection of the Decrees
of Councils, 12. q. 2 pertotum
and Epistles of the Popes, against Alienations of Lands or Goods, once given
to the Church, in the Canon Law.

I know you expect a very positive Answer to these Canons, which you think bind
all that are or shall be in Communion of the Church of Rome; and, with the
Author of the Letter to p. 11.
Dr. Burnet, are ready to say, That a man may as well be a Papist and not
believe Transubstantiation, nor worship the Host; as be one, and still enjoy
Church Lands; and that no Confessor that understands the Principles of his own
Religion, can give Absolution to such as are involved in that Guilt, without
Restitution. This is the sum of the Charge; and I shall own, that it is
Incumbent upon the Governors of the Church to secure; by Canons and
Constitutions, the rights of it, both as to Jurisdiction and Patrimony. The
like we find enacted in our own Kingdom, since the Reformation Parsons Law, p.
26.
1 and 13 Eliz. and 1 and 3 Jac. 1. Whereby Bishops and all other
Ecclesiastical persons are restrained to Alien or discontinue any of their
Ecclesiastical Lands or Livings, and if they convey or Alien any of their Lands
or Possessions, although it be to the Cokes Reports Magdalin Col. case.
Kings Majesty himself, is void in Law.

All that I shall therefore endeavor to clear, is, that in some cases, even by
other Canons, the dispensation with the Rigor of those you mention, are
allowed, and that several Popes by the plenitude of their Power have dispensed
with them.

I had Collected out of Mr. Seldom, and others, a large account; how in the
Primitive times, according to the Authority of Apolo. cap. 39. and 42.
Tertullian and St. Ep. 266. you may see for these Syn. Gang. Can. 66. Seldom
Hist. 83, 84.
Cyprian, who lived about An. 200 and 250 after our Savior, that the
maintenance of the Clergy was then by Monthly or frequenter Offerings, and the
last Father compares them to the Roman Sportula. Gelasii Dec. c. 27. Ivo Decre.
part. 3. c. 115.
Also, I had noted when Tithes began to be first Introduced, how the Founders
of Churches Arbitrarily divided the portions of Tithes, betwixt the Incumbents
and themselves. And lastly, the disputes whether Tithes could be appropriated
to Monasteries: But considering how this would have swelled this Discourse, I
have wholly laid them by.

SECT. II. What kind of Alienations have been allowed by the Canons and
Constitutions of the Church.
Concerning the Decree of Pope Symmachus.
I Shall therefore in the first place show you, in what cases Alienations of
Church Lands are allowed, even by the Canons: And first, I shall note something
concerning the Decree of Pope Symmachus, which the Author of the Letter to Dr.
Burnet principally insists upon.

A Synod was held at Rome under this Pope, and called Binnius Tom. 3. Fol. 693.
and 694.
Palmaris, because celebrated in the Porch of the Church of St. Peter, called
Palmaria. In this Synod, at the request of the Council, Symmachus caused to be
Read by Hormisda the Deacon, the Constitution of Odoacer King of the Heruli,
Published by Basilius his Praefectus Praetoriae.

Wherein, under the Pain of Excommunication, he had forbid any to alienate the
Goods of the Church. This was exploded by the Synod, because it was a Law of a
Lay-person, concerning Church Affairs; especially, because no Laymen could
appoint the Penalty of Excommunication. So Symmachus produces his own
Constitution, as it is in the Decretal, only the last clause (b) is very
different in Binnius from what is in the Decretal: Hujus autem constitutionis
legem in Apostoli. a tantum volumus sede servari. In universis Ecclesiis per
Provincias, secundum Animarum consid^rationem, quam proposito Religionis
Convenire, Rectores eorum viderint, more servato. Ibid.
For in the Council it is thus, That we will the Law of this Constitution only
to be observed in the Apostolic See, in all the Churches of the Provinces,
according to the consideration of Souls, the use and custom being observed,
which the Rectors should see to be agreeable to the purport of Religion.

But in the Decretal it is thus, Quod non modo in Apostolica servandum est
Ecclesia verumetiam universis Ecclesiis per Provincias quidem dicitur convenire
12. q. 2. non liceat Papae.
This Canon is not only to be observed in the Apostolic Church, but is said to
be convenient to be observed in all the Churches through the respective
Provinces.

By all which it appears, that it was the Pope's peculiar Constitution, made
before, and approved of by the Synod; and extended only to the Suburbican
Diocese of Rome, and was not universally obliging: which as well as other
Reasons might induce Simons History of Ecclesiastical Revenues.
a late Learned Author to assert, that there was a time, when the Pope entered
not into the cognizance of the Goods of the Churches, which depended not on his
Diocese.

I shall now show you some cases wherein Alienations are allowed, even by the
Canons, so that you may confront these to the Canons produced by you.

In the 16th. Canon of the 8th. Council, in the time of Hadrian 12. q. 2.
Ap^stolicos and paternos Canones.
the second Pope, it is declared, that the Holy Vessels may be Alienated for
the Redemption of Captives, the like St. Gregory Lib. 6. Ep. 15. seu. cap. 199.
declares to Demetrius and Valerianus, Clerks of the Church of Firman
concerning 10 l. given by Fabius the Bishop, of Money belonging to the Church,
for the Redemption of them and their Father Passivus the Bishop, Alienations
for Redemption of Captives.
which they were afraid might be required to be repayed, and St. Gregory
acquits them of it: You may say these Instances are only of Charities;
Therefore I shall now show, that in all cases Alienations, (according to the
12. q. 2. Alienatiores ^^^niu^i.
Canon Law) appear to be valid, where the consent of the Clerks of the Church,
to the Grant of the Bishop is obtained. Otherwise Pope Urban had not Decreed,
that Alienations of all, by Intrusions, or of those Canonically Elected by the
Name of Bishop or Abbot, Alienations are valid, where the Bishop and Chapter or
Abbot and Convent joins.
(who ought to be Consecrated according to the Use of his Church) to be void,
if made without the Common consent of the Clerks of the Church.

By which it is manifest, that there had been no need of that exception, if
such Alienation, with the consent of the said Clergy, had not been valid in Law.

Which is more clear in the third Council 12. q. 2. Abbatibus and Presbyteris.
of Orleans C. 23. where the Canon expresses, that it shall not be lawful, to
Abbots, Presbyters, or other Ministers, to Alienate Ecclesiastical Goods, or
things in Holy Ministry, nor Pawn them, without the Permission and Subscription
of the Bishop, etc. So that it is evident that the Bishop, or Abbot with his
Clerks, or Convents, may by Authority of their Constitutions Alienate both
Church Lands and Sacred Vessels.

It further appears, that upon necessity, either the Bishop or his Clergy may
Alienate the Lands, etc. of the Church: For in the Council of Carthage 12. q 2.
placuit ut Presbyteri. c. 5.
c. ult. I find it Decreed, that the Presbyters shall Sell nothing belonging to
the Church, the Bishop not being privy to it; Alienations upon necessity.
nor the Bishops, not consulting the Council, viz. their Canons, or all the
Presbytery without necessity. So that it seems there may be some necessity,
which may be thought sufficient to Legitimate an Injust or uncanonical
Alienation; and I hope to make it appear, that there could happen no greater
necessity at any time, than that which occasioned Pope Julius the 3d. to grant
the Power to Cardinal Pool, for Assuring the Abby-Lands to the Possessors, how
unjustly soever they had obtained them.

Having thus cleared, Application.
that by the Canons there may be Alienations of Church Revenues,
notwithstanding the positive Canons to the contrary, I shall only add, that the
Pope, ex plenitudine Potestatis, has Power to dispense with Canons, Decrees,
etc.

I shall therefore close this Section with what I find cited by a Learned Bail.
summa. conciliorum Apparatus. q. 58.
Author out of St. Thomas Aquinas.

The Question propounded is, Whether the Pope may change the Statutes of the
Holy Fathers in General Councils, or dispense with them?

In Answer to this Tract. contra impugnatores Religionis 25. in cap. co^tra q.
1. contra statuta patrum condere aliquid aut mutare Authoritas quidem h^jus
sedis non potest.
St. Thomas holds the Affirmative: And whereas that of Zozimus the Pope is
urged; which expressly determins, that the Authority of the Roman See cannot
change Statutes of the Fathers, or Establish any thing contrary to them. He
replies to it, that in those things which the Statutes of the Fathers have
Decreed to be of Divine Right, it is true. But those things which the Holy
Fathers have determined of positive right, those are left under the disposition
of the Pope, that he may change them, or dispense with them according to the
opportunities of times or Countries; and that the words of the Decrees may be
altered, Servata intention statuentium, quae est utilitas Ecclesiae, sicut in
omni jur^ positivo accidi^, etc.
and yet the Intention of the Decrees be observed (which is the profit of the
Church) as it happens in all positive Laws, where subsequent Statutes derogate
from the former. I might clog you with Authorities to prove this, but matter of
Fact will clear it better, to which I pass.

SECT. III. Several Instances of Alienations of Ecclesiastical Revenues from
the Churches, or Religious Houses, they were at their first Dedication
conferred on, in Ancienter times.
The History of Charles Martel.
THE generality of late Historians, who have occasion to speak of Charles
Martel, accuse him as one of the first that committed manifest Sacrilege;
therefore I think my self obliged to refresh your memory with the most material
passages of his Life relating to these matters.

In Paulus Aemylius De Rebus Gesi is Francorum fol. 55. ad 67.
you may find an account of his Noble Descent from Ausbert a Duke, and Blitilda
Daughter of Clothair the second King of France, whose Great Grandson Ansigas
the Duke, who Married Begga, the only Heiress of a Rich Nobleman, who possessed
the greatest part of Austria, and was Father of this Charles Martel, afterward
created Prince of France.

He grew Famous in the conduct of Armies under Dagobert, Chilperick and
Theodorick the second, Kings of France. Under the last of which the Sarazens
(who had been called out of Africa by Julian the Earl of the Vice- Goths, to
revenge the Fact of King Roderick in abusing his Wife) about the Year 730,
under Abderama their King, passed into Aquitain, and every where spoiled the
Religious Houses; and out of hatred to the Christian Religion destroyed the
Churches in Gascoign, Angolism, Sauton, and Poictou, Countries most Rich and
plentiful, and where by the Devotion of the Inhabitants the Churches were
adorned and enriched with much Gold. These Sarazens were 400000 strong, and
Charles Martel encamping beyond the River Loyr, near Turone, Fought them, and
Slew of them 375000, losing but 1500 of his own Men. He Fought another Battle,
with prosperous success against them, under the Conduct of Athinus their King.

He was relied upon for his assistance to the Apostolic See, as appears by
several Binnius Tom. 3 fol. 467. Lachrymae die nocleque ab oculis nostris non
dificiunt. Ep. 7.
Epistles writ to him by Pope Gregory the third, when he was in danger to be
oppressed by Luitprandus and Hilprand Kings of Lombardy, wherein he calls him
Subregulus, and at large recites what Tribulation, Danger, and consternation he
was in; So that Tears flowed from his Eyes, night and Day, and applies himself
to this Charles Martel as to a refuge in time of his great distress.

In another Epistle Vt cognoscant omnes gentes tuam fidem and puritatem atque
amorem quem babes erga principem Apostolorum sanctum Petrum, and nos, ejusque
peculiarem populum, zelando and defendendo; ex hoc enim poteris immortalem and
aeternam vitam acquirere. Id. Ep. 6.
the same Pope tells him, that he might expect a reward, before the Omnipotent
God in the life to come with the Prince of the Apostles, as he disposed himself
for the defense of the Church of God, and the Pope; and speedily engaged in it:
So that all Nations might know his Faith, purity and Love, which he bore to St.
Peter the Prince of the Apostles, and the Pope and the peculiar People by his
Zeal in defense of them; for by this he might obtain Immortal and Eternal life.

In another Ibid. fol. 466. Ep. 5.
Epistle, the same Pope writes to Boniface Bishop of Mentz, that God by the
endeavor of the said Bishop, and of Charles the Prince of the Franks, had been
pleased to gather from the Power of the Pagans, 100000 Souls into the Bosom of
the Church.

Yet for all this the same Boniface, as Monasteriorum multorum eversor and
Ecclesiasticarum pecuniarum in usus proprios commutator. Epist. ad Ethelbaldum
Merciorum Rege^^.
Malmsbury Records it, says, that he was the overthrower of many Monasteries,
and a converter of Ecclesiastical Money to his own use.

And Paulus Aemylius Paulus Aemylius vita Chilperici 3. p. 67. etc.
says, that the chief personages praised Martel as one that transcended the
Glory of all Captains, and Emperors; but on the other side the Holy Men said,
that though the splendour of his life was so great in the Eyes of the Vulgar, yet
he was not so to be esteemed. For that he gave the Holy Right of Tithes to
Military Men, and permitted his Soldiers to Plunder, and sweep away things
profane, and Sacred, more than the Vice-Goths did; and that the Sees of Lions
and Vienna, for several years, were deprived of their Bishops; the one dying by
Military injuries, had no Successor, and the other was compelled to retire into
a Monastery, and that to supply the necessities in the Wars with the Barbarous,
he used the Gold of the Temples, and promised when Peace was restored, he would
repay it manifold. But after he had obtained the richest and gloriousest
Victories, he changed his promise and afflicted Holy Men, being mindful of old
offenses, that he expelled Eucherius Bishop of Orleance, and Robert Bishop of
Rhemes, because he said they took part with Ramenfride his Enemy.

In an Ancient Chronicle Le Rozier Historial de France.
of France it is said, that by the Counsel of the Bishops, the Tithes of the
Churches were given him to pay his Troops.

Dupleix, says he, banished several Bishops from their Sees, and put Laymen
in them; the like is repeated by Nicholas Giles, and enlarged by Per le conseil
des Princes, donna and bailla aucunes des dismes, que tenoyent les ^glise a ses
Gens d' Arms.
Belle forest, who says, that by the Council of the Princes, he gave certain
Tithes which the Churches had, to his Men at Arms. With these concurs du
Tillet, and du Haillan. Dupleix Il recompensa la Nobless de partir des dismes
du Clergis, etc.
says, that he recompensed his Nobility with part of the Tithes of the Clergy,
with a promise of Restitution, but in this he says the ingratitude of the
Clergy [that condemn this] is more to be blamed than the enterprise of Charles;
for was it not good reason, says he, that those, who, besides their cost and
charge had so generously hazarded their Lives for the defense of the Church,
should be rewarded with some small portion of the Revenue thereof?

Sr. Thomas Ridley View of Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws 1. c. 3.. 2.
has a long Discourse on this Subject, charging all the violations done to the
Church, to have risen from his Practice; and that from France the president was
imitated by others, so that the example thereof passed the Alps into Italy, and
mounted above the Pyrenean Hills into Spain, and within a short time Sailed
over into England, in such sort, that even to this day sundry Monuments of it
appear, where any Title of Immunity for payment of Tithes is challenged in any
place, reaching beyond the Lateran Council; and tells out of the Legend Apud
Servinum Tom. 1. fol. 10.
of Eucherius or some Gratian, c. 16. q. 1.
Authors else, what you may find there; and in Paulus Aemylus, That Eucherius
Sepulcrum inane and nullis humani corporis vestigiis reliquiisque apparuisse
dicitur. Intus vastitas, borror diraque species ac velut incendio atrum. ld.
Aemyl. vita Chilperic.
Bishop of Orleance, being warned in a Vision, took Fulrade Bishop of St.
Dennis to Martels Tomb, where he had but lately been Buried, and how they found
only a Serpent in the Grave, otherwise empty, and no Footsteps or marks of an
human Body there, but all within black as if it had been burnt.

I know this Legend is questioned by Baronius; and Mr. Seldom says Eucherius
was Dead before Charles Martel, and will no ways allow Tithes to be then so
settled. But I think it cannot be questioned what a Learned Father Simons
History of the Original and progress of Ecclesiastical Revenues, p. 40.41.
Priest and Antiquary observes, that when Barbarous Kings became Masters of a
part of the Roman Empire, the great want that Princes were engaged in, was the
cause that so great parts of the Revenues of the Church fell into the hands of
Laymen, and that they made contracts of Alienation about them, as about other
possessions, and those contracts past for lawful when they were made in the
usual Form.

I had composed a large Collection of the Infeodations of Church Lands,
Infeodations.
whereby for small Rents and Services, great portions of such Lands were given
in Fee from Bishops, Abbots and Priors, to Knights or other Secular persons to
answer the Services due to the Prince from the Bishops, etc. but you may find
them in Mr. Seldens History of Tithes. Sect. 113.117. and other places.

By custom also Laymen held Tithes, Customs.
and other Religious Lands, paying either no Tithe to Parochial Churches, or
very little, for which you may consult the same Mr. Seldom, pa. 181.186, 187.

There were also Arbitrary Consecrations, Arbitrary Consecrations. Tit. de
locat. and conduct. clericis verbo portione. Modus.
whereby the Patron gave sometimes a third, half, or two thirds to the Church;
reserving the rest to himself and his Heirs, for which you may peruse Linwood.

Also Modus of Tithes was another Infringement of the Canons, for which see Mr.
Seldom, pa. 288.

Exemptions likewise were in use, Exemptions.
granted to certain Religious, which was contrary to the Ancient Canons of
paying Tithes to the Baptismal Church, and was restrained by Pope Hadrian the
4th. to the Cistertians, Templars, and Hospitalers, Compositions.
or by compositions the Church-Revenues were Decreed. For which you may consult
Mr. Seldom p. 408.

I purposely pass these by, though they be so many several instances, that the
Canons did not universally bind against all Alienations, lest I should swell
this Treatise too big.

SECT. IV. Several Instances of particular Alienations of Church Lands more
Modern in England.
I Shall now descend to latter evidence of Alienations of Church Lands,
transferring their Revenues to the endowment of Colleges, or other Charitable
Uses, or increasing the Exchequer of Princes, and suppressions of Orders, even
by the Bulls of Popes long before the Reformation.

Pope Clement the Ex Archivis Scaccarii Ex Autograph. The suppression of the
Knights Templars.
5th. by his Bull dated at Poictou the 10th. of the Kalends of December 3o.
Pontificatus, Anno. 1307. Ordered the seizing of the Knights Templars here, in
one night, according to the example of the French King, and gave the Custody of
their Lands and Goods to King Edward 2d. till further order from the Apostolic
See. In this Bull the King is required, Sic prudenter sic caute sic
secretariorum tuorum consilio studeas ordinare quod omnes and singulos
Templarios Regni tui and eorum bona mobilia and immobilia -- capi facias vno
die -- personas eorum in locis tutis sub fida custodia detin^re.
with the Council of his wise Secretaries, so prudently, so cautiously, and so
secretly by good Men, of whom there may be no suspicion of imbezling their
Goods, in one day, to cause to be seized all and singular the Templars in his
Kingdom, and all their Goods movable and immovable, and to keep their Persons
in safe places, in Faithful Custody, and commit the custody of their Goods,
Movable and Immovable to certain good persons, of whom it is not likely, that
in this or the like matters they will use any deceit, and all this to be done
till it be otherwise ordered by the Pope, etc.

This Council Viennense.
General Council of Vienna, was Celebrated Anno Domini, 1311. Under Pope
Clement the 5th. In the Sentence of the Pope I observe these expressions, Ad
providentem Christi Vicarii, praesidentis in specula Apostolicae dignitatis,
circumspe^ti^nem pertinet, etc.
It belongs to the provident circumspection of Christ's Vicar, presiding in the
Watchtower of Apostolic Dignity, etc. After reciting how the Order of the
Knights Templars had been Instituted and the Crimes of the present Knights, he
says, not without bitterness of Heart and griefs, the Holy Council approving
it; not by way of definitive Sentence, because he could not do that by Law
according to Inquisitions and Process, but by way of Provision or Apostolical
Ordination Irreffragabili and perpetua valitura sancivimus sanctione.
with a Sanction Irreffragable and perpetually to be of force, he has Decreed
the said Order to be prohibited, perpetually suppressing it. Strictly
forbidding any for the future to enter into the said Order, or receive the
Habit, or to repute himself a Templar.

And by Apostolic Authority has appointed Vniversa etiam bona ordinu
praelibati Apostolicae sedis Ordinationi and dispositioni Authoritate
Apostolica duximus referenda.
all the Goods of the foresaid Order to be referred to the Ordination and
disposition of the Apostolic See.

Concerning this matter Chron. His. Fargiensi.
Trithemius the Abbot Writes thus, the Order of Templars which had stood almost
182 Years, was condemned by Pope Clement, and in one day abolished through the
whole World at the Instance of Philip King of France, by whose promotion the
Pope was Elected -- The Templars, says he, were very Rich, whose Possessions
that the King might acquire to himself, he accused them of Heresy, and
proscribed them to be totally extinguished as many thought.

The Templars were thus suppressed, and four Years after, the same Pope
Autographis in Archivis Scaccarii. The Popes Bull to confer the Templars Lands
upon the Hospitalers.
on the 17th. of the Kalends of June, 7 Pontificatus, directs three Bulls, one
to the King, another to the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and a third to the
Nobility, Earls and Barons of England, the purport of which Bulls was, that
having had consultation whether it were better for the Professors of the
Orthodox Faith in Jerusalem, and for the relief of the Holy Land, to give the
Goods of the Templars to the Order of the Hospitalers of St. John of Jerusalem,
or to unite them to an Order to be Created anew, as some affirmed it to be more
profitable; the business was debated in the Council at Vienna, and the Pope
grants them to the Hospitalers, the Holy Council approving it, and so has
thought fit to grant, apply and unite their Goods to the said Hospitalers,
excepting, till further order; those within the Kingdoms of Castile, Arragon,
Portugal, and Majorca, being without the Kingdom of France.

So the Pope entreats and persuades them to deliver to the Master and Brethren,
or Priors, and Praeceptors of the said Hospitalers, and their Proctors, all the
Goods of the said Templars, entirely, and peaceably, Sic igitur in praemissis
vos promptos and paratos exhibeatis quod praeter retributionis aeterni praemium
quod inde merebimini vobis laudis humanae cumulus augeatur.
and that they would in the premises show themselves ready and prompt whereby
besides the praemium of Eternal reward, which they should thereby Merit, an
Accumulation of human praise might be increased to them.

Having thus considered what the Pope did about the Templars, I shall show you
what the Parliament here did.

After reciting, Statutum de terris Templariorum 17 Ed. 2.
that the Military Order of Templars ceased, and was dissolved, etc. Great
Conference was had before the King, in presence of the Prelates, Earls, Barons,
etc. whether the King and Lords of the Fees, or others, which held those Lands
which were the Templars, might retain them by the Law of the Realm, and with
safe Conscience. Whereupon the greater part of the Kings Council, as well the
Justices, as other Lay persons being Assembled together; the said Justices
affirmed precisely, that the King and other Lords of the Fees, might well and
Lawfully, by the Laws of the Realm, retain the foresaid Lands as their
Escheats, in regard of the ceasing and dissolution of the Order aforesaid.

But because the Lands, etc. were given to the Brethren of the said Order, for
the defense of Christians and the Holy Land against Pagans and Saracens, and
other Enemies of Christ and Christians, and the Universal Holy Church, and
Canonized to the Augmentation of the Honor of God and liberal Almsgiving -- It
is agreed, ordained, and established for Law to continue for ever; That neither
the King, nor any other Lords of the Fees aforesaid, nor any other person, has
Title or Right to retain the said Lands, etc. Notwithstanding any Law or Custom
of the Realm of England.

Wherefore our Lord the King, by the mutual assent of the Earls, Barons and
Noblemen aforesaid, of his Regal Authority, in the same Parliament, has
assigned and determined to deliver all the foresaid Lands, etc. To the Order of
the Brethren of the Hospitalers of St. John of Jerusalem.

In which Act we may note, that it was the Opinion of the Justices, that they
were Escheated to the Lords of the Fee, and that they were only Transferred to
the Hospitalers, on account that they might perform the same service as the
Templars had done.

It is probable you will ask me what I bring this relation for, another Order
then in being.

But if you consider the matter aright, Dugdales origines Juridiciales. Tit.
Temple.
Ed. 2. gave the Inner and Middle Temple (the very chief House of their Order in
England) to Thomas Earl of Lancaster who forfeiting it shortly after, it was
granted to Adomar de Valence, Earl of Pembrook, and after to Hugh le Despencer
for life, The Temple given to Lay-Peers.
which Hugh being attainted 1 E. 3. the Right thereof devolved to the Crown,
and then the King restored it to the Hospitalers.

Temple-ne-wsom given to the Lord Darcy.
I might instance in many other places; but I shall only do it in one, viz.
Temple-newsom, in Yorkshire, the account of which among my Collections I find
thus. Esc. 21. E. 3. n. 54.
Inquisition being taken after the Death of John Lord Darcy, called le Pere, it
is thus Recorded, that the Manor of Temple-newsom, some time was in the
Possession of the Templars, and after the deposing of them, the King seized it
into his hands, and made a composition with the Brethren Hospitalers and gave
it to Mary St. Paul, Countess of Pembrook, for Life, the reversion to John
Darcy and his Heirs.

Besides this in the 18 Cart. 18. E. 3. M. 1.
of E. 3. this John Darcy le Pere had free Warren granted him in Temple-newsom
and Temple-Hyrst, Com. Ebor. and Torksay Com. Lanc. and Ekington Com. Derby and
Kirkly Com. Not. all which, unless the two last, certainly belonged to the
Knights Templars: And I have seen sufficient evidence, that Temple-newsom at
least, continued possessed by the Family till it was forfeited by the Attainder
of Thomas Lord Darcy toward the later end of H. 8ths. time:

Surely you must yield, that Alienations and Compositions for Religious Lands,
have been reputed valid in former Ages when the Canons of the Church and the
Popes Authority were no ways questioned by the extruded.

A part of Lincoln's Inn is owned Bucks univer. p. 1072. Part of Lincoln's Inn
and Gray's Inn, formerly Religious Lands.
to have appertained to the Dominicans, and by them Alienated to Henry Lacy
Earl of Lincoln; and Gray's Inn, was part of an Ancient Prebendary of the
Cathedral of St. Paul's.

So that we find the very Houses, which are the Nurseries, and Academies of the
long Robe, and where we may justly expect greatest care would be taken to be
secure in their right, have belonged to Religious Societies, or the Dignitaries
of the greatest Cathedral in England.

To descend nearer to our times, I have seen the Bull of Ex Autographo in
Archivis Scaccarii. Dissolution of several Monasteries to endow the College of
Winsor Castle and Kings College Cambridge.
Pope Clement the 7th. dated the 4th. of the Nones of November, 5 Pontificatus,
Anno 1528. 20 of H. 8. where he gives Cardinal Wolsey a Power to Dissolve, and
Suppress such Monasteries as maintained but six, four or three Monks, to the
value of 8000 Ducats of Gold of yearly Rent, and to transfer all their
Possessions and Movable Goods toward the increase of the Revenues of the Kings
Collegiate Church at Windsor Castle begun by E. 4th his Grandfather by the
Mothers side, and the College at Cambridge built by H. the 6th. Grandfather to
the same King by the Fathers side.

In this Bull are the fullest recitals of the Popes dispensing Power, that I
have yet met with, therefore I think it fit, being no where that I know of
Printed, to give you the words, that you may at once see how far the Popes
Power extends in dispensing with the Canons: The words are,

The Popes dispensing with all Canons Councils, etc. in the suppresing those
Abbeys, etc.
Non obstantibus voluntate nostra predicta, ac aliis Apostolicis, nec non bonae
memoriae Othonis and Ottobonis olim in dicto Regno Apostolicae sedis legatorum,
ac in Provincialibus and Synodalibus Conciliis Editis, Generalibus vel
Specialibus Constitutionibus, and Ordinationibus ac Statutis, and
Consuetudinibus Monasteriorum, and Ordinum quorum Monasteria ipsa fuerint
Juramento, confirmatione Apostolica, vel quavis firmitate alia roborata;
Privilegiis quoque and Indultis ac Literis Apostolicis, etiam in forma Brevis,
Monasteriis and Ordinibus praedictis, sub quibuscumque tenoribus and formis,
etiam per modum Statuti and Ordinationis perpetuae, and cum quibusvis etiam
derogatoriorum derogatoriis fortioribus, and efficacioribus and Insolitis
clausulis, ac Irritantibus, and aliis decretis, etiam motu proprio, and ex
certa nostra scientia, ac de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, etiam per nos
and sedem eandem etiam iteratis vicibus concessis, confirmatis, and innovatis,
etiamsi in illis caveretur express, quod illis, etiam per quascunque liter as
Apostolicas nullatenus derogari possit, nisi in literis per quas illis derogare
videretur, illorum omnium Tenores, de verbo ad verbum insererentur, and
express appareant; Romanum Pontificem illis derogare voluisse, and causa
urgens, and sufficiens exprimeretur, and aliis certis modis and formis
observatis, quibus omnibus illorum Tenores, ac si de verbo ad verbum insertis
and forma in illis tradita observata foret, presentibus pro expressis habentes.
Illis alias in suo robore permansuris, hac vice duntaxat specialiter and
express, ex certa nostra scientia, and potestatis plenitudine derogamus, ac
etiam quibuscumque defunctorum Testamentis, ultima voluntate, Ordinatione, and
quod dispositionibus quacunque Auctoritate confirmatis corroboratis and
consolidatis, ac quibuscumque poenis and censuris Ecclesiasticis Communitis,
super quorum omnium Testamentorum ultimam voluntatem, Ordinationem and
dispositionem, ac omnia and singula, ac illorum tenores etiam presentibus pro
expressis, and recitatis and insertis habentes. Immutationes alterationes and
in vestrorum collegiorum praedictorum conversionem and translationem
specialiter and express, in eventum suppressionis, and applicationis per
eandem circumspectionem tuam faciendo, licentiam and potestatem praedictam
dispensamus, ac specialiter, quacunque allegatione de non expresso valor
fructuum bonorum Monasteriorum hujusmodi literis nostris; praetextu alicujus
constitutionis inde editae, curiaeve nostrae stili, aut alias requisitio and
inserendo contrariis quibuscunque.

The Constitutions of Otho and Othobon, that are here dispensed with, I suppose
are those, viz. Constitutiones Othonis Tit. 12.14.
of Otho, that no Goodsshall be taken out of the Houses, Manors, or Granges,
belonging to Bishops, or the Religious without their consents, and that of
Othobon Constit. Othobonis Tit. 11.13, 21, 22.
forbidding Bishops to confirm, or assign, by appropriation, any Church in his
Diocese, to another Bishops Monastery, or Priory, unless he to whom the Bishop
would appropriate it, were so poor, or other lawful cause were, that the
Appropriation might not appear so much contrary to Laws, as agreeable to Piety.

In the Archives Ex iisdem Archivis. Instructions how to proceed legally to
suppress Monasteries.
of the Exchequer there are the Instructions how to proceed to obtain this
suppression of these Monasteries; which were on the Kings part to supplicate
the Pope for a Commission to be granted to Cardinal Wolsey and Cardinal
Campegius Legates de Latere, then the Pope to grant by his Bull to the Legate or
Legates a Faculty, then a Commission of Enquiry what Monasteries were fit to be
suppressed, and then the Legat's executing his Power, and the Pope's
Confirmation.

In the same Ibidem. Suppressing of Religious Houses for building and endowing
Cardinal Wolseys College at Oxford and Ipswich, whereof the yearly Rent was,
19582.
Archives of the Exchequer, are to be found, the Bull of Pope Clement the 7th.
the day before the Kalends of June, 5 Pontificatus, to Cardinal Wolsey, for the
suppressing of several Religious Houses for the building, and endowing of the
Cardinal College of Oxford, now called Christ-Church, as likewise Ibidem.
that of the Nones of February, 6 Pontificatus, of the same Pope, and many
other Bulls, not only for that College, but for his Cardinal College at
Ipswich, where he was born; but all our Historians relating the matter so
particularly, I shall refer you to them.

Only give me leave to note one thing out of the Instructions given by the same
Cardinal to his Chaplains and Counselors, as they are Styled, Sir Robert
Carter Steward of his House, Instructions for demolishing a Church for building
the Cardinal College at Oxford.
Mr. Lawrence Stubbs his Almoner, and Sir Nicholas Towrs; about the building of
his Cardinal College of Oxford, that for enlarging the College, the Parish
Church of St. Nicholas was necessarily to be pulled down, and taken away,
wherefore, by his Legantine Power, he Authorizeth them to cause it to be done,
and to Translate and annex the Parishioners of the same Church of St. Nicholas,
to the Parish of St. Aldate Now St. Aldate near the great Gate of Christ-Church.
being next adjoining, and to compound for a part of the Churchyard of St.
Fridiswold, belonging to the Monastery of that Name.

This leads me to another remark I find in the Survey of ^bidem. At Bridlington
a Church converted into a Bake-house and Brew House.
Bridlington Abbey in Yorkshire, upon it is dissolution where it is worded thus.
Item, on the South Side of the said Monastery, is a Bake-house and Brew House,
which by report of old Men was sometimes a Nunnery; by sight, the Bake house
was the Body of the Church, the Roof whereof is covered with Slate, and the
Isle with Lead, the Brew House is where the Quire seemed to be, and is covered
with Lead.

To this let me add what I have from the relation of a Reverend person, that
has lived long upon the place; St. Edmunds Church at Rome pulled down for the
building a private house.
that about 20 years since, a Church in Rome, belonging to the English College
there, and Dedicated to St. Edmund the Martyr, was pulled down, and made a
dwelling House, and the obligation of Divine Service, was transferred to St.
Thomas Church.

By all which it appears, that not only Religious Lands may be Alienated, but
the very Churches themselves, Consecrated in a special manner to the service of
God, (even in the Church Communion, and City of Rome,) may be demolished and
converted to profane uses.

SECT. V. Instances of Alienations of Church Lands in Foraign Countries in the
Roman Catholic Communion.
IF we take a toure into other Countries, we shall find the like Alienations of
Church Lands, suppressions of Monasteries, or their being converted into more
secular uses than they were by the first Institution designed.

In the Year, 1563. Pietro Soavo Polano Hist. of the Council of Trent, fol. 666.
Pius the 4th. being Pope, and Charles the 9th. King of France. The Queen
Regent of France sent Letters to Rome, and Trent, in the end of May, that

consultation had been had how to pay the Debts of the Crown, that a Decree had
passed for Alienating to the value of 100000 Crowns of Ecclesiastical
Immovable Goods, Alienation of Church livings in France 1563.
and it was confirmed by the Kings Edict and Sentence of the Parliament. The
French Ambassador was Ordered to move his Holiness to give his consent,
alleging the exhausture of the Exchequer by the late War, that he designed to
put his affairs in Order, that he might begin, as his purpose ever was since
the making of the peace, to reunite all in the Kingdom to the Catholic
Religion; and that he might be abler to force whosoever should oppose him, he
meant to impose a Subsidy, and cause the Clergy to contribute their parts to it
also; whereto the Church was so much more bound than others, by how much their
interests were more in question. That all being considered, nothing was found
to be more easy than to supply the necessity with the Alienation of some few
Ecclesiastical Revenues, whereto he desired the consent of his Holiness.

The Pope answered, that the demand was painted forth with a fair pretense of
defending the Church, but it was the only way to ruin it; for the avoiding
whereof his securest way was not to consent to it; Idem. p. 667.
and he was of opinion, that the French would not proceed to the execution of
it without him, and he thought without his consent none would adventure Money
upon them, because a time might come, that the Ecclesiastics would resume their
Rents, and not restore the price; and he proposed the business to the
Consistory, and resolved not to consent, but by diverse excuses to show, it was
impossible to obtain that demand at his hands.

Idem. 739.
The French having considered the Popes Answer, resolved to Treat no more with
the Pope for his favor in the Alienation, but to execute the Kings Edict
approved in Parliament without any consent of his Holiness. This being suddenly
performed, few Buyers could be found, which was a hindrance to the King, and no
favor to the Clergy; for the Sale was made at low Rates, so that there was but
Two Millions, and a half of Franks raised, small in regard of the things
Alienated, being but Twelve for a Hundred, whereas it had been a small price,
if they had given a Hundred for Four. Amongst the things sold, the Jurisdiction
which the Archbishop of Lions held until that time over the City, was sold at
the outcry for 30000 Franks, but the Bishop complained so much, that in
supplement of the price, he had given unto him 400 Crowns yearly.

I know not whether ever any Pope confirmed this; however it is apparent, that
if the Pope by Bull had confirmed it, none would have scrupled the Legality of
the Title of a Purchaser. But this is Ex relatione Reverendi Superioris Ordinis
St. Benedict.
most certain, that those Alienations continue to this day, only the Religious
have liberty to redeem them, paying the Money paid for them, and the charges
for any improvement, as I have it from one who lately redeemed such an
Alienation from the Purchaser.

Pope Alexander the 7th. by his Bullar^um Magnum impressum Lugdini. v^l. ult.
fol. 220.
Bull dated 28 April, 1656. 2o. Pontisicatus, suppressed the Order of the
Fratrum Cruciferorum, or Cross-bearing Brethren.

The Preamble runs thus, We thinking it Our Duty with all Study and Industry,
continually to cultivate the Vinyard of the Lord, The suppression of 4 Orders
by the Pope.
which is his Church by the Divine Will committed to Our care, that the Vines
of Religious Orders providently planted in it, which being destitute of the
Primigenious vigor of Regular observance have degenerated into barren wild
Vines, according to the Example of the good Husbandman, or Father of the
Family, We must pluck out of the Vinyard as by mature and forethought
deliberation, We see it, in the same Lord, to be healthfully expedient.

Therefore when long since it is found, that of the Order called the Fratres
Cruciferi, there remains but four Monasteries, which had in the whole Order
Twenty five, Twenty one of them being suppressed by Pope Innocent the 10th. our
Predecessor of happy memory, whose Brethren are reduced now to a few, and have
totally deviated from the Primitive Institution, and is in the Church of God
wholly unprofitable, and there is no hope that it shall be reduced to bring
forth good fruit.

Therefore of our proper motion and certain knowledge and mature deliberation
by the fullness of Apostolic Power, by the Tenor of these presents we for ever
extinguish, suppress, and abolish the said Order, with all it is Dignities,
Offices, and Ministries, and all it is Conventualship, Title, Essence and
Denomination.

And we do res^rve all and whole the Goods, Movable and Immovable, as well
Sacred as Profane, their Convents, Houses, Vinyards, Farms, Canons,
Responsions, Fruits, Entries and Rights whatsoever, wherever they be, according
to the disposition of us, and the Apostolic See, to the Uses and Pious works,
to be converted by those, to whom they are committed by us and the said See.

Then follows a Non obstante against all things, that might Invalidate this and
all the expressions that may confirm it, which are too tedious to be here
Inserted.

Then follows a Bull of the same Pope, dated the same day, for suppressing the
Congregations of the Canons Bull^rio pr^^dicto fol. 221. 222.
Regulars of the Holy Spirit at Venice, Styled Congregatio Canonicorum
Regularium Sancti Spiritus Venetiarum.

Eodem Bullario fol. 467.
There is also another Bull, by Clement the 9th. for the suppression and
extinction of the Congregations of the Canons of St. Gregory in Alga at Venice,
and the Brethren Jesuits of Saint Jerome in Fesulis, Styled Congregationem
Canonicorum St. Gregorii in Alga Venetiarum ac fratrum Jesuitarum St. Hieronymi
in Fesulis.

How the Revenus of the two first were disposed of I know not, but the last
(and I believe so of the former) were given to the State of Venice, for
defraying the charge of the defense of Candy; and the Senate sold them, and the
Buyers are in no danger of Resumption.

In the like manner Cardinal Vrsini, Protector of Poland, has of late
Interceded with the Pope, for dissolving of several Religious Houses in that
Kingdom, to supply the Treasury in the Important War that Kingdom sustains
against the Turks, and I doubt not but it is, or will be effected.

The Abbey of Burgh de Di^u Alienated.
To return to France, the Famous Abbey called Burgh de Dieu, (which with the
appurtenances is valued at 20000 l. yearly Rent) is Possessed by the Prince of
Conde, and it is little more than two years since, that two thirds of the Rich
Abbey of St. Denis in France has been given for ever by the Pope, Two thirds of
the Abbey of St. Denis Alienated.
for the Education of Young Gentlewomen, the King having solicited the
Alienation, and caused it to be confirmed by the Archbishop and Parliament of
Paris.

At Liege in Lord Castl^maine Peply, p. 219.
Germany the Prince enjoys the Cloister, Garden and Appendices belonging to the
Nuns there, by the Popes Bull, and all Catholic Divines and Lawyers are
satisfied.

In Germany, as well as in other places, Alienations in Germany.
it has been long Practiced, that such a portion of Religious Lands as have
been employed for the Table of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, or Priors,
have been Converted to Secular Pensions. In General we may observe, that as the
Statute of Mortmain here, was made to restrain Peoples too Prodigal giving to
the Church; so where some Church-mens Revenues are thought too great, and some
Merit was thought fit to be rewarded, Commendams and Pensions have been thought
to be dispensed with.

By these, and multitudes of other instances I might produce (if the cause
r^quired) you may easily Judge, that the Canons of Councils, the Decretals of
Popes, and other Constitutions Ecclesiastical, prohibiting Alienation of Church
Lands, have been Infringed sometimes by Secular Princes without, and sometimes
with the Popes Dispensation in all Ages.

SECT. VI. Concerning the Alienations of Church Lands in Germany, and the
establishment of a Tolleration of Religion there, by the Treaties of Munster
and Osnaburgh.
Objection, that the disseizing of the Religious in England was very different
from that in other places.
I Believe you had considered the force of these particulars (of which you
could not be ignorant) therefore you tell me how different our case is from any
other Alienation of Church Lands, since in all the foregoing Examples, the
Sacred Patrimony was either commuted to some other Charitable use, or employed
for the support of Armies, for defense of the Prince, or his Dominions, or of
Christians against Pagans or Turks.

But here was a total suppression and Abolition of Religious Orders, under
pretext that they had degenerated into Sloth, Vice, and Superstition, and that
their Lands being given to the Crown, would so Augment the Kings Revenue, as
the Subjects, for the future, would be eased of Subsidies, and other Taxes; the
King might erect new Bishoprics, and employ some of their Lands to better
Religious Uses; which were the popular Arguments to obtain the Assent of the
two Houses of Parliament to their Dissolution.

Yet for want of appointing how particularly these Lands should be applied to
such uses, and the absolute Investing them in the Crown, without Limitation of
Uses, they were squandred away by piecemeal, and the Subjects very little
eased of any public burden.

You further add, that when you consider these things, and the Artifices used
to obtain surrenders from the Convents of these Lands, and then make them pass
for their voluntary Acts, and as such obtain their confirmation by Acts of
Parliament, so that in no Kingdom or State, any such unpresidented Innovation
upon the Rights of the Church, or such a sweeping devastation of these Lands,
so legally settled upon the Religious was ever known: You cannot conceive, but
that if the Roman Catholic Religion can ever be Introduced here, those Lands
will be claimed and in Justice ought to be restored; Since no defense can be
made for so violent a possession of them.

In the proper place, when I come to consider the Act it self, I hope to give
you satisfaction, that though I grant all this, yet no Resumption can possibly be
obtained.

How the Religious Lands in Germany were settled by the Treaty of Munster.
But before I speak to this, I shall pass with you into the Empire, and own how
the Churches there have lost their Lands, and that the condition of them in
Germany is nearest akin to ours; and that there the Entrance upon the Church
Revenues was by Violence, during a Civil War, by the Princes of the Augustan
Confession, seized upon as out of the Hands of their Enemies; and that during
the Treaties of Tractat. Pacis, etc. p. 140. The Nuncio of the Pope protests
against it.
Munster and Osnaburgh the Restitution of these Lands being debated, Fabius the
Popes Nuncio (afterward Pope, by the Name of Alexander the 7th.) made his
protestation against it, both by the Testatum facio me tum jussu Pontificis, ac
muneris mihi demandati Intuitu, tum propriae Deo dante voluntatis propensione,
etc.
Command of the Pope, by Virtue of his Character then, and the propensity of
his own Will, and entr'd his Protestation against it, Dated at Munster, October
26. 1648.

Also Pope Innocent the 10th. Published his Ibid. p. 148. The Pope condemns it
by Bulls.
Bull the 26th. of November following, in 5o. Pontificatus, against both the
Treaty of He Presaceth the Bull thus. Zelo Domus Dei animum nostrum assiduo
commovente, in eam praecipue curam sedulo incumbimus ut Orthodoxae fidei
Integritas, ac Ecclesiae Catholica Dignitas and Authoritas ubique sarta and
tecta conservetur.
Osnaburgh concluded the 6th. of August, 1648. and that of Munster the 24th. of
October the same year, declaring both against the Possession of Ecclesiastical
Goods by the Heretics, to them and their Successors, and the permission of the
Heretics, as he Styles them, of the Augustan Confession, to have free liberty
of Exercising their Heresy in several places, and the Assignment of places to
to build Churches, and their enjoying of Public Employments, Offices, and
Participation of Arch-bishopricks Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical
Benefices, Provost-ships, Baly-wicks, Commendams, Canon-ships, other Benefices,
etc. Which at large may be Read in the Tracts Published at Leyden, 1651.

In Answer to these, I shall not undertake to justify the matter of Fact,
Answer not vindicating the spoil, especially when the Tithes were not restored
to Parish Priests.
nor vindicate the divesting of the numerous Parish Priests of the Tithes
belonging to them, and by their former appropriation to the several Religious
Houses, upon their Dissolution given to the Crown; which had then an
opportunity of annexing them to their respective Parishes, which though they had
been supplied, while they were in the Hands of the Religious, by some of their
Body, by the subtraction of the maintenance, were to be the worst of all other
supplied by the poor Vicars, yet were not at all considered.

But I shall in the following Sections endeavor to make it apparent, that
Religious Lands are now possessed without any fear of Resumption, where no
Confirmation of the Pope was ever obtained, as in Germany.

Therefore I shall here pass by the validity of Law (either Canon, Civil or
Municipal) because when I come to the proper place, I hope to make it appear,
that there was as much done by the Popes (both Julius 3d. and Paulus the 4th.)
as was requisite to make the Title of every one, sufficiently secured, even by
Canon Law.

Therefore I shall spend this Section in clearing two things: First in showing
the amicable composure, that the Treatise of Munster, and Osnaburgh produced,
betwixt the Roman Catholics, Lutherans and Calvinists; and thereby show the
grounds of those accords betwixt the Princes and Subjects of each persuasion in
Germany, and so secondly Illustrate something more that account, the Author of
the Book you sent me, has laid down, and in that vindicate the Author, and
show that since the German Princes and Subjects enjoy the Religious Lands,
without any scruple in Law or Conscience; we have much more reason to think our
selves secure.

Concerning the settlements in Germany by the Treaty of Munster.
As to the settlements in Germany, it was a great Work, and the
Plenipotentiaries were persons of great knowledge in the Laws, and assisted by
the Learnedest of that Age, to compose a matter of so great moment; so that we
need not doubt, but that all possible care was taken to make it as binding as
Law and Authority could contrive it. In which Instrumentum pacis
Treaties Arch-bishopricks, Bishoprics, Abbeys, etc. formerly in the hands of
Roman Catholics, were settled upon Lutheran and Calvinist Princes and Lords, so
I shall note some of the principal matters settled by the Instrument of Peace
concluded at Osnaburgh.

Artic. 5.. 1.
First the Transactions at Passaw, Anno 1552. And that called Pax Religionis,
Anno 1555. And that Anno 1556. (which were in Queen Marys time) and those in
the several Dyets in the Empire, are Confirmed, and what in any Controverted
Articles in the present Transaction, by consent were established in Judgments,
and other ways, shall be observed, Non attenia cujusvis, seu Ecclesiastici, seu
Politici Secularis intra vel extra imperium contradictione, vel Protestatione.
not taking cognizance of the contradiction, or protestation of any
Ecclesiastic, or Politic person, within or without the Empire, all which by the
force of this agreement are declared void and null.

Secondly,. 2.
That Restitution shall be made in the matters Ecclesiastical from the first of
January 1624. So that the Cities named shall retain the Goods, Rights, and
Exercise of their Religion, as they enjoyed them that Day and Year.

In Pa. 26. Equality of Magistrates or Alternative Election of them.
particular the City of Augusta Vindiliciorum, Ausburgh, shall have seven
Senators of the Secret Council, whereof the two Presidents, called
Staup-fleger; one shall be a Catholic, the other of the Augustan Confession,
and of the other five, three shall be Catholics, and two of the Augustan
Confession; and the rest of the Senators called the lesser, the Syndicks,
Assessors, and City-Judges, and other Officers shall be equal in number of both
Religions, and the three Mint-Masters, the first Year shall be two Catholics
and one of the Augustan Confession, and the next Year two Augustans and one
Catholic; and so of the Masters of the Ordinance being three; and all other
Officers of the like Number, and where there is but one Officer for one or more
Years, the Catholic and Augustans shall be Alternatively.

That neither Party shall abuse the Power of those adhereing to their Religion,
Pa. 27. Neither party to depress other.
to the depressing of the contrary, nor directly or indirectly shall increase
the number of the Presidents, Neutra vere pars suae Religioni ad^arentium
potentia ad deprimendam alteram abutatur, etc.
Senators, etc. But if any do, it shall be void.

P. 28.
In the Cities of Dunkelspiile, Biberac, and Ravensburg, there being two
Consuls, one shall be a Catholic, and the other of the Augustan Confession; and
so in all other Officers where the number is equal, and where there is but one
Officer, it shall be exercised Alternatively.

P. 29. Ecclesiastical Goods to be possessed as in Anno 1624. pa. 30.
In the 3d. Section it is agreed. As to Ecclesiastic Goods, whether they be
Arch-bishopricks, Bishoprics, Prelatures, Abbacies, Balywicks, Provost-ships,
Commendams, or free Secular Foundations, etc. Whoever possessed them, whether
Catholics or Augustans, the first of January 1624. they shall possess them
quietly, and undisturbedly Vsque dum de Religionis dissidiis per Dei Gratiam
Conventum fuerit.
till by Gods Grace it shall be agreed about differences of Religion, and it
shall be lawful to neither Party to molest other, either in Judgment, or
otherwise, much less to cause disturbance or Impediment; Quod si de Religionis
dissidiis amicabiliter convenire non possit, nihil ominus hac conventio
perpetua sit and pax semper duratura.
and if it cannot be amicably agreed concerning differences in Religion,
nevertheless this Convention shall be perpetual, and the Peace to endure for
ever.

If a Catholic Archbishop, Bishop, or Prelate, or of the Augustan Confession,
or other Ecclesiastics, change their Religion, they (w) shall lose their Right,
retaining their Honor and Fame, and shall lose the profits; and the Chapter, or
to whom the Right appertains, shall choose another person of that Religion, to
which by this Treaty the Benefice appertains, and leave to the Archbishop,
Bishop, or Prelate, etc. departing, the profits received and consumed.

If a Catholic or Augustan State, have since the first of ^xcidan^ ilit suo
sure, honor tamen Famaque illibans. p. 34.
January, 1624. judicially or extrajudicially been dispossessed by Virtue of
this Treaty, they shall be restored, etc.

In the 7th. Section, it is provided that the number of Chapters or Canons,
which were of either Religion, the first of January, 1624. shall be continued;
so that where any, of either number die, one of the same Religion shall be
chosen; and if of either there be now a greater number, To have the Chapters
equal as to the Canons. p. 35.
they shall continue for life, and after their Death one of the other Religion
be chosen, till the number be adjusted as in, 1624.

Artic. 5o.. 9.
Whatever Monasteries, Colleges, Baly-wicks, Commendams, Churches, Foundations,
Schools. Hospitals or other Ecclesiastical Goods, with their Rents, Rights, (by
whatever name they are called) the Electors, Princes, States, etc. The
settlement of the Possessions to be conformable to the Treaty p. 36.
Of the Augustan Confession were possessed of the first of January 1624. they
shall possess them now, whether they retain them, or have restored them, Donec
controversiae Religionis amicabili partium compositione universali definiuntur.
Nothing to be valid that contradicts this Treaty: All claims in Law to cease.
till the Controversy of Religion by the Amicable Composition of all Parties
be determined, not attending the exceptions, whether before or after the Treaty
of Passaw, or the Religious Peace, or any Interruption by Hostilities, or
foregoing or after Treaties general or special, Decrees, Mandates, Rescripts,
Suits, or causes of Suits, Reversals, Petitions, or any pretext or reason
whatsoever, the only Foundation of this Treaty of Restitution and Observance,
being from the first of January 1624. So that those of the Augustan Confession
be restored into their former state, and be not by any means disturbed of their
Possession, but be free from any Persecution of Law or Deed for ever, while the
Controversies of Religion be composed.

The Pa. 37. Provision for Catholics.
like is agreed upon for the Catholics in relation to their Monasteries, so
that they be not changed into other Orders than such as they had from the
first, unless the Order be extinct, and then the Catholic Magistrates may choose
Religious out of any other Order used in Germany before the difference in
Religion, and in whatever Foundations, Collegiat Churches, Monasteries,
Hospitals, half Catholics, and half of the Augustan Confession promiscuously
lived, that they should live in the same number as they were the first of
January, 1624. and the public exercise of Religion shall remain the same as at
that time, and those that used the first Prayers at that time, should so
continue them.

In the 11th. Pa. 41. None to disturb other in the exercise of their Religion.
Section it is provided in all places, that neither Neutrique partium alterum
de Religionis suae Excercitio Ecclesiae ritubus and ceremoniis deturbare fas
sit.
Party disturb other in the Exercise of their Religion, but that the
Inhabitants live Peaceably and Friendly one with another, and have the free use
of their Religion and Goods.

In the 12th. Section, that the Inhabitants of a Territory where the Lord of it
is of another Religion, shall have liberty to remove, so Nemo alienos subditos
ad suam Religionem pertrahere eave i^ causa in defensionem and protectionem
suscipere; p. 42.
that none endeavor to draw other subjects to his Religion, or for that cause
to receive them into defense and protection.

Pa. 44.
Also the Subjects of either Religion which in Anno 1624. Where a different
Religion was not used 1624. Then Liberty of Conscience to be granted to the
private exercise of it.
had neither public nor private exercise of their Religion in any time of the
Year appointed, and those who after the Year published in Futuro tempore,
diversam a Territorii Domino Religionem profitebuntur and amplectentur,
patienter Tolerentur, and conscientia libera domi devotioni suae sinc
inquisitione aut Turbatione privatim vacare, page 45. No Test here.
aftertimes, possessed and embraced a Religion different from the Lords of the
Territory, shall be patiently Tolerated, and with a free Conscience without
disturbance, or Inquisition, shall exercise their Religion in their own Houses
privately, and in the Neighborhood, i.e. where their way of Worship is
exercised, where and as often as they please, be present at the public
exercise of their Religion, and shall send their Children to some Schools of
their Religion, or have private Masters to instruct them; so that they in other
Incaeteris officium su^^a, cum debito obsequio and subjectione adimpleant.
things perform their Offices to their Lords, in due obsequiousness and
subjection, and give no occasion to disturbances, and that no subject of either
Religion for the cause of Religion Nullibi ob Religionem despicatui habeantur,
nec a mercatorum, opisicum, aut Tribuum communione haereditatibus, Legatis,
etc. multo minus publicis coemiteriis honoreve S^pulturae arceantur. p. 45.
be despised, or be secluded from their Manufactures, Merchandise, or the
Community of their Companies, their Inheritances, Legacies, Hospitals, places
for Lazar's, Alms or other Rights or Commerce, much less from burying in
Churchyards, or the Honor of Sepulture.

Freedom to those that have not freedom of public exercise of their Religion to
remove, and yet look after their effects.
As to the Subject that neither had public or private exercise of his Religion
the Year 1624. or that after the published Year changed his Religion, and of
his own accord left the Country, or by the Lord of the Territory was Banished,
It Liberum ei sit aut retentis bonis aut alienatis discedere, retenta per
ministros administrare, and quoties ratio id p^stulat, ad res suas
inspiciendas. vel persequendas lites, aut bebita exigen^a, libere and sine
literis commeatus adi^e, pa. 52.
shall be free for him, either retaining his Goods, or selling them, to depart,
and to manage those he retains by his Servants, and so often as there is
occasion to return freely, without any Pass, to look after them, or pursue his
Lawsuits.

In the 17th. Section: All public impugning of the Treaties forbidden.
It is agreed, that the Magistrates of either Religion Severe and rigorose
prohibent ne quisquam public privatimve concionando, docendo, disputando,
scribendo, consulendo hanc Transactionem Imp^gnet, dubiam faciat, aut
assertiones contrari^s inde deducere conetur.
Severely and Rigorously prohibit all public Preaching, Teaching, Disputing,
Writing or Consulting to Impugn the Treaty of Passaw or the Religious Peace,
and priv^tly shall neither Impugn nor call into dispute the Treaty, or deduce
assertions to the contrary, and what ever has been Printed, Divulged or
Published to the contrary, shall be void; and what doubts soever shall arise in
the Dyets, or other Imperial Conventions, shall be amicably transacted by the
Nobles of either Religion.

In the 18th. Section: Pa. 53. In the Conventions the Deputies of the Princes
of either Religion to be equal.
In the Conventions of the Deputies Ordinary of the Empire, the Nobility of
either Religion shall be equal and in extraordinary Commissions concerning the
Affairs of the Empire; if the matter be betwixt persons of the Augustan
Confession, they only addicted to that Religion shall be deputed, and so of the
Catholics; and if it be betwixt Catholics and Augustans, then the Commissioners
to be equal.

In the 19th. Section: It is ordered that in causes of Religion, and in all
other things, where the State was divided in the points of Religion, all
differences and suits should be ended by Amicable Composition, Non attenta
votorum pluralitate.
and not by plurality of Vote.

I might Transcribe the whole Treaty with some Advantage to the design of
composing Men's minds not to apprehend the danger of Resumption, and to show how
the Germans have accommodated Matters, and live Amicably in the several
professions of their Religion, with great advantage as to Peace and Concord,
without Tests and Persecution for Religion. But I dare not lengthen this Letter
too much, and so must refer you to the Treaty it self.

Concerning the Nuncios Protestation, and the Popes Bull against the Treaty.
As to the Objection of the Nuncio's protesting, and Pope Innocent the 10th's.
Bull against it; you may easily conceive, that it stood not with the Dignity,
Honor, or Ecclesiastical Interest of his Holiness to give his open Assent to
such an agreement as allowed not only such a public exercise of a contrary
Religion, but spoiled the Church of such great and Opulent Arch-bishopricks, as
Magdeburg (called the Metropolis of Germany) or that of Bremen, Erected into a
Dukedom, or of the Rich Bishoprics of Osnaburg, Minden, Halberstadt, and
Verdon, together with most of the Great Monasteries and Church Lands of the
North part of Germany, which were swallowed up by the Reformed Princes.

Tacit connivance of the Pope.
Yet that there has been a Tacit Connivance or Confirmation of this, appears in
that the Pope Artic. n. 122.
disturbs not the same; and in Anno 1657. Ten years after the said Treaty, the
French King in the Treaty betwixt him and Spain, Styles himself a Confederate
for the Maintenance of the Treaty of Munster, yet neither the Pope (who was
Alexander the 7th. Nuncio at the Treaty of Munster) or his Plenipotentiary
dissallowed the Title.

The present Duke of Bavaria Castlemain pa. 248. What Catholic Princes in
Germany enjoy Religious Lands.
as well as his Father Maximilian, not only enjoys the Revenues of several
Abbeys, but have endowed new Colleges with some of the same Lands, and charged
others with great Pensions, and all this with the Popes positive consent.

The Duke of Newburg also, that now is Palatin has obtained a dispensation for
what he and his Father possessed since Luthers time which belonged to the
Church, and the Landgrave of Hess has obtained the like

However since upon the account of these Treaties, That the Reformed Princes
enjoy the Religious Lands notwithstanding the Popes Bull prohibiting it.
Therefore greater security here where confirmed by two Popes.
betwixt the Empire, King of France and Sweden, with the Concurrence of the
Catholic Princes of Germany, as well Ecclesiastical, as Secular, these so great
Portions of Church Lands are enjoyed to this Day peaceably by the Reformed
Princes and States, notwithstanding the foresaid Protestation and Bull of the
Pope so directly dissallowing thereof. It is to me a very Convincing Argument,
that we in England have no reason to fear any Resumption of such Lands when
they are so well Confirmed by Act of Parliament, and have obtained the
Confirmation of two Popes.

Neither is it so new a matter, as some may imagine, that an Act of Parliament
in England has been here Judged valid, though it Diametrically thwarted a Canon
of the Church, which is evident in the Statute Stat. Merton. c. 9.
of 20 H. 3. the words are.

To the Kings Writ of Bastardy, whether one born before Matrimony may Inherit
in like manner as he that is born after Matrimony; all the Bishops answer, that
they would not, nor could not answer to it; because it was directly against the
common Order of the Church, See Fortescue de Legibus c. ^9. Seldom Comment and
Waterhouse Comment fol. 466. and 483.
and all Bishops Instanted the Lords, that they would consent that all such as
were born after Matrimony should be Legitimate as well as they that be born
within Matrimony, as to the Succession of Inheritance, for so much as the
Church accepts such for Legitimate. And all the Earls and Barons with one
voice answered, That they would not change the Laws of the Realm which hitherto
have been used and approved.

This is esteemed as good a Statute Law as any in the Printed Books or upon
Record; and yet it is most evident, that the Church judges otherwise, as is
apparent in the Decret. Greg. Tit. 17. c. 1.
Decree of Pope Alexander the 3d. Circa Annum 1159. 5o. H. 2. to which I refer
you.

SECT. VII. Whether Cardinal Pools Confirmation of Church Lands to the
Possessors was delusory or not.
IN the next part of your Letter you take up another of Dr. Hist. Reformation
lib. 2. p. 298.
Burnets Arguments, That Cardinal Pool's Confirmation was an Artifice, and the
Point was carried by those who did not understand the true danger their Estates
were in: But considered the present Advantages they were to have from the
consenting to the Act.

The Reason he gives for this Assertion is, because the Cardinal gave a charge
to all to be afraid of the Judgment of God that fell on Balthazar for
converting the Holy Vessels, which had been taken by his Father, and not by
himself, to profane uses; which, says the Doctor, was to pardon the thing, and
yet call it Sacrilege; and that it was studiously designed to possess the
People with an opinion of the sin of retaining Church Lands, so that the
Confirmation might be looked upon as an Indemnity and Permission to keep them,
rather than a Declaration that the Possessors had a Lawful Title.

This you enforce from the Authority of Letter to Dr. Burnet,
one who assures us he had met with a Register of Cardinal Pool's Letters, and
among them the two Breves, and the Letters that passed betwixt the Cardinal and
the Bishop of Arras, who was afterward Cardinal Granvil, and others that
passed betwixt the said Cardinal, and the Cardinal de Monte, and Cardinal
Morone and Soto the Emperors Confessor, and some from Cardinal Pool to the
Pope, and to King Philip.

This Gentleman having said this (to gain himself credit with his Readers)
proceeds to prove, that it was never intended to confirm the Alienation that
was made of the Abby-Lands, and you having made an Abbreviation of what he
there lays down to make a plausible proof, I shall Insert them justly.

But because these require distinct Answers, that I may both show the
Infidelity of the Author of this Letter, and the designed misapplication of the
whole, you must give me leave to show, first in General, how the whole business
was Transacted, and the Reasons of the method; and secondly discover the
disingenuousness of the Author; and lastly exhibit the Summary of the Breves,
and the words of the material parts of them.

The Author of the Letter (c) says, Page 6.
That Cardinal Pool left Rome in November 1553. and was dispatched with general
Powers as Legate, and afterward, viz. 8. March 1554. the first of the Breves
was sent him, which probably was an enlargement of the Powers given him at his
first dispatch, and those, he says, very probably carried more Grace and Favor
than was intended or allowed of at first.

To this I answer, he might have known that Cardinal Pool was returned from
Rome long before November 1553. for he had taken up his Habitation at 1o. Post
initum Julii 3i. Pontificatum Anno etc. Polus, bona cum Pontificis Venia Roma
excedere and in quietum aliquem locum se recipere cupiens, statuit Maguzanum
secedere in coenobium quoddam Monachorum D. Benedicti Ordinis, quorum ipse Rome
Patronus, atque ut illi appellant, Protector erat, remotum salubremque locum in
agro Veronensi non procul a lacu Benaco positum. Duditius vita Card. Poli. p.
22.
Maguzano a Monastery of the Benedictines, whereof he was Protector when the
troubles begun in Italy by reason of the War betwixt the Emperor and France,
soon after Julius the 3d. was chosen Pope about Anno 1551.

There he received the news of the Death of King Edward the 6th. and the
Assumption of Queen Mary to the Crown; upon which he dispatched a Gentleman, by
Name Vincenzo Vincentius Parpala homo magno rerum usu atque experientia
praeditus. Id. p. 23.
Parpaglia Secular Abbot of St. Saluto, to give the Pope notice of it, and to
offer himself for the Spiritual Assistance of England; this Letter bears date
from that place 7. August 1553.

The Pope had about the same time received the same news, and motu proprio
declared in Consistory Cardinal Pool Legate a Latere for England. The Breve of
the Legacy Pont. Maximus Polo Legationem in Angliam decernit, eique amplissimas
facultates etiam creandi Episcopos tribuit, Idem p. 23. A.
bears Date the 6th. of August. The Gentleman, whom the Cardinal had
dispatched, met the Messenger, who carried the said Breve, about Bononia, and
understanding his business, returned back with him to the Cardinal, who upon
the receipt of it, sent his own Gentleman with new Letters to Rome, and removed
in October from the Monastery Iter mense Octobri [ Anno 1553.] parat and
Maguzano ad Insulam Benaci Lacus proficiscitur. Idem. pa. 22. B.
to a Neighboring place called the Isle of the Lake: So that it appears, that
the Cardinal neither departed from Rome at first upon account of this Legantine
Power, nor ever returned thither any more.

As to the proceedings of the Pope, the Emperor Charles the 5th. and Cardinal
Pool in the business of the Reconciliation, the Marriage of King Philip with
the Queen, and the security of Abby-Lands, from what we find in Dr. Burnets
History, Petro Soavo, Cardinal Pallivicino, our own Historians, and the Author
of the Letter to Dr. Burnet, and what I have from the Relation of a Learned
person, the matter was thus; The Popes desire was principally the
Reconciliation of the Kingdom to the Church of Rome; and it is not to be
doubted it was his desire that this might be effected, so as a Restitution
might be made of the Abby-Lands, and the losses that the Apostolic See had
sustained since the Reformation, might be repaired, therefore it is not to be
wondered at, that Cardinal Letter to Dr. Burnet. The Reason why Cardinal Pools
dispatch into England was so slow.
Morone should Write to Pool 13th. of July, that the Pope was not yet
determined in the business of Church Lands, but had spoken, very often very
variously concerning that matter.

Duditius gives a large account how the Emperor stopped the Cardinal at Dilingam
a Town of the Archbishop of Augustane, the Reason of which the Cardinal not
understanding, he resents it ill, as a great disadvantage to the Conversion of
England: page 23.24.
The Reason of all which was, that the Emperor Charles the 5th. having designed
to Marry his Son Philip with Queen Mary, made use of the Lord Pagets
assistance, as hereafter shall be shown, and the Emperor had an apprehension,
that his design in this might be thwarted by Cardinal Pool, and the Lord
Chancellor Gardener. For when the Hist. Reformation, Part 2. fol. 258. and 259.
The Reason of the Emperors staying the Cardinal is thus expressed by Duditus.
Queen sent Commendone (afterward a Cardinal) to Rome, to give the Pope
assurance of her Filial Obedience, and to move the Pope to send the Cardinal
with a Legatine Authority: He that Writes the Cardinals Life, Insinuates that
the Queen had another design; for she asked Commendone, whether the Pope might
not Dispense with the Cardinal to Marry, since he was only in Deacons Orders;
the Lord Chancellor Gardener, is also thought to have promoted Caterum cupiebat
Caesar, ut post^a Intellec^ium est, Philippo, ejus Filio Mariam Angliae Regin^m
nub re. Quae res Anglis cum ^^rime probaretur, nec vero Caesar nescius esset
quanti Polum Regina multique in Anglia Primarii homines facerent, cavendum
st^^tuit, ne quam ejus adventus moram nuptiis afferret, pa. 24. A.
Pools Pretensions to the Queen, since her Marrying a Subject, and not a
Stranger, would have made the Government much easier and more acceptable to the
People, and it would have been the best thing he could have done for himself;
because upon that Match he might have probably obtained the Archbishopric of
Canturbury.

Edward Dugdales baronage, part 1. fol. 643.
Courtn^y Earl of Devonshire, Son of Henry, Son of Will. Courtney Earl of
Devonshire, and Katharine Daughter of Edward 4th. in regard of his Royal
Descent, flourishing Youth, and courteous disposition, was also proposed as an
Husband to Queen Mary.

But my Lord Idem part 2. fol. 391. An. 1549.
Paget, one of the Executors of King H. 8th. who in the 4th. of E. 6th. was
sent Ambassador to Charles the 5th. and the very next Year, accused as one of
the Accomplices of the Duke of Sommerset, sent to the Tower, bereaved of the
Ensigns of the Garter, and Fined 6000 l. Upon King Edward the 6th's Death he
joined with the Earl of Arundel, to set up Queen Mary, and upon her being
Proclaimed at London Rid Post to acquaint her with it. He apprehending the
advantage would accrue by the Match of the Queen with Philip then Prince of
Spain, Eldest Son to the Emperor Charles the 5th. so far prevailed, that the
Emperor gave him full Power to Transact it with that Queen, and in one
Afternoon he adjusted the matter with her, and having a good share of
Church Lands, as well as several others, no doubt he did his utmost endeavors
to get the Emperor to Insist upon the security of Abby-lands, when he was sent
with Edward Duditiu^ vita Poli p. 26.
Lord Hastings, Master of the Horse, about September 1554. to fetch Cardinal
Pool as well as he had done formerly in his Negotiations with the Emperor, with
whom joined William Earl of Pembrook, the Lord Russel, and Sir William Peter's,
and many others equally concerned in Abby-lands.

When this Marriage was once agreed upon, the unfortunate Courtney was soon
forbid the Court, to color which, his pretentions to the Lady Elizabeth, and
his Confederacy with Wyat were alleged.

The advantage the Emperor proposed to himself by the Marriage of Prince Philip
to Queen Mary, and how this contributed to the confirming of Abby-lands to the
Possessors.
The Emperor having entertained the thoughts of this Marriage as of greatest
advantage to him, by joining the great Kingdoms of England and Ireland to his
House, whereby he might not only be assisted with Naval and Land Forces against
France, but greatly assist his Netherlands by the Vicinity of England; studied
all the ways he could to render the Match more acceptable to the English, and
by the composing Men's minds there, and gaining a firm security, that all might
enjoy their Abby-lands, prevent all occasions of Rebellion, and the easilyer
effect the Pope's and all Roman Catholics desires, to have the Kingdom of
England Reconciled to the Church of Rome: He rightly apprehending, that if
those Lands were secured, there would be no great difficulty to bring the Body
of the Kingdom to return again to the Bosom of the Church, he havin^ had large
experience in his affairs of Germany, what obstructions the matter of
Church Lands occasioned.

By all this it is manifest to all unprejudiced persons, how much it was the
Interest of the Emperor, King Philip, the Queen, and all her Subjects, to get
those Lands sufficiently secured, that the Reconciliation might the easilyer be
effected: And it is the most improbable thing in the World, that the Interessed
persons would omit the due care to have them so secured, as they might neither
be in danger of a Resumption from the Church or State.

The Pope wrought upon by the Emperor to enlarge the Powers of Cardinal Pool.
As to the Popes increasing the Powers given to Cardinal Pool, pian piano, step
by step, the Reason of it is very evident, since it might be rationally
expected, that it was for obtaining the great end of the Reconciliation, that
the Indulgences and Dispensations of of the Pope were granted, and it could not
be foreseen at Rome, nor in the Emperors Court, nor even in England at first,
how much would satisfy; and that seems to me the evident Reason why the
Emperor kept the Cardinal so long from passing to England, till all things were
adjusted at Rome, and all satisfaction given in England in this as well as the
Marriage.

These things appear even by the Confession of the Pa. 13.
Author of the Letter to Dr. Burnet; for he owns, that it appears by the Breve
the 10th. of July 1554. that the Pope in consideration of the Prince of Spains
being Married to the Queen of England enlarges Pools Powers; an account of
which the Cardinal sent to the Bishop of Arras by Ormanet, P. 16. And Duditus
vita Poli pa. 23.
who was not Secretary as this Writer says, but Auditor to the Cardinal; for
Anthony Floribellus was his Secretary. The Bishop of Arras Writ to the Cardinal
the 3d. of August following, that the Emperor would send to England to know the
State of affairs there, which he thought must be done first before the Legate
could go over.

Also in the Letter from the Cardinal Pa. 15.
to the Pope, Dated from Bruf;sels, October 13th. 1554. he gives his Holiness
an account, that he had told the Emperor, that though as to matters of Faith the
Pope would slacken nothing, How far the Pope granted to yield.
nor show any manner of Indulgence; yet in the matter of the Church Lands, in
which the Pope was more at liberty, he was resolved to be gentle and Indulgent:
And as to all the pains and censures that the Possessors had incurred, and the
Rents that they had enjoyed (which were points of great Importance) he was
resolved to use all sort of Indulgence toward them, and to forgive all; nor
had he any design of applying any part of their Goods, either to himself or to
the Apostolic See, of which some were afraid -- and such regard the Pope had
to the King and Queen of England, Pa. 16.
that he was resolved to grant, upon their Intercession, whatsoever should be
thought convenient, to such persons as they should think worth gratifying, or
were capable to assist in the design of settling the Religion.

Yet it appears, The cautious proceedings of the Emperor in proposing
difficulties.
that this did not fully satisfy the Emperor, who as our Author says,
Answered with new delays, and owned, that since the Goods were Dedicated to
God, it was not fit to grant every thing to those that held them, and therefore
though the Cardinal had told him how far his Power extended, yet it was not fit
that it should be generally known. The Emperor Pa. 17.
further gave him to understand, that regard must be had to the ill
dispositions of the parties concerned, since the Aversion that the English
Nation had to the very name of Obedience to the Church, or to a Red Hat, or a
Religious Habit, was so Universal, that his Son had been advised to make the
Friars that came over from Spain with him, to change their Habits: But though he
had done it, yet the danger of Tumults deserved to be well considered.

It is worth considering how disengenuous an Inference, The disengenuous
reflections made upon the Emperors difficulties.
the Author of the Letter makes from this, that the Cardinal intended only to
grant a general discharge to all the Possessors of the Abby-lands for what was
past; but resolved to give no grants of them for the future, Note, the Queen
did Interceed for all.
except only to such as should Merit it, and for whom the Queen should
interceed, and whose Zeal in the matter of Religion might deserve such a favor,
and that the Emperor intended no more; and that he thought this should be kept
as a great secret, when as he well knew, that the Powers, given to the Cardinal
were of great extent, and that he fully executed them, as I shall make it
appear when I Treat of the Breves themselves and of the Dispensation of the
Cardinal pursuant to them:

Having thus stated the matter of Fact I shall proceed to Answer the Objection
more particularly, which you insist upon.

First therefore, Objection that only moveable Goods were granted upon
condition to restore the Lands.
as to what Dr. Burnet says, that the Cardinal in the Absolution, put them in
mind of Balthazar, and the expression in the Breve of the 4th. of March 1554.
Pope Julius the 3d. gave the Cardinal Power only to Agree, and Transact with
the Possessors of the Goods of the Church; for the Rents which they had
unlawfully received, and for the moveable Goods, which they had consumed and
for freeing and discharging them for them, they restoring first (if that should
seem expedient to him) the Lands themselves that were unduly detained by them;
and the Pope intended no security, but on those conditions.

In Answer to this, I shall first give you the words of the Breve Letter to Dr.
Burnet.
Ac cum possessoribus bonorum Ecclesiasticorum ( restitutis prius, Si The
expression to be noted.
tibi expedire videatur, Immobilibus per eos indebite detentis) super fructibus
male perceptis ac bonis mobilibus consumptis concordandi, and transigendi, ac
eos desuper liberandi, ac quietandi, etc.

Here I desire you to consider, Answered, first as to the movables what was to
be excepted, viz. Church stuff unchanged.
that among the movables of the Church, two particulars are to be
distinguished. First the Vessels Consecrated to the use of the Altar; such were
Chalices, Patens, Crucifixes and such like: And secondly, the Rents and Profits
received of the Lands, Tithes, or Pensions belonging to the Church: Concerning
the first it is, that the Cardinal in his Admonition expresses himself, that
although he had released indistinctly to them that possessed them, all the
movable things of the Church, yet he would have all admonished, that they
having before their Eyes the severity of Divine Judgment against Balthazar
Stat. 1o. and 2o. Philip. and Mariae. c. 8.
etc. should restore them to their proper Churches, if they were in being, or
else to others. Now, the plain meaning of this is, only to admonish these who
had such Vessels of Silver or Gold, or other Utensils or Church-stuff, as yet
entire, undefaced, or melted down, should restore them to the Churches from
whence they were taken; which surely was no ill Admonition, since God Almighty
appointed the Censors of Corah, Thuribula, etc. nam admoverunt illa coram
Jehova; Ideo sancta sunt. Number. c. 17. V. 3.
Dathan and Abiram to be made Plates of, for the Altar, because they were
offered before the Lord, and therefore were Holy. If therefore the Censors of
such Sinners were holy; can any imagine, that the Cardinal would not Judge the
Chalices, etc. such?

Secondly, As to the clause of the Breve, I shall presently show how much that
Power was enlarged by those that follow, and even in that it is left to the
Cardinals discretion, to do it if he thought it expedient, which by the
Faculties he had after, was not required of him, and so he most absolutely
acquitted all of them, as will appear by the Dispensation it self.

From hence we may judge the Enviousness of the Pa. 7.
expressions of the Author of the Letter to Dr. Burnet, that the discharging
what was past, The envious expressions of the Letter to Dr. Burnet.
might have been done by Cardinal Pool, before or after Restitution as he
pleased; but Restitution was still to be made, and he had by these Powers no
Authority to confirm the Alienations that had been made by King Henry the 8th.
for the time to come, and of that of Dr. Burnet, Hist. Reformation 2.. p. 298.
Dr. Burnets frivulous Inference.
concerning the Lands in general, that when Men were near Death, and could no
longer enjoy the Lands themselves, it was not to be doubted but the Terror of
Sacrilege and the Punishment due to it, with the hope of that relief, and
comfort, that Soul-Masses might b^ing them in Purgatory, would prevail with
many of them to make at least great, if not entire, Restitution; or that of his
Letter to Dr. Burnet. pa. 5.
Colleagues, that it was most likely that if a Priest came to tell them a
frightful Story of Purgatory, and did aggravate the heinousness of Sacrilege,
they would easily be wrought upon to take care of themselves in the next World,
and leave their Children to their shifts in this, and that every fit of
sickness, or Idem pa. 11.
cross accident, would by the Priests Rhetoric look like the beginning of the
Curse which fell upon Ananias and Saphira, etc.

Whereas I shall make it appear, No reason for such scruples.
that Roman Catholics, by the Popes Dispensation, think themselves acquitted in
foro conscientiae, and for Protestants I think they entertain no such scruples:
Since all that Sir Henry De non Temerandis Eccles^is.
Spelman has Writ in his Book, that Churches are not to be violated, has
hitherto made no very great number of Converts, though it has been Reprinted
five times.

But these two Gentlemen are so desirous, that nothing may be restored to
Religious Houses, yea or to Parish Churches, that they number it among the
designs formed to recover Letter p. 5. Concerning the Repeal of the Statute of
Mortmain.
Abby-lands, that the Statute of Mortmain was repealed for Twenty Years, which
Statute, says he, was a restraint upon profuse endowments of Churches, and the
suspending of it, for so long a time, gave the Monks scope and Elbow room, that
in that time they might hope the most part of them would be restored.

I shall not enter upon the considerations, that induced that Statute to be
made; the principal of which was, that Lands given to Religious Houses, etc.
were exempt from several burdens payable for the support of the Public, so
that the more were given, the less assistance the Crown would have in Personal
Service or Aids. But when it is considered how vast a Portion of the Patrimony
of the Church was swept away and annexed to the Crown in King Henry the 8th's.
and King Edward the 6th's. days; we are not to wonder if the Statute of
Mortmain was dispensed with for such a time, that the Subjects might be left at
liberty to restore to Parishes or Religious Houses what they were inclined to,
without prohibition: But as it effected no great matter, and was so few Years
in force, it argues more spightfulness than Real sense of prejudice, for any
from those twin Authors once to insist upon it.

I now proceed to the consideration of the previous Breves which the Author Pa.
9.10.
of the Letter to Dr. Burnet mentions, and makes his Comment upon: And so
boldly affirms, The disingenuous.
that the whole Transaction was a public cheat put upon the Nation, or at least
on the Possessors of the Abbey lands; Inferences of the Author of the Letter to
Dr. Burnet.
since it neither granted them a good Title in Law, (he means the Canon Law) or
gave any security to their Consciences in enjoying that which according to the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome is plain Sacrilege -- and that it is plain by the
progress of this matter, that the Court of Rome never intended to confirm
Abby-lands; for all that was done by Pool was only an Artifice to still ^ens
fears, and to lay the clamor, which the apprehension of the return of Popery
was raising, that so it might once enter with less opposition, and then it
could be easy to carry all lesser matters when the great Point was once gained.

I shall now therefore show the Insincerity of this Author and the legal force
of these Breves, and the Act of Parliament persuant to them.

First he tells us out of the Idem pa. 8. New Breves obtained with larger
Powers.
Register, that the Limitations in the former Breve, viz. the 8th. of March
1554. were so distasteful, both in England, and at the Emperors Court, that
Pool found it necessary to send Ormanet to Rome for new Instructions, and
fuller Powers, and Addressed him to Cardinal de Monte for procuring them;
Ormanet was dispatched from Rome in the end of June 1554. and came to Pool by
the end of July, as appears by the Date of Pools Letter to the Cardinal de
Monte, which is the 29th. of July, upon the receipt of the two Breves that
Ormanet brought him, bearing Date the 26th and 28th of June 1554.

How the Powers of the first Breve are concealed by the Author of the Letter to
Dr. Burnet.
The first of these, says the Author, is only matter of Form, empowering him to
Act as a Legate, either about the Emperor, or the King of France, in as ample
manner, as former Legates had done; so he gives us no Transcript of that,
whereby his Insincerity is most manifest; for the words relating to this affair
in that Breve are very material, which I shall give you Transcribed from the
Register by a Reverend person in whose Possession it is at present.

The Breve.
Registrum Negotiationum Cardinalis Poli.
At licet te multis and quidem amplissimis facultatibus, quibus etiam in
partibus Flandriae exist^ns, quoad personas and negotia Regni Angliae uti
possis; per diversas nostras, tam sub plumbo quam in forma Brevis confectas
literas munivimus, prout in illis before continetur: Quia tamen ob Schismata
and alios errores quibus dictum Regnum diutius infectum fuerit, multi casus
potuerunt contingere qui provisione per dictam sedem facienda Indigebunt, and
sub dictis facultatibus velut Infiniti, and inexcogitabiles, comprehendi
nequiverunt, and insuper a nonullis, haesitatur an a Facultatibus hujusmodi,
etc.

Nos de tuis, Fide, Pietate, Religione, Doctrina and prudentia in Domino, been
confidentes, and volentes omnem in praemissis haesitandi materiam amputare!
Circum spectioni tuae, ut ubicunque fueris, etc. Legationis tuae hujusmodi
durante, omnibus and singulis tibi concessis, and in posterum concedendis
facultatibus quoad personas, and Regni negotia, and Insularum and Dominiorum
hujusmodi, per te vel per alium, aliquem, juxta ipsarum facultatum
continentiam, and tenorem uti, ac omnes and singulos quae tibi per Omnipotentis
Dei ac nostro and ejusdem sedis honor, nec non Regni, Insularum, and
Dominiorum praedictorum ad sanctae Ecclesiae Communionem reductionem, ac
personarum in illis existentium animarum saluti expedire Judicaveris, etiam si
ea, in generali mandato, and facultatibus tibi alias concessis non veniant; sed
spec^alem expressionem, and mandatum magis sp^ciale requirant, dicere, facere,
exercere, and exequi and Apostolica Autoritate tenore presentium concedimus,
and Indulgemus, and facultates tibi concessas praedictas ad haec omnia
extendimus: Non obstantibus, etc.

The Breve Englished.
In English thus.

Although we have Empowered thee with many, and those most ample Faculties by
diverse of our Letters, as well made under Lead as in the Form of Breves, which
while thou Residest in Flanders, thou may use, as well to the Persons as to
the Affairs of the Kingdom of England, as it is more fully contained in them.
But by reason of the Schisms and other Errors with which the said Kingdom has
been long Infected, many cases may happen which may need Provisions to be made
by the said See, and being as it were Infinite and not to be before thought of,
cannot be comprehended under the said Faculties, and likewise it is doubted by
some, whether thou be Empowered by the same Faculties, etc. We in the Lord well
confiding in thy Faith, Piety, Religion, Learning, and Prudence, and willing to
cut off all cause of doubting in the premises to thy circumspection where ever
thou art, etc. During this thy Legation, give thee Power to use by thy self; or
any other, according to the Contents and Tenor of the said Faculties all and
singular the same already granted to thee, or to be granted to thee f^r the
Persons and Affairs of the Kingdom, and the Isles and Dominions of the same,
and to Pronounce, Do, Exercise, and Prosecute, all and singular things which
for the Honor of Almighty God and ours and the said See, as also for the
Reduction of the said Kingdom, Isles and Dominions to the Communion of the Holy
Church, and the health of the Souls of the persons living in the same, thou
shall think expedient although they fall not within the general Command and
Faculties otherwise granted to thee, but require special Expression and
Command, and by Apostolical Authority, by the Tenure of these Presents, we
Grant and Indulge, and Extend to all these the foresaid Faculties granted to
thee, etc.

Can any one that Reads this Breve be so ignorant as to think this contained
matter of Form only? whereas on the contrary it rather Imports a General and
Unlimited Power given the Cardinal, to grant every thing that tended to the
Honor of God, the Pope, etc. which in the Opinion of all Roman Catholics
nothing could more effectually do, than the reducing the Kingdom, etc. to the
Communion of the Catholic Church.

The second Breve of the 28th. of June, being to be found, Letter to Dr. Burnet.
Printed at length in the said Letter, I shall not Transcribe the Latin, but
only Translate it, the Tenor follows.

Whereas in the late Months bypast, The Breve of the 28th. of June 1554.
hope was given us, by Gods Mercy, and the great Religion and Piety of our
dearest Daughter in Christ, Mary Queen of England, that the most Noble Kingdom
of England, which very long, by the Impiety of some was torn from the Body of
the rest of the Catholic Church, would be reduced to the Union of the said
Catholic and Universal Church, without which Salvation can be to none;
therefore we destine thee to the said Queen Mary, and to all that Kingdom, as
Legate a Latere of us and the Apostolic See, as an Angel of Peace and Concord,
by the Counsel and Unanimous assent of our Venerable Brethren the Cardinals of
the Holy Roman Church; and have Empowered thee with all the Faculties which we
have thought necessary to the effecting so great a business, or are any way
seasonable for it; and among other things have given Authority and Faculty to
thy Circumspection, to Accord, and Transact with the Possessors of
Ecclesiastical Goods; concerning all the Fruits unjustly received, and the
Moveable Goods wasted, and them to free and acquit when it can be done, as in
our Letters thereupon made it is more fully contained. Whereas for these
beginnings, which by the Industry and dilgence, and right and constant mind to
God of the said Mary, and in that matter by thy cooperating Study and Counsel,
the foresaid work of Reduction in the said Kingdom to this Day has, and the
perfection of the said Famous work is daily more to be hoped; and the matter
may be known, thereby to have more easy progress, so much the more, as we show
hope of Apostolical Benignity and Indulgence in the Possessions of the
Ecclesiastical Goods occupied by the Men of that Province in the confusion of
the late times. We not willing for any Earthly respects to hinder such a
recovery of a Nation, the most beloved of us in Christ, after the custom of an
Holy Father toward Sons of us and the Holy Catholic Church, after a long time
of dangerous Travel abroad, meeting them that look back and return, with a
wished Embrace: In whose excellent Virtue, singular Piety, Learning, Wisdom and
Dexterity, we having in the Lord full trust, at thy own Arbitrament by our
Authority, give thee full Power of Treating, Agreeing, Transacting and
Compounding with whatever Possessors or Detainers of Ecclesiastical Goods, as
well Moveable, as Immovable in the said Kingdom; for whom the said most Serene
Queen Mary, shall Intercede and give the full and free Apostolical Authority by
the Tenor of these Presents, and of certain knowledge to dispense with them,
that they may retain the said Goods without any scruple for the future, and of
concluding, and doing all and singular other things which in these and about
these are any way necessary and seasonable; saving however in these matters, in
which for the greatness and the weightiness of them this Holy See of due may be
thought by thee to be consulted, our and the said Sees good Will and
Confirmation, notwithstanding the Letters of Pope Paul the 2d. our Predecessor
of happy Memory, of not Alienating Church-Goods, unless by observing a certain
Form, or any other Apostolical Edicts, General or special Constitutions and
Ordinations in Provincial or Syn^dal Councils, or any Oath, or Apostolic
Confirmation of any Churches, Monasteries, or other Regular or Holy Places, or
by any other Firmness corroborated, Foundations, Statutes and Cust^ms, having
their Tenors sufficiently expressed, to the contrary whatsoever.

The insincerity of the Author of the Letter to Dr. Burnet.
From this Breve the Author of the Letter would Insinuate, that the Salvo took
all away, and vacated all the Concession of the Pope, to make which the more
probable he renders the Salvo thus, that he reserves all to the Popes
Confirmation and good pleasure in all those things that were of such
Importance, that the Holy See ought first to be consulted by Pool; which even
as this Translator renders it, may but seem a necessary Reservation, because
some matter of great Importance, might require it; but as it is in the Haec
sancta seeds merito tibi ^ideretur conjulenda.
Breve it is onlly in such things as should to the Cardinal se^m fit, that the
Holy See should be consulted; and I have not yet Read that the Cardinal found
any further cause to consult the Pope, or obtain greater Powers: For he makes
the dispensation general without any such Reservation, and it is well known
that when the Emperor and Granvillanus Bishop of Arras, afterward Cardinal,
understood this Breve was sent, they said if they had known the extent of it,
they had not Importuned the Pope any further, and our Friend of Dr. Pa. 14.
Burnets says, that by Ormanets Letter it appears, that these last Powers gave
the Emperor full satisfaction, and were not at all excepted against; only
Granvillanus made some difficulty in one Point; whether the settlement of the
Church lands should be granted as a Grace of the Popes, by the Cardinals hands
Immediately to the Possessors, or should be granted to Philip and Mary, and by
that means to the Possessors; for it seems, says he, it was thought a surer
way to engage the Crown to maintain what was done; if the Pope were engaged for
it to the Crown, with which he would not venture so easily to break, as he
might perhaps do with the Possessors themselves: But, continues he, Ormanet
gave him full satisfaction in that matter, for the manner of settling it being
referred wholly to the Cardinal by his Powers, he promised he would order it in
the way that should give the Nation most content.

Having thus removed all the difficulties I have met with, and the objecti^ns
against the fullness of Cardinal Pools Powers granted by Pope Julius the 3d. It
is full time to consider the Transactions of the Cardinal in order to his
Execution of the same Powers, to the quieting of the Possessors Consciences,
and securing them from all Ecclesiastical censures.

SECT. VIII. Cardinal Pools confirmation of Abby-lands, to the present
Possessors, and the Act thereupon.
BEfore I give you an account of the Act it self, I think it necessary to show
the Cardinals Progress toward the Reconciliation, which was the Foundation of
the Confirmation of the Abbey and Chantry Lands given to King Henry the 8th. and
Edward the 6th. by the respective Acts of Parliament; which Relation I extract
out of Duditius in his Life of Cardinal Pool, an Author I shall have occasion
to mention hereafter.

Duditius p. 26. A. B. He had been attainted by Act of Parliament and that was
taken off two days before viz. 22. Novem.
In September 1554. in the Company of the Lord Paget and Hastings, (sent by the
King for that purpose) Cardinal Pool arrived at Callice, and there met six of
the Kings Ships sent for him. At Dover the Bishop of Ely and the Lord Montacute
met him, and at Gravesend the Bishop of Durham and the Earl of Salisbury, who
brought with them the Act of Parliament for his Restitution under the Broad
Seal. Then he took Shipping, and by their Majesty's appointment had the Silver
Cross (the Emblem of his Apostolic Legatship) placed in the fore Deck of his
Vessel, and accompanied with many Boats and Barges he came to the Court; the
Id. p. 27. The Reception of the Cardinal.
Bishop of Winchester, Lord Chancellor met him at the Shore, and presently the
King also, and the Queen received him at the top of the Stairs. Having staid
some while with their Majesty's, he was by the Bishop of Winchester and several
Nobles conducted to L^mbeth, which the Queen had caused to be Richly furnished
for his Reception.

After three Days he waited on the King, who met him out of his Bedchamber,
bringing a bundle of Letters directed to him, lately brought from Rome, and
with them the Pope sent an Cum eoque Pontisex Facultatum Legati Amplisicationem
miserat quae maxim expetebatur Id. p. 27. b.
Amplification of his Powers, which was greatly desired says my Author, by
which expression it is manifest, that this Bull was satisfactory.

The Day after the King gave a visit to the Legate; and there they had
Conference, how the Kingdom of England might be revoked to the Unity of the
Church.

The Cardinals Speech to the Houses.
The next Day the Cardinal came to the Parliament, and Lord High Chancellor made
a Speech to the Houses, letting them know how the Cardinal was sent as Legate
from the Pope to their Majesty's and all the Kingdom of England; and having
explained to their Majesty's the Commission of his Legatship, in the Audience
of all, The Cardinal in the English Tongue made a long Has viz. Leges quod ill^
abrog^sse^t, iis sese pro tamo benefi^^o grati^s ag^^e^e^ and bab^tu^um semper,
quantas possit maximas, atque hoc quidem Beneficium eo sibi contigisse gratius,
quod facultatem sibi praeberet, vicissim illis Inservi^^i intanta re, and causa
quae tantopere ad eorum incolumitatem and s^lutem pertineret, seque Illuc
propterea venisse at quemadmodum ab illis in terrenam patriam, and nobilitatem
Restitutus ipse fu^rat, ita rursu^ eos in coelestem Patriam, a^ Nobilitatem
Rest^turet, qua ipsimet sese tum privassent, cum ab Ecclesiae unitate
desciverant. Idem. p. 27. b.
Oration, thanking them for the taking off the Laws that hindered him from
entering the Kingdom, and this favor he ^^^d was the more acceptable to him, in
that it gave him a Power, on his part, to serve them in such a matter and
cause, which so greatly appertained to their safety and Salvation: That he came
thither for that cause, that as by them he was restored to his Earthly Country,
and Nobility, so on his part he might restore them to their Heavenly Country
and Nobility, which they had deprived themselves of, when they departed from
the Unity of the Church.

Then he remembered them what Calamities they had undergone, how great a Benefit
by the great bounty of God was proposed to them, and how great benefits in all
times, especially from the Apostolic See, were afforded them, that they might
at length acknowledge the Errors of former times, and truly and from their
Souls detest them, and exhorted them, that with all alacrity of Soul, they
would receive and studiously retain the benefit, that God in the Name of his
Vicar by his Legatship had brought to them.

That it now remained that since he was come, and brought the Keys by which he
might open the Doors of the Church to them, and as they had opened a Passage to
him into his Country, by abrogating the Laws which shut him out, so on the
other side he desired they would abolish all Laws which were made against the
Apostolic See, by which they were wholly cut off and torn from the rest of the
Body of the Church.

While the Legate spoke these things, all heard him with great attention and
silence, and many often lift up their hands that one might observe they were
much moved, and received no small Edification by the Speech of the Legate.

Then the Chancellor, in the Name of the King and the whole Parliament, gave
the Legate thanks, and told him that they would deliberate among themselves of
those things he had spoken.

The resolves of the Parliament conformable to the Legates Speech.
The Legate being withdrawn into the next Chamber, the Chancellor made a Speech
to the Parliament, relating the sum of the Legates Speech, and acknowledging,
that he himself was one of those that had fallen; and admonished them how great
the benefit of God to them was, that all might again arise and exhorted them to
receive the pardon offered them.

At the next meeting, the Day after, Cum de eo relatum esset, ut ad Ecclesiae
unitatem rediretur. Id omnes mirifica consensione approbarunt.
all with a wonderful assent yielded to return to the Unity of the Church.

The Legates appearance at the Parliament on the day of the Reconciliation.
The Day following, being St. Andrews Day, the Parliament assembled, the King
sent the Earl of Arundel, High Steward of the House, and six other Noblemen,
Knights of the Garter, and as many Bishops to bring him to the Palace, where
the Houses convened. The Legate was Apparelled with the Ornaments accustomed,
and had all the Ensigns of his Legatship, and was received with much Honor by
their Majesty's.

The Lord Chancellor declared what was done the day before, and asked all
present whether they would confirm them, and Vt ipsorum nomine venia peteretur
and ad Ecclesiae vnitatem ac Pont. Romans supremi ejus capitis obedientiam
rediretur. Id ^unctis, magno clamore, assentientibus.
in their Names that pardon should be asked, and whether they would return to
the unity of the Church, and the Obedience of the Pope, Supreme head of it. To
this every one with a great noise assented.

The Petion of the Houses for Absolution.
Then the Lord Chancellor delivered their Majesty's the Petition of the Houses,
in which they all declared their Penitence for their bypast Schism, and for
all things which they had admitted against the Apostolic See and the Church of
Rome, and they professed as much as in them lay, in that very Parliament to
disannul all those Laws which were made against the Authority of the Apostolic
See and Church of Rome, and prayed their Reges ipsos oraeb^nt, utpo^e quos Deus
ab ^ac labe puros a^que Int^gros conservasse^, veniam sibi a Pont. Max. per
ejus L^ga^um Impetrarent, ut in gremium ma ris Ecclesiae, ta^quam Filii
reciperentur, quos eorum o^anium, qu^e in ^llam an^e^ deliquissent vere atque
ex animo poeni^eret; u^que ejusdem corpori, a quo divulsi fuerant, velut
Germana and viva membra rursus agglutinarentur.
Majesty's, whom God had kept pure and whole from that stain, to entreat Pardon
for them from the Pope by his Legate, and that he would receive them as Children
into the bosom of the Church, repenting them truly and from their Souls of all
things wherein they had sinned against it, and that he would conjoyn them again
as Brotherly and living Members, to that Body from which they were torn.

The Queen desires the Cardinal to grant it.
When their Majesty's had Read this Petition, they gave it again to the Lord
Chancellor, who Re^d it aloud, that all might hear it, and their Maj^sties
arising moved toward the Legate, who readily met them, and the Queen both in
her own and the Kings Name, desired that according to the Petition he would
grant Pardon to the whole Kingdom, and would gather it again to the Unity of
the Church.

The Cardinals Powers Read.
Then the Legate, after all were seated, caused to be (h) Read the Bulls and
Breves and Powers which appertained to his Legatship, (i) Recit^ri juss^^ quae
ad L^ga^io^em and facultates per^inebant. ^ullam vocant and Br^via. The
Cardinals Speech.
which being done he made a Speech, and told them how they ought to return
Eternal praise to the Everlasting God, who had given them such eminent helps to
amend their Errors and plainly had declared that he had a special care of that
Kingdom, even as in old times of the Church, he had bestowed such favors on the
English, that they, the first of all others, having left the Errors of the
Gentiles, had with public consent embraced the Worship of the True God, so now
he had afforded that Grace to them, when they had disjoined themselves from the
Church, that they the first of all others, should acknowledge how greatly they
had offended, and if Quod si eos vere, atque ex animo poeniteret, quantum
gaud^i putandum esse capere Angelos ex tanti populi tamque Ampli Regni
conversione, quibus vel unius peccatoris poenitens animus incredibilem afferre
laetitiam soleret? Haec, atque alia permulta cum Legatus diceret, visi sunt
omnes vehementer commoveri.
they truly, and from their Souls were Penitent, how much joy was it to be
thought the Angels would have, at the Conversion of such a People, and so great
a Kingdom, when as the Penitent Soul of one Sinner, did wont to bring such
ineredible joy to them?

While the Legate spoke these, and many more things to them, they all seemed to
be much moved, says my Author.

Then the Legate Tum surrexit ipse, and cum omnes in genua procubuissent;
universos, Anglice loquens, A^solvit: ac dum il^e Absolution^m tribueret,
Reginae and plerique aliis, prae gaudio summoque pic^atis studio obortae sunt
Lachrymae; omnesque, absolutione peracta, amanter inter se Ample cabantur;
atque haec verba saepius usurpantes, hodie renati sumus, mutuo gra^ulab^ntur.
arose and when all had kneeled on their Knees; in English he absolved them
all, and had scarce Pronounced the last words in the Name of the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, before all, with one Voice, said Amen, Amen, and while
Absolution was giving, the Queen, and several others out of their great ^iety
wept for joy, and the Absolution being passed, they embraced one another, and
mutually rejoiced, often expressing themselves, that that day they were born
again.

Thence they went to the Chapel Royal, and Te Deum was Sung.

Thus I have given you faithfully what my Author (present no doubt at the
Action) has given an account of.

You may in Mr. Fox see the Letter writ by King Philip to the Pope, giving him
an account of that Days performance, Dated on St. Andrews Even, November 30.
1554. and another from the Cardinal Dated ult. November.

I shall now acquaint you with what I find in the Journal of the House of
Commons relating to this business, whereby the truth of Duditius his Relation
will the better appear. An account of these matters out of the Journal of the
House of Commons.


November 19th. The Master of the Rolls and Mr. Solicitor brought from the
Lords the Bill to Repeal the Attainder of Gardinal Pool, made 31 H. 8. and it
was Read the second time that day.

November 20th. The Bill to Repeal the Attainder of Cardinal Pool, was Read the
third time, and Assented to.

November 21 the same Bill was sent to the Lords, and Mr. Treasurer declared
that the King and Queen would be to Morrow Afternoon in the Parliament House,
to give their Assent to the said Bill.

November 22. About three a Clock Afternoon in the Parliament Chamber the Royal
consent was given to the Bill for Cardinal Pool, and so made a perfect Bill.

November 27. Mr. Secretary Peter declared the King and Queens pleasures to be,
that the House be to Morrow at the Court, to hear a Declaration by the Lord
Cardinal of his Legacy.

November 28 Mr. Speaker Declared the Legacy of the Cardinal, was to move us to
come again to the Unity of the Church from which we were fallen.

The Master of the Rolls and Mr. Solicitor declared from the Lords, that they
had appointed the Lord Chancellor, four Earls, four Bishops, and four Barons to
confer with a number of this House, who Immediately were sent unto them.

The Lords aforesaid, together with the Commons of the House appointed, devised
a Supplication to the King and Queens Majesty's, which was here Engrossed and
agreed by the House to be presented to the King and Queen, whereby the Realm,
and Dominion might be again united to the Church of Rome, by the means of the
Lord Cardinal Pool.

Vltimo November. This Afternoon, before the King and Queens Majesty at the
Palace, the Lords and Commons being present, the Supplication was Read in
Latin, and exhibited by their Majesty's to the Lord Legate, who making and
Oration of the great Joy for the return of lost Sheep, did, by the Popes
Holiness's Authority give Absolution to the whole Realm, and the Dominions of
the same.

December 4th. Mr. Attorney and Mr. Solicitor, brought a Bill ( viz. A List of
Names) of diverse of the Upper House, requiring a number of this House to confer
with them, etc. Which Immediately were named, viz. the whole Council of the
House (that is, all the Members of that House who were of the King and Queens
Privy Council) and Twenty one Knights and Burgesses sent up to the Lords.

On St. Stephen's Day, Mr. Serjant Dyer, and Mr. Solicitor brought from the
Lords the Bill to Repeal certain Acts touching the Supremacy, which was Read
next Day, and the second time Read, 29th. December.

Upon the last of December, there were Arguments touching the Bill of the
Supremacy; and upon the 2d. of January, Arguments upon the same Bill.

The same Day is thus entered the great Bill touching the Repeal of Acts against
the Sea of Rome, and Assurance of Abby-lands and Chantry Lands Read the 3d.
time, and Assented to.

By this Journal it appears, that the Reconciliation was first performed,
before the Bill for the securing of Abbylands was perfected in the Houses: So
that all the Members of both Houses being absolved, in the Name of the whole
Realm, there could be no Objection against their unqualifiedness by any Church
Censures, to pass that Bill, which is of no small moment to be considered.

Whence you may Judge concerning what Mr. Marty. part 3. fol. 113.
Fox Writes, That about the time of the Absolution, a Messenger was sent from
the Parliament to the Pope, to desire him to Establish the Sale of Abbey and
Chantry Lands; for the Lords and the Parliament would grant nothing on the
Popes behalf, before their Purchases were well secured.

As to a Messengers sending, no doubt several dispatches, were made to and from
Rome during this Transaction, but I cannot conceive that in so short a time a
Currier could go and come from Rome, and bring new Powers to the Cardinal, yet
I will not insist upon that.

But I believe he Writes truly, that what preparation soever was made, by
Debates, Conferences, etc. concerning the Repeal of other Laws against the Sea
of Rome, they never passed into Bills, till the Bill for securing Religious
Lands was perfected.

Hence we may conclude the Reason why the Solemn Procession, related in Mr. Fox
was not till the 25th. of January, after this Parliament was Dissolved, which
was on the 16th. of the same Month, which Procession, Hist. Reformation, part
2. fol. 300.
Dr. Burnet says, was to thank God for the Reconciling them again to the
Church: And to keep up a constant remembrance of it, it was ordered that St.
Andrews Day should be still observed as the Anniversary of it, and be called
the Feast of the Reconciliation, and Processions, with all the highest
Solemnities they at any time use, were to be on that day.

Duditius tell us, That there was every where great Vita Cardinalis Pol. p. 30.
De Angliae ad Pristinam Fidem reditu magna ubique gratulatio facta est,
magnaque laetitiae significatio. Omnibus locis supplicationes decretae, ac
meritae Deo gratiae actae sunt: Praeterea Julius III. Pont. Max. amplissimum
Jubilaeum promulgavit.
rejoicing for the return again of England to the ancient Faith, and great
expressions of the joy: In all places Prayers being decreed, and due Thanks
returned to God. Besides which, Pope Julius III. published a most ample Jubilee
upon that occasion. And there was good reason for it in all the Territories of
the Roman Catholic Communion that had any regard for England, since it was the
greatest revolution of that Age; and no less to be wondered at, than that K.
Henry VIII. could suppress so many Abbeys in such a way as he did.

Having given you this prospect of the conduct of this great affair, I come now
to the Act if self, which in Pulton is entitled, All Statutes against the Sea
of Rome repealed.

The Act wherein Abby-Lands are confirm'dto the Possessors. 1 and 2 Ph. and
Mar. 6.8. The first supplication for reconciliation. Repeal of several
Statutes, according to promise.
The Act first recites,

That much false Doctrine had been preached and written since the 20th. of King
Henry VIII. How Cardinal Pool was sent from Rome, Legate de Latere, to call the
Realm into the right way from whence it had strayed.

Then relates at length the supplication of the Parliament to the King and
Queen, to be a mean to reduce them into the Catholic Church, by their
intercession with the Legat-Cardinal; for which I refer you to the Statute.
Then immediately follows a Repeal of all Statutes made against the Supremacy,
and See Apostolic, since the time of the Schism; in accomplishment of their
promise made in their supplication. Upon which, at the intercession of their
Majesty's, by the Authority of their holy Father Pope Julius III. and of the
Apostolic See, they were assoyled, How they were absolved.
discharged and delivered from Excommunications. Interdictions, and other
Censures Ecclesiastical, which had hanged over their heads for their said
defaults, since the time of the said Schism, mentioned in their supplication.

Second supplication for taking away all occasion of contention.
Then follows another supplication to their Majesty's, That all occasion of
contention, hatred, grudge, suspicion, and trouble, both outwardly and
inwardly, in men's consciences, which might arise among them by reason of
Disobedience, might by Authority of the Pope's Holiness, and by ministration of
the same unto them by Cardinal Pool, by Dispensation, Toleration, or Permission
respectively, as the case shall require, be abolished, and taken away.

After some other things, follows in these words: Concerning Abby-Lands, etc.
Finally, when certain Acts and Statutes have been made in the time of the late
Schism, concerning the Lands and Hereditaments of Archbishoprics and
Bishoprics, the suppression and dissolution of Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories,
Chantries, Colleges, and all other the Goods and Chattels of Religious Houses,
since the which time the Right and Dominion of certain Lands and Hereditaments,
goods and Chattels belonging to the same, be dispersed abroad, and come to the
hands and possessions of diverse and sundry persons, who by Gift, Purchase,
Exchange, and other means (according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm for
the time being) have the same: For the avoiding of all scruples that might grow
by any of the occasions aforesaid, or by any other ways or means whatsoever,
The Petition of the two Houses to the K. and Q. to be Intercessors to Card.
Pool to confirm Abby-Lands.
it may please your Majesty's to be Intercessors and Mediators to the said most
Reverend Father Cardinal Pool, that all such causes and quarrels, as by
pretense of the said Schism, or by any other coccasion or means whatsoever,
might be moved by the Pope's Holiness, or by any other Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, may be utterly removed and taken away; so as all persons,
having sufficient Conveyance of the said Lands, and Hereditaments, Goods, and
Chattels, may without scruple of conscience enjoy them, without Impeachment or
Trouble, by pretense of any General Council, Canons, or Ecclesiastical Laws,
and clear from all dangers of the Censures of the Church.

Before I proceed further, I think fit to note, That by the consent of both
Houses it seems clear, that they looked upon those Lands to be well secured,
according to the Laws of the Land; which appears, because I find in the Journal
of the Second Parliament 1o. Mariae. Bill prepared before the Cardinal's
arrival.
Commons House, That upon the 25th. of April, 1555. a Bill was engrossed, that
Bishops should not convent any person for Abby-Lands; and the next day I find
the Bill passed their House. that the Bishop of Rome, nor any other Spiritual
Person, shall convent any person for Abby-Lands.

So that what is to be cleared, is, that for removing of scruples of
conscience, and preventing the causes and quarrels moved by the Pope,
See-Apostolic, or any other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, there was effectual
course taken.

The Clergy in Convo^ation petition that the Lands may be confirmed.
Therefore, because that part in the Act is put in Latin, whereby every Reader
of it does not, or will not, observe the force of it, I shall render the most
material passages of it into English.

First, the Bishops and Clergy in Convocation present their supplication to the
King's and Queen's Majesty's, showing,

That they ( viz. the Clergy) were the Praefects of the Church, The Clergy
petition, and show their duty by the Canons, is to preserve the Goods of the
Church.
and the care of Souls was committed to them, and they were appointed Defenders
and Curators of the goods, Jurisdictions, and Rights of the said Churches by
the dispositin of the Holy Canons: Therefore they ought with the remedies of
Law to recover to the ancient Right of the Church, the Goods, Jurisdictions,
and Rights of the Church, de per^^^^ am^^^a.
spent, or lost in the late pernicious Schism.

The reasons why they desire their confirmation; as preferring public Peace
before private commodity.
Nevertheless, having had among themselves mature counsel and deliberation, they
do ingenuously confess themselves best able to know how difficult, and as it
were impossible, the recovery of the Goods of the Ecclesiastics would be, by
reason of the manifest, and almost inextricable Contracts and Dispositions had
upon them; and if those things should be questioned, the quiet and tranquillity
of the Kingdom would be greatly disturbed; and the unity of the Catholic
Church, which by the Piety and Authority of their Majesty's was introduced into
the Kingdom with greatest difficulty, could obtain no due progress, or
finishing.

Therefore, preferring the public quiet before private commodities, and the
health of so many Souls, redeemed with the precious Blood of Christ, before
earthly Goods, not seeking their own Profit, but the things of Jesus Christ:
They earnestly request, and most humbly supplicate their Majesty's, in their
names to communicate these things to the Legate, and vouchsafe to intercede,
Here note, by Goods [ Bona] in the Canon Law, all Lands, as well as Chattels,
are comprehended.
That concerning these Ecclesiastical Goods (in part, or in whole, according to
his pleasure, and the Faculty and Power given him by the most holy Lord the
Pope) he would enlarge, or set at liberty, and relax the detainers of those
goods, preferring public good before private; Peace and Tranquillity before
Dissolution and Perturbation; and the health of Souls before earthly Goods:
They giving their assents to whatever he should do, and that in the premises he
would not be strict or difficult.

The Dispensation of the Cardinal.
Then follows the Cardinal's Dispensation, wherein, after the recital of the
several breaches of the supplication of the Parliament, and the uncanonical
things that had been done, it is added, The reasons laid down why the Cardinal
dispenses, etc.


That as to Ecclesiastical Goods, they were seized and possessed by diverse
persons of the Kingdom, which, though by the Constitutions of the Canons they
might be declared void, yet if they should be revoked into any other State than
in which they then were, the public Peace and Quiet of the whole Kingdom would
be disturbed, and the greatest Confusion would follow; especially if the
possessors of the same Goods should be molested: Therefore the Parliament have
humbly supplicated their Majesty's, that they would vouchsafe to intercede with
the Cardinal.

And whereas the Bishop and the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury,
representing almost the whole body of the Ecclesiastics of the Kingdom, to whom
the cause of those Ecclesiastic Goods do mostly appertain, have declared, That
these Goods cannot be recalled to the Right of the Church, but the universal
Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom will be disturbed, and the cause of the Faith,
and the Unity of the Church, now by the consent of all introduced into the
Kingdom, shall be brought into extreme danger; and have supplicated, etc. as
before is rehearsed.

The Cardinal's Authority.
Therefore We, who are sent Legate de latere to your Majesty's and this most
Noble Kingdom, from our most holy Lord Pope Julius III. his and the Apostolic
See, That we might reconcile the Kingdom (which has so long been separated
from the Unity of the Catholic Church) to God, and the Church of Christ, and
his Vicar upon Earth, and should with all study procure all those things which
appertain to the Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom.

After by the benignity of God, and the Piety of your Majesty's, by the
Authority of the said our most holy Lord the Pope, whose Person We here
represent, the Reconciliation is made.

That we may take care for the Peace and Tranquillity of the said Kingdom, and
the Unity of the Church, from whence the Salvation of so many Souls redeemed by
the precious Blood of Christ depends, now introduced into this Kingdom, may be
strengthened, and remain safe.

The stability of the Reconciliation and the Peace consists in the assurance of
Abby-Lands.
And whereas the stability of either of them, consists mostly in that no
molestation be brought upon the Possessors of Ecclesiastical Goods, whereby
they may not retain them which so many and such grave Testimonies cause us to
believe; and the Intercession of your Majesty's (who have so studiously and
holily labored for restoring the Unity of the Church, and the Authority of the
Apostolic See) may have that Authority with us that is fit, and that the whole
Kingdom may know, and in truth and reality experience, the Motherly Indulgence
of the Apostolic See toward it: Absolving, and judging to be absolved, every
one to whom these Writings may appertain, from all Excommunications,
Suspensions, Interdicts, and other E^clesiastic Sentences, Censures, and
Punishments, by Law, or by Man, upon any occasion, or cause whatsoever
Pronounced, (if for the cause aforesaid only they be inflicted.)

And so the Cardinal passes to the particulars in the Supplication: And lastly
as to the Ecclesiastic Goods, adds these words.

The words of the Dispensation and confirmation of Abbylands, notwithstanding
Canons and constitutions. etc. to the contrary.
And to whatever person of this Kingdom, to whose hands Ecclesiastic Goods, by
whatever contract, either Lucrative, or Onerose they have come, or they have
held, or do hold them, and all the Fruits, though unduly received, of them, in
the whole he does remit and release; Willing and decernning that the Possessors
aforesaid of the said Ecclesiastic Goods, Moveable, and Immovable, may not at
present, or for the future, by the Dispositions of General or Provincial
Councils, or the Decretal Epistles of Roman Bishops, or any other Ecclesiastic
Censure be molested, disquieted, or disturbed in the said Goods, or the
Possession of them, nor that any Ecclesiastic Censures, or Punishment, be
Imposed or Inflicted, for the detention, and Non-Restitution of the same; and
so by all kind of Judges and Auditors, it ought to be adjudged and defined,
taking from them all kind of Faculty, and Authority of Judging otherwise, and
decerning it to be Null and void, if any thing happen to be attempted to the
contrary.

Notwithstanding the foresaid defects or whatever Apostolic Special or General
Constitutions and Ordinances Published in Provincial, and Synodal Councils, to
the contrary.

An Admonition to those that do hold the Goods of the Church, and an
exhortation to allow maintenance to Parish Parsons and Vicars.
Then follows the Admonition, that though all the Moveable things of the Churches
were indistinctly released to those that possess them, yet he would Admonish
them, that having before their Eyes the severity of the Divine Judgment against
Balthazar King of Babylon, who converted to profane uses the Holy Vessels, not
by him, but by his Father taken from the Temple; if they be extant they will
restore them to their proper Churches or to others. The meaning of which I have
before explained. Then follows.

Exhorting also and by the Bowels of the Mercy of Jesus Christ vehemently
entreating all those, to whom this matter appertains, that not being altogether
unmindful of their Salvation, at least they will do this; that out of the
Ecclesiastical Goods principally of those which were specially destined for the
support of Parsonages and Vicarages, that in Cathedrals and other Inferior
Churches, now in being, it may be so provided for them that have the care of
Souls, that their Pastors, Parsons, and Vicars may Commodiously, and Honestly,
according to their Quality and State be maintained, whereby they may Laudably
exercise the Cure of Souls, and support the Incumbent Burdens, This is Dated
at Lambeth 9th. of the Kalends of January, the 5th. of Pope Julius the third.

Then follows in the same Act the Confirmation of all these in the most
General, Comprehensive, and particular words, that the Wisdom of that Age could
devise, to Comprehend all the Religious Houses, Colleges, Chantries, Hospitals,
Guilds, Fraternities, Obits, etc. so Alienated.

The Caution used in securing the Lands not to be doubted.
It is not to be doubted but our Ancestors who had so lately acquired those
Abby-lands, and were in much more eminent danger of a Resumption, than we are
in this Age, would be as cautious to have these Confirmed to them by all the
Laws, Ecclesiastical, and Civil, as could be contrived for their firm security:
And that the Legates Absolution and Remission were sufficient according to the
Canon Law, will not be denied by any who hold the Authority of the Pope in such
matters; since the Pope Conferred upon the Cardinal his own Power to do in that
affair as much as if he had been Personally present he could have done; sine in
one place it is expressed, that the Legate acted by the Per Autoritatem
Sacratissimi Domini nostri Papae cujus vices sustinemus.
Authority of the most Holy Lord the Pope whose Person, Character or Power he
has, for the word Vices Implys; that he was his Complete Substitute to do as
much as he could do, and in another place of the same Absolution he expresses
his Powers thus, by Authoritate Apostolica per literas etc. nobis concessas and
qua fungimur in haec part.
Apostolic Authority, by the Letters of our most Holy Lord the Pope Julius the
third, granted to us and with which Authority we are empowered in this
particular.

Whoever considers this Act, and attentively will peruse it, as it is Printed
in our Statutes, or is upon Record in the Roll, must conclude it had all the
Authority that either an Act of Parliament in England, or a Constitution of the
Pope by his Bull can give it, and I hope I have sufficiently cleared it, that
by the Canon Law and continual Practice of the Pope, he has a full Power to
Establish and make valid what he did in this particular.

SECT. IX. The Exceptions against this Assurance of Abby-lands to the
Possessors, that it was not confirmed by Pope Paul the 4th. fully Answered.
YOU are pleased to endeavor to Invalidate the force of this Spiritual and
Temporal Act, Pietro Soave's Assertion that Pope Paul the 4th. did not confirm
Abby-lands.
by producing the Opinion and assertions of Father Pietro Soave Polano, in his
Council of Trent, and one or two Gentlemen's, whose Sentiments you so zealously
have embraced.

The words of Soave Fol. 367.
are thus rendered into English by Sir Nathaniel Brent.

John Peter Caraffa, by the Name of Paulus 4us. being Created Pope 1555. On the
first Day of his Papacy the English Ambassadors from King Philip and Queen
Mary, entered Rome, viz. The Hist. Reformation, part 2. fol. 300.
Viscount Montacute, the Bishop of Ely, and Sir Edward Carn, there being one to
Represent every State of the Kingdom, sent to make their Obedience to the Pope,
and to obtain a Confirmation of all those Graces Cardinal Pool had granted in
the Popes Name, says Dr. Burnet.

At the first Consistory after the Idem Soave. The Popes Reception of the
Ambassadors from Queen Mary.
Coronations, the Ambassadors were brought to it, who prostrating themselves at
the Popes Feet did in the Name of the Kingdom acknowledge the faults committed;
relating them all in particular, for so the Pope would have it. Confessing they
had been ungrateful for the many benefits received from the Church, and humbly
craving Pardon for it. The Pope did Pardon them, took them up from the ground,
and Embraced them, and to Honor their Majesty's that sent them, gave the Title
of a Kingdom to Ireland.

In private Discourse, says our Author, His reprehension of the proceedings in
England.
betwixt the Pope and the Ambassadors, he found fault that the Church Goods
were not wholly restored, saying, that by no means it was to be Tolerated, and
that it was necessary to render all even to a Far thing, because that the
things that belong to God can never be applied to Human uses; and he that
witholdeth the least part of them is in continual State of Damnation. That if
he had Power to grant them, he would do it most readily, for his Fatherly
Affection which he bears them, and for his experience of their Filial
Obedience, Mr. Fox says, the Pope published a Bull in Print against the
restoring Abbylands which Dr. Burnet affirms also Appendix fol. 403.
but his Authority was not so large, as he might profane the things Dedicated
to God, and let England be assured, that this would be an Anathema and a
Contagion, which by the just Revenge of God, would always hold the Kingdom of
England in perpetual Infelicity; and he charged the Ambassadors to Write
thereof Immediately, and was not content to speak of it once, but repeated it
as often as there was occasion, and said also plainly, that Peter Pence ought
to be paid as soon as might be.

Thus far Soave.

In Answer to this, Cardinal Lib. 13. c. 13. Cardinai Palivicino's Assertion
about the confirming Religious Lands.
Palivicino, after his Discourse of the business of the Kingdom of Ireland, as
to the Restitution of the Ecclesiastic Goods in England, says, because in that
Kingdom during the time of the Schism most grieveus Usurpation of Church Lands
had been made, as he had before related, some by private persons, others by the
Crown. Those were with great Liberality restored by the Queen. But concerning
the others i. e. those in the Subjects Possessions, it was Judged profitable to
use condescension; lest with a pay of so great Interest, they should Enroll the
Usurpers under the Standard of Heresy not sufficiently destroyed. The plain
sense of which, is that they were to be Indulged in their Possessions, how
unjust soever they were; lest the denying of it should enforce them, for the
sake of preserving their Estates, to reject 'the Reconciliation, which was the
prime thing desired.

It is true this Pope Paul the 4th. is Ricaut continuation 110.
represented by Historians to be a Morose Man, of a Saturnine Temper, being the
first Author and Contriver of the Inquisition, and that by a new Decree he
retrieved all those Goods and Ecclesiastical Revenues, which had been Pa. 112.
Answer to Soavis arguments.
Alienated from the Church since the time of Julius the 2d. to his Days, and
that since the time that Rome had been sacked by the Spaniards, (who had
Plundered and Sequestered the Estate and Rents of the Family of Caraffa, of
which he was a Son) he had conceived an Implacable anger, and Inveterate hatred
against the whole Nation; which also was increased by that ill Treatment, and
Injustice Pa. 113.
which the Vice-King of Naples once used toward his own Person. For being
Created by Paul the 3d. Archbishop of Naples he was debarred from the
Possession and benefits thereof by the Viceroy, on no other pretense, than
that he was suspected to favor the French party; and upon that affront he would
have persuaded Paul II^. to a War with Naples; but the Pope declining that, the
anger and fury of this Paul IV. being suppressed until he became Pope* did then
burst forth and vent it self; so that he made a stricter Union with France, and
commenced a War against Philip King of Spain.

Yet it is likewise noted, p. 112.
That notwithstanding the Pride and rudeness of his Nature, he did several
things in the beginning of his Papacy to gratify and please the people of
Rome, insomuch that they erected a Statue of Marble for him in the Capitol: And
I shall now endeavor to m^ke it clear, that he did ratify what Cardinal Pool
had done; and that his Animosities against Spain or Cardinal Pool (whom he p.
118.
recalled from his Legatship in England) were acts of a later date, and he had
the good conduct and fortune to prove a successful Instrument in making that
memorable Peace betwixt Philip King of Spain and Henry King of France; And it
is apparent by Sir Edward Carne's Hist. refor. collect. Rec. fol. 315. See
concerning Pope Paul IV's revocation of Cardinal Pool. Duditius p. 34, 35.
Letter, that the Pope did revoke the Cardinal only because of the War with
Spain, as he did his Nuncio's from all King Philip's Countries; but staid that
of the Cardinal at Queen Mary's desire.

Having related what Soavo has published concerning this matter, before I
proceed to the clear proof that Pope Paul IV. did ratify what Cardinal Pool
had done, The Opinion of a Learned Roman Catholic, Father W.
I do offer to your consideration what I have under the hand of a Learned
Father, of sufficient Learning and Knowledge in the Canon Law, and of great
Candor and Virtue, That he believes that from the moment of the Release of
Cardinal Pool, all Possessors of those Lands had a just Title, even by
Canon Law, to them, even as to their other Lands: And, as the Pope cannot
deprive them of their other Lands by any Act whatsoever, no more can he deprive
them of those Lands; nor that any Canonist will own that any succeeding Pope
can repeal the Release of Church Lands. Which must be most clear, whenas the
Release was so confirmed, as I shall now endeavor to make clear by some
positive proofs.

The first of which shall be what I have found in the Journal of the House of
Commons, Endorsed Seymour, which you may have access to, for your further
satisfaction, if you scruple my credit in that particular; for I have copied it
from the Original, in the custody of the Honorable Sir John Trevor, Master of
the Rolls, whose singular favor I must ever acknowledge, not only in affording
me the perusal of this Journal, and ready admittance to the Records in his
custody, but likewise in furnishing me with a Repertory, whereby I am enabled
readily to find such Records as I have had, or may have occasion to peruse for
His Majesty's Service.

The first proof of the assurance of Abby-Lands from the Journal of the House
of Commons.

This Journal reaches from the 1st. of Edward VI. to the 8th. of Queen
Elizabeth. In the first leaf of the Parliament 2 and 3 of King Philip and Queen
Mary, which begun the 21st. of October 1555. After the relation of choosing the
Speaker, etc. these following words are entered*

After which was read a Bull from the Pope's Holiness, confirming the doings of
my Lord Cardinal Pool touching the Assurance of Abby-Lands, etc. after which
the Speaker with the Commons departed to the nether House. It is true there is
nothing of this mentioned in the Journal of the Lords; but whoever looks into
their Journals in the Reign of Queen Mary, and those before, and some while
after, will find little in them besides the names of the Proxies for the absent
Lords on one side, and then the Folio divided into three Colums; in the first
of which are the Names of the Bishops present; in the second the recital of the
appearing Peers; and in the third only the Titles of the Bills read: So that in
several Folio's there is not one Line writ in the third Division.

Second Proof.

I now pass to the second proof, That Pope Paul IV. did by Bull confirm what
Cardinal Pool had done. To illustrate which, I shall translate into English the
Copy of it, to be found in Ecclesiae collegiate, fol. 207.
Sir William Dugdale's last Volume of his Monasticon, transcribed from the
Original in my Lord Peter's custody.

The Bull of Confirmation of Abby-Landsto Sir Will. Peter's.

The Title is, The Bull of Paul IV. Bishop of Rome; in which, for better
caution, he especially and expressly approves and confirms to William Peter's,
Knight, and Counselor of the King, all and singular the sales of several
Manors, etc. sometimes belonging to diverse Monasteries by King Henry VIII.
dissolved, which he ( viz. Sir William) as it is said, is ready to assign and
demise to Spiritual Uses.

Paul Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God, to the perpetual memory of the
Fact.

By the accustomed bounty of the Apostolic See, it becomes us freely to impart
Apostolic Favor to those which require Quiet and Tranquillity, especially when
it is humbly desired from us, and reasonable causes persuade it, and that they
may remain undisturbed, j^^ibatae.
to add the stability of Apostolic Munition.

A Petition being lately exhibited to Us on the part of Our beloved Son the
Noble Sir William Peter's, Knight, and Counselor of the King, of the Diocese of
Exeter, That heretofore King Henry VIII. of famous Memory, and several other
persons, (there particularly named) sold to the same Sir William Peter's,
Manors, Lordships, Advowsons, Lands, etc. belonging to Monasteries,
(particularly also named) as appeared by Instruments and public proofs.
Documenta publica.


And afterward our beloved Son Reginald, Deacon of St. Mary in Cosmedon,
called Cardinal Pool, Legate de Latere in England, of Us and the aforesaid See
being authorized to that matter, with sufficient power by the Letters of the
said See, as appears in his Commission.

And afterward we generally, under certain words expressed in mode and form,
have By this clause the Bull mentioned in the Journal of the House of Commons
must be understood.
approved and confirmed the Sales, Gifts, and Exchanges, and Grants, made to
and by him; and added to them strength of assurance, or firmness, as in our
Letters made thereupon is said more fully to be contained.

However, as the said Petition subjoyned expresses, the same Sir William, who,
as he affirms, is ready to assign and demise the said Rectories to Spiritual
Uses, desires to have all the Sales Gifts, and Grants made to him of those
things, and all the things in the said Instruments and Documents contained, for
the better caution, specially and expressly to be approved and confirmed: And
besides, has humbly supplicated to Us, That of Apostolical Benignity we would
vouchsafe to provide for the Indemnity and Quiet of him and his.

The Pope's Dispensation and Absolution from Ecclesiastical Censures.

Therefore We, who admit to the favor of our audience the prayers of those
devoted to Us, and Our foresaid See, quit the said Will. from all
Excommunications, Suspensions, Interdicts, and other Ecclesiastic Sentences,
Censures, and Punishments, either by Law, or from any man, upon any occasion or
cause produced, (if he be by any of them any ways tied in consequence of any
effect of these presents only) by the tenor of these presents absolving him,
and judging him to be absolved. Being inclined by those supplications, by
Apostolical Authority, by these presents do perpetually approve and confirm all
the Sales, Grants and Gifts aforesaid; likewise all the Receipts and
Procurements of the Possessions, and the retaining of them; and, as they
concern them, all and each singular other matters, in all the Instruments,
Documents, and other Writings, and things, contained in the foresaid Letters of
the said Reginald the Cardinal; and to them do add the strength of a perpetual
and inviolable firmness, supplying all and singular defects of Law or Fact
necessary to be expressed, if by chance any happen to intervene in them; and
decerning them inviolably to be established, without any scruple of conscience;
as also by the said William Peter's, and Bishops, Chapters, Abbots, Priors,
Prioresses, and Convents, and others, which these any way concern, or may
concern for the future, according to the tenor of the Sales, Grants, and other
Dispositions made upon them, in all things and by all means perpetually to be
observed; and so to be judged, and ought to be defined by all Judges, and
Ecclesiastical and Secular Comissaries enjoying any Authority; taking from them
and every of them every Faculty and Authority of Judging and Interpreting other
ways, and making it void and null, if upon the premises, by any one by any
Authority, knowingly or ignorantly, it happen to be attempted.

The Pope's Command to Bishops to defend Sir Will. Peter's Right.

Wherefore by Apostolic Writ We command Our Venerable Brothers the Bishops of
London, Exeter, and Pisauria, that two or one of them, or by another or others;
these present Letters, and whatever is contained in them, when and where there
is need, and so often on the part of William Peter's and the Heirs aforesaid, or
any of them, it be required, solemnly to publish, and assisting them in the
premises, with maintenance of an effectual Defense, by Our Authority they
perform it, to make them and every of them enjoy them peaceably, not permitting
any of them by the Bishops, Chapters, No Religious to molest him.
Abbots, Priors, Prioresses, or Convents, or any other, contrary to the tenor
of these presents, in any wise to be molested, vexed, or disturbed; inflicting
upon all contradicters and Rebels, by Ecclesiastical Censures, and Money-mulct,
at their pleasure; punishments to be applied, and by other opportune remedies
quieting them; postponing all Appeals, and by repeated instances aggravating,
and (if need be) calling in to this purpose the aid of the Secular Arm.

The Clause of Non obstante.

Notwithstanding any heretofore sent Apostolic Constitutions and Ordinances, of
what Kind soever, or by what other firmness corroborated Statutes and Customs
contrary thereto whatsoever; or if it be indulged from the said See, to
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Prioresses, or by any other in common or separately,
that they may not be Interdicted, Suspended, or Excommunicated by Apostolical
Letters, not making full and express mention word by word of the said
Indulgence.

Therefore it shall not be lawful for any man whatsoeever to infringe or
contradict by any rash attempt, this writing of ours, of Absolution,
Approbation, Adjection, Supplement, and Command. If any therefore presume to
attempt this, let him know, that he shall incur the Indignation of the
Omnipotent God, and of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul.

Dated at Rome, at St. Peter's, the Year of the Incarnation of the Lord, 1555.
the 4th. of the Kalends of December, the first Year of our Pontificate, 2 and 3
Philip and Mary. Subsigned Beltradus.

Observations from this Bull.

From this Bull we may learn there was a General Confirmation by Pope Paul the
4th. of Cardinal Pools Assurance of Abby-lands, and it is as certain as any
thing can be, to one, that has not seen that Bull, which was sent to Absolve
the whole Kingdom; that it was as full in the same or such like expressions as
are usual in Alienation of Church Lands, Dispensations, or Absolutions, as were
requisite, or the desire of the Interessed persons security could expect, since
we find, by this to a particular person, what care was taken about securing
them.

In further confirmation of this give me leave to acquaint you what I must own
the favor of Dr. Bernard for the loan of this rare Book.
Andreas Duditius Writes on this Subject, whose Testimony is the more
Authentic, in that he not only Translated out of Italian In praefatione Libri
de vita Cardinalis Poli Imp. Venetiis 1563.
into Latin, the Life of Cardinal Pool, (Writ by Becatellus Archbishop of
Ragusa) but added several things of his own knowledge, and by the Information of
John Baptista Binardus, who were both with the Cardinal in England.

His words, The 3d. proof.
I render thus into English, He ( viz. the Cardinal) omitting nothing which
might conduce to the complete restoring of Piety, and the repair of the Ruins
of the Church, made in late times: Dealt with the Queen, Illud etiam agere cum
Regina Institit ut qua Bona, Henricus Pater, Ecclesiae per vim adempta, ad
Regia Vectigalia adjunxerat ac Regii omnino Juris possessionisque esse
Decreverat, ipsa Ecclesiae redderet pa. 32. B. All our Authors say, that the
Queen her self first designed this Restitution.
that she should restore to the Church the Goods which Henry her Father, by
force had taken from it, and had Annexed to the Revenue of the Crown, and had
Enacted them to be the Rights and Possessions of the Crown. Concerning this he
sent an Exhortation to the Queen, excellently penned: Nor did the Queen suffer
her self long to be entreated, but l^ying aside all delay, dismissed all, and
permitted them to be disposed of at the Will of the Roman Bishop and his Legate.
Which Goods Pool (having first deliberated the matter with the Bishops) so
appointed and distributed to every Church, as might be most expedient to
increase the Worship of God, and Establish the Ecclesiastic State, and these,
were said to be almost the half of the Fruits, This was much less than our
Author mentions.
which in the former more flourishing times the Ecclesiastics had received.

Now mark what follows. But Ac ne qua Turba excitaretur, placuit, consentiente
Pontifice, nihil de reliquis bonis quaeri quae passim multi possidebant, sed
liberum omnibus relinqui, id agere quod quisque vellet. Id. pa. 32. B.
least troubles might be raised, it pleased the Cardinal, the Pope consenting,
that nothing of the rest of the Goods ( viz. Moveable and Immovable) should be
enquired after. But to be left at Liberty to all to do with them what every one
willed.

The 4th. proof.
The whole matter further appears in the Decrees of the Cardinal, for the
Reformation of England Anno 1556. for in the 10th. Decree, wherein any future
Alienation of Church Lands is prohibited, this exception is annexed in these
words.

Exceptis ta men semper iis, quas circa bona Ecclesiastica, ante ab Ecclesiis
ablata, Jam Autoritate Apostolica constituta sunt. Quibus per hoc nullo modo
derogari Volumus. Labbei council Tom. 14. fol. 1753.
Those things always excepted, which concerning Ecclesiastic Goods, before time
taken from the Church, by Apostolic Authority now are constituted, from which
by this Decree they ( viz. the Cardinal and the Clergy met to appoint these
Decrees) will no ways derogate.

SECT. X. The Application of what has been offered toward the Assurance of
Abbey lands to the present Possesors.
I know nothing can rationally be urged now against the security, one Pope
does, another Succeeding Pope may disannul, especially where so great concerns
of the Church may invite to it.

As to the first, de facto for many 100 of Years they do and have dispensed
with Canons, etc. and such Dispensation is looked upon by all of the Roman
Catholic Communion to secure, not only their Title in all Ecclesiastical
Courts, but likewise it removes all scruples of Conscience.

I shall give you the resolution as to this particular, of an Author Rebuf^us
d^ pacif^^^^ po^s^^^or^^^ fol. 2 9. (...). 256.
beyond exception, The question he proposes thus, Quid si violentus petit a
Papa sibi confirmari Beneficium per vim obtentum, and Papa hoc facit, and
postea possidet per triennium, and ultra, an posset molestari?

After he has argued in the negative, he thus determins it. Quod si Papa ex
certa scientia, de novo concederet Invasori, expressa habita mentione
Intrusionis and violentiae, videtur illam violentiam remittere, and de novo
confer, nec obstat quod violentus semper potest molestari. Verum est (says
he) non purgata violentia: Sed hic purgavit violentiam Impetrando a Papa, ergo
non amplius dicitur violentus, nec Intrusus, quod notandum.

The sum of which is, that it being questioned whether a violent Possessor of
Church Lands, A violent Intruder may be dispensed with by the Pope.
desiring of the Pope to confirm him in his Benefices, obtained by force, and
the Pope do it, and after the Intruder Possess it for three Years or more,
whether such an one can be molested, viz. Ejected by course of Law?

His answer is, that if the Pope on his certain knowledge grant the same anew to
the Intruder, and violent Possessor, it seems the violence is remitted, and the
thing is granted anew. Neither, says he, does the General Rule hold good in
this case, that the violent Intruder may always be molested: For that is only
true where the violence is not purged, but here the violence is purged by
obtaining the Popes Grant; therefore he is no more to be called a violent
Possessor or Intruder, which, says he, is to be noted. By this you see a
dispensing Power is owned.

I know this is spoken of Church Livings Possessed by Church Men,

In Answer to which, to our case; for if the Popes Authority be good in any
case, where the necessity of the matter was so urgent in the Opinion of his
Holiness and all Roman Catholics, that the Reconciliation to the Roman Catholic
Church was to be preferred before the comparatively few Religious enjoying
their Possessions, I suppose it is good here.

How much in all cases the public is to be preferred before the private,
appears in the resolution given by a Learned Joachemi Mynsingeri Comment. in
Instit. Lib. 2. Tit. 16. de usucaptions n. 20.
Civilian thus, we are to know, says he, that there is a Superior Law that the
public Society of Men be conserved, and it is an Inferior Law, that right shall
be done to every one: When this Infeior Law therefore cannot be preserved,
without the violation of the Superior, the Inferior Law is neglected, that the
Superior may be fulfilled, viz. that the public good and tranquillity be
conserved, and there be an end of strife.

So in another case the forecited De pacificis possessionibus fol. 217. n. 31.
Rebuffus says, this is Introduced for public good, lest suits about Benefices
should be Immortal, and for the ease of the Subject, lest he should Eternally
doubt of his right.

Alcuin's Opinion rather to dispense with payment Tithes than hinder Pagans to
turn Christians.
This calls to mind what Alcuin the great English Dr. and Chaplain to Charles
the Great, writes to him concerning the Hunns and Saxons, who being Conquered
by the Emperor, had lately received the Christian Faith; Alcuin there advises
the Emperor, that it were better for the benefit of the Christian Faith, not to
impose the payment of Tithes upon them. He says, we know that Tything of our
Substance is very good, but it is better to let that go, than lose our Faith,
we our selves says he, nourished and taught in the Catholic Faith, scarce
consent to pay full Tithe of our Substance; how much less can we expect, that
their tender Faith, and Infant condition, and covetous minds, will consent to
such a liberality.

Here you see he advises rather to preserve them in the Catholic Faith, than
have them abandon it by exacting such payments.

I leave it to your self to apply it. I no ways meaning to compare Possessors
of the Church Lands in Queen Mary's Days, to a People newly Converted from
Paganism; but only to let you see in that Learned Man's Opinion, how much the
retaining them in the Catholic Faith was to be preferred before the exacting of
Tithes.

I come now to the last remaining Objection, Last Objection.
that by the Revocation of former Popes Grants, and Decrees by Succeeding
Popes, and by their non-obstantes of Canons, etc. You see not why a Pope may
not publish a Bull, if any such Juncture of Affairs should be, that it was like
to be obeyed, to recall the Acts of Julius the 3d. and Paul the 4th.

To this I Answer, or where without passion private ends intrigues or designs,
the matter to be revoked was by all un-interessed persons thought fit to be
disannulled, but our case is far otherwise.

In the cases of our Abby-lands a Resumption is not practicable.
For as to the business of Abby-lands, whatever Reasons induced the Pope to
confirm them in the hands of the Possessors at the first, will be much more
now, since besides the disturbing the Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom, and
the great confusion, that would arise by reason of the Inextricable Contracts,
and Dispositions, there will now be the greatest Injustice committed by such a
Resumption; since it is appaent, that the number of the Purchasers were few
Comparatively at the first, and they were only such as were for the
Reformation, whereas since that time many Catholics (by the reliance upon the
Legal securities, and the Confirmation of the Pope) have been induced to
purchase these Lands, which otherwise they would never have done: And will it
consist with any Pope's Interest to take advantage of such as were thereby
ensnared?

The Religious Nonclaim, and their offer to release all right or claim.
Besides, who are they that can lay claim to these Lands? The Religious had no
Heirs, and I have seen it under the hand of the Reverend Superior of all the
English Benedictins, that the Superiors of the Benedictins offer to give it
under their hands and seals, and serious protestation, that they have no Right,
nor ever intend to lay any claim to the Possessions belonging to their Order
here, and given by the Parliament to the Crown.

That the Act of Confirmation of these Lands can never be attempted to be
revoked by any English Parliament, No English Parliament will attemptit.
though their majority should be Roman Catholics, (which in it self is such a
monstrous postulatum, as sure no Protestant Unbeliever can swallow) will appear
manifestly to any that will consider, that when it could not be effected in
that Age, when some of each House were alive, who knew the Lands; and the
inextricable Confusion that then it was thought it would bring upon Purchasers,
was sufficient to hinder the Houses and the Convocation to think it a work
feizible, when it may be the loss would have fallen upon those who had been
most instrumental in the Subversion, what must we think now of the difficulty
of separating the Sacred from the Profane? which I can compare to nothing more
resemblingly, than the difficulties some Philosophers suggest in apprehending
the Resurrection of our Bodies, by bringing again these individual Atoms which
were once part of them, and have been exhaled, or have been assimulated into
the bodies of Fishes or ravenous Beasts, or converted into dust, and are
disspersed into various Regions. Till therefore we can be sure of such an
Omniscient Power in a Parliament, as can know the distinct Lands that once
belonged to every House; and so Omnipotent, as can disengage them from
Lay-fees, (they are not only soldered to, but per minimae mixed and
incorporated with) and such a self-denying Parliament as will part with their
Inheritances, Entails, Settlements, Mortgages, and Purchases, upon some peoples
suggesting a Sacrilege to them, (not believed by themselves or Catholics.) I
say, till all these, and a great many other difficulties can be solved, I think
the Possessors of Church Lands may rest secure in their Titles.

Those that suggest these Jealousies, to be suspected.
I pray therefore, Noble Sir, suspect all those that suggest such doubts to you,
as men that have most wicked aims to alienate the affections of the Subjects
from our Gracious King, who I am well assured desires to give all his Subjects
satisfaction in this particular, and look upon them as concerting with utter
Enemies to Monarchy, and such as would be working us, by such unreasonable
Jealousies, to a temper fit for some greater mischief, and who have such an
envious cankered disposition, that, though they believe not one syllable of what
they publish on this Head to be true, yet studiously endeavor to spread abroad
the suspicion, for no other end than to bring an Odium upon the King, who has
a greater care for preserving every man's Property, and that his People may
live in Peace, Freedom, and Plenty, than the best of these Calumniators; who,
if they had power, would be the first that would be for resumption of Crown,
Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and other Lands, as they were during the
Usurpation.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 7. lin. 6. for Foretakers, read Intruders. p. 15. l. 4. for Praetoriae,
r. Praetorio. p. 23. l. 7. dele and. p. 30. l. 10. for want, r. wars. p. 32. l.
3. for 4th. r. 2d. p. 34. l. 10. for This, r. The.

THe Excellency of the English Monarchy; A Treatise useful to all persons that
are desirous to know the constitution of the Government of England, may be had
(in Quires, or Bound) at the Author's House at the Iron-Balcony in
Leicester-street next Leicester-fields.

Price in Quires, 9 s. plain Bound and Lettered, 10 s. 6 d. Guilt back, 12 s.


